


Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:

1.01    In General 

1.02    Adoption of Material by Reference 

1.03    Initiative and Referendum

1.04    Code Enforcement 

1.05    Public Records 


Chapter 1.01 IN GENERAL

Sections:

1.01.010    Title and citation of code. 

1.01.020    Adoption of code. 

1.01.030    Definitions and rules of construction. 

1.01.040    Catchlines of sections. 

1.01.050    Reference applies to amendments. 

1.01.060    Savings clause. 

1.01.070    Copies as proof of ordinances. 

1.01.080    Continuation of ordinances and code provisions. 

1.01.090    Adoption of new material. 

1.01.100    Conflict amending code sections.

1.01.105    Fee resolutions.

1.01.110    Severability. 

1.01.120    Noncharter code city classification. 

1.01.130    City seal. 

1.01.140    Penalty provisions – Exception. 


1.01.010 Title and citation of code.

The codification hereby adopted shall be known as the “Kent City Code” and may be cited as such. The titles, chapters, and sections as set forth in the codification hereby adopted shall be, and they hereby are, declared to be the titles, chapters, and sections by which the provisions of the Kent City Code may be designated and cited.

(Ord. No. 2692, § 4. Formerly Code 1986, § 1.02.040)


1.01.020 Adoption of code.

Pursuant to the provisions of RCW 35.21.500 through 35.21.570, there is adopted the “Kent City Code,” the official codification of all general, public, and permanent ordinances of the city of Kent, Washington, as compiled, edited, and published by Code Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington.

(Ord. No. 2692, § 1; Ord. No. 3477, § 3, 10-19-99. Formerly Code 1986, § 1.02.010)

State law reference(s) – Codification and revision of ordinances, RCW 35.21.500 et seq.


1.01.030 Definitions and rules of construction.

In the construction of this code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise:

Business. The word “business” shall include all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions, enterprises, establishments, and all other kinds of activities and matters, conducted for private profit, or benefit, either directly or indirectly, on any premises in this city, or anywhere else within its jurisdiction.

City. The word “city” shall mean the city of Kent, Washington.

City council. The words “city council” shall mean the city council of the city of Kent, Washington.

Code. The word “code” shall mean the Kent City Code.

Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter.

Number. Words importing the singular shall include the plural, and words importing the plural shall include the singular.

Officials, boards, commissions, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions, committees, and the like by title only, they shall be construed as if followed by the words “of the city of Kent, Washington.”

Person. The word “person” shall mean individual natural persons, partnerships, joint adventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, or corporations; or any officer, agent, employee, factor, or any kind of personal representative of any thereof, in any capacity, acting either for himself, or any other person, under either personal appointment or pursuant to law.

Shall. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.

State. The word “state” shall mean the state of Washington.

Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and the present.

(Ord. No. 2692, § 15. Formerly Code 1986, § 1.08.010)


1.01.040 Catchlines of sections.

The catchlines appearing in connection with the titles, chapters, and sections of the code are inserted as a matter of convenience, and they shall be wholly disregarded by any person, officer, court, or other tribunal in construing the terms and provisions of the code.

(Ord. No. 2692, § 5. Formerly Code 1986, § 1.02.050)


1.01.050 Reference applies to amendments.

Whenever a reference is made to any portion of the code or to any ordinances of the city, such reference shall apply to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made.

(Ord. No. 2692, § 7. Formerly Code 1986, § 1.02.070)


1.01.060 Savings clause.

Nothing contained in this chapter or in the code adopted in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city herein repealed, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm, or corporation, or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of enactment of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 2692, § 9. Formerly Code 1986, § 1.02.090)


1.01.070 Copies as proof of ordinances.

As provided for by RCW 35.21.550, copies of such code in published form shall be received without further proof as the ordinances of permanent and general effect of the city by all courts and administrative tribunals of this state.

(Ord. No. 2692, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 1.02.020)


1.01.080 Continuation of ordinances and code provisions.

The provisions of the code, insofar as they are substantially the same as ordinances heretofore adopted by the city shall be construed as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.

(Ord. No. 2692, § 6. Formerly Code 1986, § 1.02.060)


1.01.090 Adoption of new material.

New material shall be adopted by the city council as separate ordinances prior to the inclusion thereof in this codification. Any ordinance amending the codification shall set forth in full the section of the codification being amended, and this shall constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement that no ordinance nor any section thereof shall be revised or amended unless the new ordinance sets forth the revised ordinance or amended section in full.

(Ord. No. 2692, § 3. Formerly Code 1986, § 1.02.030)


1.01.100 Conflict amending code sections.

A. Intent. The current version of the Kent City Code reflects an iterative drafting process that has been developed and amended over the life of the city. In particular, various councils have elected to reorganize the city’s departmental structure at various times in order to meet the demands of a growing city and changing laws. Because of this ongoing process, despite best efforts, it is not always possible to capture and resolve all conflicts that may arise within the code.

B. Definition of references made. References to specific departments or specific department directors or generic references to “department” or “director” should be construed to refer to the department or director that has authority over the code subject or function in question as established in KCC Title 2, Subtitle II, Departments and Offices.

Any otherwise unreasonable conflict amending code sections shall be resolved in favor of the section most recently enacted.

(Ord. No. 2692, § 14; Ord. No. 3926, § 1, 8-4-09. Formerly Code 1986, § 1.12.010)


1.01.105 Fee resolutions.

Any fees, rates or charges established by city council resolution shall be deemed lawfully established by authority of the city council regardless of whether the fee, rate or charge is established by a separate ordinance.

(Ord. No. 4019, § 1, 12-13-11)


1.01.110 Severability.

Each title, chapter, section, and subdivision of a section of the code hereby adopted is declared to be independent of every other title, chapter, section, or subdivision of a section, and the invalidity of any title, chapter, section, or subdivision of a section of the code shall not invalidate any other title, chapter, section, or subdivision of a section thereof.

(Ord. No. 2692, § 10. Formerly Code 1986, § 1.02.100)


1.01.120 Noncharter code city classification.

Notwithstanding anything contained in the ordinances of the city to the contrary, the city hereby adopts the classification of a noncharter code city operating under the concept of a seven (7) member city council plus a mayor form of government as set forth in Chapter 35A.12 RCW. The city shall be endowed with all the applicable rights, powers, privileges, duties, and obligations of noncharter code cities as set forth in RCW Title 35A as the same now exists, including, but not limited to, those set forth in Chapter 35A.11 RCW, and further including any and all supplements, amendments, and/or other modifications of such title hereafter.

(Ord. No. 1622, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 1.04.010)

State law reference(s) – Noncharter code city, optional municipal code, RCW 35A.01.020.


1.01.130 City seal.

The corporate seal of the city shall be a metallic circular device on which shall be engraved and embossed around the circle the words “City of Kent” encircling the words “Corporate Seal.” This device shall be capable of making an impression of such words on paper.

(Ord. No. 679, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 1.06.010)


1.01.140 Penalty provisions – Exception.

A. Unless otherwise specifically provided for in the code, any violation of any of the provisions of the code or any code adopted by reference by any person, firm, or corporation, their agents or servants, shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of a sum not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000) or by imprisonment not exceeding twelve (12) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate day or portion thereof during which any violation of any adopted code or provision of this code shall constitute a separate violation and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in this section.

B. The appropriate penalty provision stated in this section is not intended to effect the validity of other remedies, and/or penalties other than fine and/or imprisonment. All other remedies, including but not limited to abatement, removal, and replacement shall continue to be effective as stated in the adopted code or statute.

(Ord. No. 2692, §§ 8, 12; Ord. No. 3013, § 1, 12-3-91. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 1.02.080, 1.10.020)

State law reference(s) – Penalty, RCW 35A.11.020; actions in court, RCW 35A.21.195.


Chapter 1.02 ADOPTION OF MATERIAL BY REFERENCE

Sections:

1.02.010    Generally. 

1.02.020    Amendments to Revised Code of Washington, Washington Administrative Code, or King County Code sections adopted. 


1.02.010 Generally.

All codes or statutes adopted by reference shall be effective when the ordinances adopting such code or statute are passed and published as required by the general laws of the city and the state and one (1) copy of such adopted code or statute is filed with the city clerk. All codes or statutes so adopted by reference shall be effective as if fully set out in the adopting ordinance.

(Ord. No. 2692, § 11. Formerly Code 1986, § 1.10.010)

State law reference(s) – Codes adopted by reference, RCW 35.21.180.


1.02.020 Amendments to Revised Code of Washington, Washington Administrative Code, or King County Code sections adopted.

All provisions of the Revised Code of Washington, Washington Administrative Code, and the King County Code adopted by the city by reference, unless otherwise stated, shall include all subsequent amendments thereto. Such amendments shall become effective when one (1) copy is filed with the city clerk.

(Ord. No. 2692, § 13. Formerly Code 1986, § 1.10.030)


Chapter 1.03 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

Sections:

1.03.010    Initiative and referendum powers adopted.

*    Prior legislation: Ord. 2848.


1.03.010 Initiative and referendum powers adopted.

A. Pursuant to RCW Title 35A, the city council adopts the powers of initiative and referendum for the qualified electors of the city.

B. The powers of initiative and referendum shall be exercised in the manner set forth in RCW Title 35A, including, without limitation, Chapters 35A.11 and 35A.29 RCW.

(Ord. No. 4034, § 1, 4-17-12)


Chapter 1.04 CODE ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

1.04.010    Purpose.

1.04.020    Definitions.

1.04.030    Violation unlawful – Each day is separate violation – Criminal offense.

1.04.040    Joint and several responsibility and liability.

1.04.050    Interference with code enforcement unlawful – Criminal offense.

1.04.060    Methods of service.

1.04.070    Voluntary correction – Correction notice.

1.04.080    Notice of violation.

1.04.090    Stop work order – Violation a misdemeanor.

1.04.100    Stop use order – Violation a misdemeanor.

1.04.110    Removal of stop work or stop use order – Misdemeanor.

1.04.120    Response to notice of violation.

1.04.130    Failure to respond.

1.04.140    Scheduling of hearing to contest or mitigate – Correction prior to hearing.

1.04.150    Contested hearing – Procedure.

1.04.160    Contested hearing – Decision of the hearing examiner.

1.04.170    Mitigation hearing – Procedure.

1.04.180    Mitigation hearing – Decision of the hearing examiner.

1.04.190    Failure to appear – Default order.

1.04.200    Monetary penalty.

1.04.210    Appeal.

1.04.220    Repeat violation or failure to abate – Misdemeanor.

1.04.225    Civil infractions.

1.04.230    Abatement.

1.04.240    Additional enforcement procedures.

1.04.250    Conflicting code provisions.

1.04.260    Duty not creating liability.


1.04.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish an efficient system of enforcing city regulations that will enable violations to be promptly resolved wherever possible, while providing both appropriate penalties and a full opportunity for alleged violators to have a hearing to contest the violations. This chapter shall apply to all regulations as defined in KCC 1.04.020; provided, that a violation of any regulation of the Kent City Code may be prosecuted as a criminal violation at the city’s discretion, pursuant to KCC 1.01.140.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 2, 5-6-08)


1.04.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following words, terms, and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless a different meaning is plainly required:

A. Abate means to act to stop an activity, and/or to repair, replace, remove, or otherwise remedy a condition, where such activity or condition constitutes a violation of a regulation; provided, the actions must resolve the violation to the satisfaction of the city, or the hearing examiner if the matter has been mitigated or contested and found committed, and the actions taken and the manner in which they are performed must not endanger the general health, safety, and welfare of the community. For the purposes of this chapter, the verbs “abate” and “correct” shall be interchangeable and have the same meaning.

B. Act means doing or performing something.

C. City means city of Kent, Washington.

D. Code enforcement officer means any person or persons authorized by statute, ordinance, regulation, written city policy, or interlocal agreement, or designated by the mayor or his or her designee, to enforce any of the regulations subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of this chapter, and shall expressly include the city’s code enforcement officers; the city attorney, or his or her designee; the chief of the Kent police department, or his or her designee; the director of the community development department, or his or her designee; the director of the public works department, or his or her designee; building inspectors; construction inspectors; the chief of the Kent fire department, or his or her designee; fire code official, and fire inspectors.

E. Correction notice means a written statement, issued by a code enforcement officer, notifying a person that property under his or her control, is in violation of one (1) or more regulations, and informing such person that a notice of violation may be issued and/or criminal charges filed if the violations are not abated.

F. Day or days, as used in this chapter, shall mean calendar days unless expressly stated otherwise in a given section or subsection. In addition, any portion of a twenty-four (24) hour day shall constitute a full calendar day.

G. Hearing examiner means the Kent hearing examiner and the office thereof established pursuant to Ch. 2.32 KCC.

H. Notice of violation or notice of civil violation means a written statement, issued by a code enforcement officer, which contains the information required under KCC 1.04.080, and which notifies a person that he or she is responsible for one (1) or more violations of the Kent City Code.

I. Omission means a failure to act.

J. Person means any individual, firm, business, association, partnership, corporation or other legal entity, public or private, however organized. Because “person” shall include both human and non-human entities, any of the following pronouns may be used to describe a person: he, she, or it.

K. Person responsible for the violation means any of the following: a person who has titled ownership or legal control of the property or structure that is subject to the regulation; an occupant or other person in control of the property or structure that is subject to the regulation; a developer, builder, business operator, or owner who is developing, building, or operating a business on the property or in a structure that is subject to the regulation; or any person who created, caused, or has allowed the violation to occur.

L. Regulation means and includes any of the following, as now enacted or hereafter amended:

1. All Kent City Code provisions making reference to this chapter;

2. All standards, regulations, and procedures adopted by the city that make reference to this chapter; and

3. The terms and conditions of any permit or approval issued by the city, or any concomitant agreement with the city pursuant to code provisions that make reference to this chapter.

M. Repeat violation means, as evidenced by the prior issuance of a correction notice or a notice of violation, that a violation has occurred on the same property within a two (2) year period, or a person responsible for a violation has committed a violation elsewhere within the city of Kent within a two (2) year period. To constitute a repeat violation, the violation need not be the same violation as the prior violation.

N. Violation or civil violation means an act or omission contrary to a regulation as defined in subsection (L) of this section. A violation continues to exist until abated to the satisfaction of the city, with each day or portion thereof in which the violation continues constituting a separate violation.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 2, 5-6-08)


1.04.030 Violation unlawful – Each day is separate violation – Criminal offense.

A. Separate violations. The violation of any regulation shall be unlawful. A violation continues to exist until abated to the satisfaction of the city, with each day, or portion thereof, in which the violation continues constituting a separate offense subjecting the person responsible for the violation to the civil and criminal penalties provided for in this chapter.

B. Criminal offense. In addition to other penalties provided for by this chapter, a person who:

1. Negligently violates a provision of the Kent City Code is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by up to the maximum penalty established in RCW 9A.20.021(3) as now enacted or hereafter amended; or who

2. Knowingly violates a provision of the Kent City Code, or commits a repeated violation of the Kent City Code, is guilty of a gross misdemeanor, punishable by up to the maximum penalty established in RCW 9A.20.021(2), as now enacted or hereafter amended.

a. For purposes of this section repeated violation means, as evidenced by a prior criminal conviction, a prior committed finding by the Kent municipal court of an infraction issued under this chapter, or a prior committed finding by operation of law under KCC 1.04.130, that a violation of the Kent City Code has occurred on the same property or that a person responsible for the violation has committed a violation of the Kent City Code elsewhere within the city of Kent. To constitute a “repeat violation,” the violation need not be the same violation as the prior violation.

3. If a person is found guilty of a criminal offense as provided for in this subsection (B), or pleads guilty to another offense on recommendation of the prosecutor, the court shall order the defendant pay restitution to the city of Kent, or any other victim of the offense, for the total suffered loss or damage by reason of the commission of the crime.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 2, 5-6-08; Ord. No. 4282, § 1, 7-3-18)


1.04.040 Joint and several responsibility and liability.

Responsibility for violations of the codes enforced under this chapter is joint and several, and the city is not prohibited from taking action against a party where other persons may also be potentially responsible for a violation, nor is the city required to take action against all persons potentially responsible for a violation.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 2, 5-6-08)


1.04.050 Interference with code enforcement unlawful – Misdemeanor.

Any person who intentionally obstructs, impedes, or interferes with any lawful attempt to serve notice of a violation, stop work or stop use order, or an emergency order, or intentionally obstructs, impedes, or interferes with lawful attempts to correct a violation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than ninety (90) days or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by both such imprisonment and fine.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 2, 5-6-08)


1.04.060 Methods of service.

A. Service by regular first class mail shall be equal to personal service. Any correction notice, notice of violation, notice of hearing, or other code enforcement document shall be deemed legally served upon a party by use of regular first class mail, as described in subsection (B)(2) of this section, unless another method of service is expressly required in a particular subsection of this chapter; provided, at the discretion of the code enforcement officer, the code enforcement officer may personally serve documents or cause documents to be personally served upon a party.

B. Methods of service defined. For purposes of this chapter, the methods of service of any documents related to code enforcement, such as correction notices, notices of violation, stop work orders, etc. (hereinafter “document”), are defined as follows:

1. Personal service. Personal service shall mean handing the document to the person subject to the document or leaving it at his or her dwelling house or usual place of abode with some person of suitable age and discretion then residing therein, or leaving it at his or her office or place of employment with a person in charge thereof. Personal service shall also be deemed complete when the hearing examiner or his or her assistant hands any order, ruling, decision, or other document to a person prior to, during, or after a hearing.

2. Mailing. Service by mail shall mean sending the document by regular first class mail to the last known address of the person subject to the document. The last known address shall be an address provided to the city by the person to whom the document is directed; if an address has not been provided to the city, the last known address shall be any of the following as they appear at the time the document is mailed: the address of the property where the violation is occurring, as reflected on the most recent equalized tax assessment roll of the county assessor or the taxpayer address appearing for the property on the official property tax information website for King County; the address appearing in any database used for the payment of utilities for the property at which the violations are occurring; or the address of the person to whom the documents are being sent that appears in the Washington State Department of Licensing database. Where service of the notice of violation is by mail, service shall be deemed complete upon the third day following the day upon which they are placed in the mail, unless the third day falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, in which event service shall be deemed complete on the first day other than a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday following the third day.

3. Posting. Posting shall mean affixing a copy of the document in a conspicuous place on the property, with at least one (1) copy of such document placed at an entryway to the property or structure if an entryway exists.

4. Publication. Publication of the document shall mean publication as set forth in RCW 4.28.100 and 4.28.110, as currently enacted or hereafter amended.

C. Proof of service – Due diligence. Proof of service shall be made by written affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting the service, declaring the time and date of service, the manner by which service was made, and if service was made solely by posting or publication, facts showing that due diligence was used in attempting to locate a mailing address for the person at whom the notice of violation is directed.

D. Additional proof of service not necessary. The hearing examiner shall not require additional proof of service beyond the requirements in this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 2, 5-6-08)


1.04.070 Voluntary correction – Correction notice.

A. General. Prior to the issuance of a notice of violation, the code enforcement officer shall attempt to secure the voluntary correction of a violation by attempting to contact the person responsible for the violation, explaining the violation, and requesting correction. This may be done verbally by the code enforcement officer; provided, a written correction notice shall be served on the person responsible for the violation prior to issuance of a notice of violation; provided further, a written correction notice need not be served nor efforts made to secure voluntary correction where the nature of the violation creates a risk of imminent harm to public health or safety, or where it is a repeat violation as defined in this chapter.

B. Service of correction notice. Service of a written correction notice may be accomplished by regular first class mail or by personal service, at the discretion of the code enforcement officer, or by posting or publishing the correction notice if an address for the person responsible for the violation cannot be ascertained pursuant to KCC 1.04.060(B)(2).

C. Contents of written correction notice. The written correction notice shall be deemed sufficient if it contains the following information:

1. The name and address of a person responsible for the violation; and

2. The street address or description sufficient for identification of the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation has occurred or is occurring; and

3. A description of the violation and a reference to the code provisions that have been violated; and

4. A statement indicating what corrective actions are required and a correction deadline stating the date and time by which the corrective actions must be completed to the satisfaction of the code enforcement officer in order for the violator to avoid the issuance of a notice of violation; and

5. A statement indicating that, pursuant to KCC 1.04.030, a notice of violation may be issued for each day a violation continues, with each violation constituting a separate offense subject to civil and/or criminal penalties.

D. Time period in which to correct or abate the violation. Whenever a person responsible for a violation is served with a written correction notice, he or she shall be given at least ten (10) days from the date of issuance of the notice to correct the violation(s) to the satisfaction of the code enforcement officer; provided, where, in the opinion of the code enforcement officer, a violation creates a risk of imminent harm to public health or safety, or is a repeat violation as defined in this chapter, the city can require less than ten (10) days for correction to be completed. In the event the violation is not corrected within the required time period, the city may, at its discretion, issue separate notices of violation for each day, or portion thereof, that the violation has existed or continues to exist.

E. Extension of voluntary correction period or modification of required actions. An extension of the deadline for voluntary correction, or a modification of any required corrective action noted in the written correction notice, may be granted by the code enforcement officer if the person responsible for the violation has, in the opinion of the code enforcement officer, shown due diligence or made substantial progress in correcting the violations but unforeseen circumstances render correction unattainable within the original deadline.

F. Revocation of deadline for compliance. The original deadline for compliance, or any extension for compliance previously granted by the code enforcement officer, may be revoked and immediate compliance required where, in the opinion of the code enforcement officer, circumstances make immediate correction necessary to avoid an imminent risk of injury to persons or property.

G. Use of written voluntary correction agreement.

1. At the sole discretion of the city, a voluntary correction agreement may be entered into between the person responsible for the violation and the city. The voluntary correction agreement must be in writing.

2. Contents of voluntary correction agreement. The voluntary correction agreement is a contract between the city and the person responsible for the violation under which that person agrees to abate the violations within a specified time and according to specified conditions. The voluntary correction agreement shall include the following:

a. The name and address of the person responsible for the violation; and

b. The street address or a description sufficient for identification of the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation has occurred or is occurring; and

c. A description of the violation and a reference to the regulations that have been violated; and

d. An acknowledgement by the person responsible for the violations that the violations described in the correction agreement exist, and that he or she is waiving the right to contest the existence of the violations or to mitigate the penalties; and

e. The necessary corrective action to be taken, the date or time by which correction must be completed, and an acknowledgement by the person responsible for the violation that he or she will correct the violations within the time specified in the voluntary correction agreement; and

f. Acknowledgement by the person responsible for the violation that the city may enter the property and inspect the premises as may be necessary to determine compliance with the voluntary correction agreement; and

g. Acknowledgement by the person responsible for the violation that if the terms of the voluntary correction agreement are not met, the city may enter the property to abate the violation and may also recover its costs and expenses and/or a monetary penalty pursuant to this chapter from the person responsible for the violation; and

h. The signature or official mark of the person responsible for the violation and the signature or official mark of the code enforcement officer.

3. Failure to comply with voluntary correction agreement.

a. Abatement by the city. In addition to any other remedy provided for in this chapter, the city may abate the violation in accordance with KCC 1.04.230 if the terms of the voluntary correction agreement are not met.

b. Penalties and costs. If the terms of the voluntary correction agreement are not met, the person responsible for the violation may be assessed a monetary penalty in accordance with KCC 1.04.200, plus all costs and expenses of abatement, as set forth in KCC 1.04.230, in addition to being issued new notices of violation or criminal charges if the violation has not been abated.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 2, 5-6-08)


1.04.080 Notice of violation.

A. Issuance of notice of violation. When the city determines that a violation has occurred or is occurring, and does not secure voluntary correction pursuant to KCC 1.04.070, the code enforcement officer may issue a notice of violation to any person responsible for the violation.

B. Contents of notice. The notice of violation shall include the following:

1. The name and address of a person responsible for the violation; and

2. The street address or description sufficient for identification of the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation has occurred or is occurring; and

3. A description of the violation and a reference to the provisions violated; and

4. A statement indicating that the violator must respond to the notice of violation within fourteen (14) days of the date of issuance by doing one (1) of the following:

a. Paying the fine and correcting the violation;

b. Requesting a mitigation hearing and correcting the violation; or

c. Requesting a hearing to contest the violation; and

5. A statement indicating that failure to respond shall result in the violation(s) being deemed committed without requiring further action by the city, and that the full fine amount indicated on the notice of violation shall be due and owing to the city by the person or entity to whom the notice of violation was issued; and

6. A statement indicating that, unless a request to contest the violation or to mitigate the penalty is properly filed, a monetary penalty of five hundred dollars ($500) for each violation listed on the notice of violation is due and owing at the time the notice of violation is issued, and must be paid in full within thirty (30) days or may be assigned to a collection agency; and

7. A statement indicating that if the person or entity to whom a notice of violation was issued requests a hearing and fails to attend the hearing, a default judgment shall be entered against the person or entity to whom the violation was issued, with the full amount of the fine indicated on the notice of violation immediately due and owing, and that any unpaid fines and any costs may be assigned to a collection agency after thirty (30) days have elapsed from the date the notice of violation was issued; and

8. A statement indicating that the city may seek to recover from the person to whom the notice of violation was issued the costs to the city of any abatement action taken; and

9. A statement indicating that separate notices of violation may be issued for each day, or portion thereof, in which a violation continues; and

10. A statement indicating that payment of a monetary penalty does not relieve the person or entity named in the notice of violation of the duty to abate the violation, and that failure to abate may result in the issuance of additional notices of violation and/or criminal charges, with additional civil and/or criminal penalties.

C. Service of notice of violation. Service of a notice of violation may be accomplished by regular first class mail or by personal service, at the discretion of the code enforcement officer, or by posting or publication if an address for the person responsible for the violation cannot be ascertained, pursuant to KCC 1.04.060.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 2, 5-6-08)


1.04.090 Stop work order – Violation a misdemeanor.

A stop work order may be issued pursuant to any of the codes or regulations adopted pursuant to KCC Titles 13 and 14. In addition, the code enforcement officer may issue a stop work order whenever any work that is subject to regulation under the Kent City Code is, in the opinion of the code enforcement officer, being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of the Kent City Code, or will exacerbate damage that has already been caused to any property, or will materially impair the code enforcement officer’s ability to seek compliance. The stop work order shall state the reasons for the order and may be appended to, or incorporate by reference, a notice of violation. The stop work order shall take effect immediately upon service. Service of the stop work order shall be deemed accomplished upon posting of the notice in the manner described in KCC 1.04.060(B)(3). Violation of a stop work order shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than ninety (90) days, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by both such imprisonment and fine.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 2, 5-6-08)


1.04.100 Stop use order – Violation a misdemeanor.

In addition to any remedy provided for in this chapter, the code enforcement officer may issue a stop use order when allowing the use to continue creates an imminent threat of injury to the health, safety, or welfare of any member of the public, or creates an imminent threat of harm to neighboring property, or will exacerbate injury already caused to any property. The stop use order shall state the reasons for the order; provided, the stop use order may be appended to, or incorporate by reference, a notice of violation. The stop use order shall take effect immediately upon service. Service of the stop use order shall be deemed accomplished upon posting of the notice in the manner described in KCC 1.04.060(B)(3). Violation of a stop use order shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than ninety (90) days, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by both such imprisonment and fine.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 2, 5-6-08)


1.04.110 Removal of stop work or stop use order – Misdemeanor.

Where a stop work order or a stop use order has been posted in conformity with the requirements of this chapter, removal of such order without the authorization of the city, or the hearing examiner if the matter has been heard by the hearing examiner, shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than ninety (90) days, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by both such imprisonment and fine.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 2, 5-6-08)


1.04.120 Response to notice of violation.

A. Generally. A person who has been served with a notice of violation must respond to the notice within fourteen (14) days of the date the notice is served. A person may respond to the notice of violation by:

1. Paying the amount of the monetary penalty as set forth in the notice of violation. Partial payment or payment using a check that is rejected for insufficient funds shall not be deemed payment under this subsection. Payment of the fine shall not relieve the person or entity responsible for the violation from the duty to correct or abate the violation. Additional notices of violation may be issued if the violation goes uncorrected.

2. Contesting the notice of violation by requesting a contested hearing in writing and sending the request to the city as described in subsection (B) of this section.

3. Seeking to mitigate the monetary penalty by requesting a mitigation hearing to explain the circumstances surrounding the violation. The request to mitigate must be made in writing and sent to the city as described in subsection (B) of this section. Requesting to mitigate the penalty shall not relieve the person responsible for the violation from the duty to correct or abate the violation. Additional notices of violation may be issued if the violation goes uncorrected.

B. Method of response. The person or entity to whom a notice of violation has been issued may respond by mailing or hand-delivering the response to the building services division of the city’s department of community development. Mailed responses must be postmarked no later than the fourteenth day from the date of service of the notice of violation; hand-delivered responses must be brought to the building services division of the city’s department of community development no later than 4:30 p.m. on the fourteenth day after service; provided, where the fourteenth day falls on a weekend or holiday, the deadline shall be extended to the next regular business day. Telephone, facsimile, or email responses shall not satisfy the requirements of this section.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 2, 5-6-08)


1.04.130 Failure to respond.

If the person to whom the notice of violation is issued fails to respond as required in KCC 1.04.120, the violations shall be deemed committed without requiring further action by the city or the city’s hearing examiner and the person to whom the notice of violation was issued shall owe the full fine amount indicated in the notice of violation.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 2, 5-6-08)


1.04.140 Scheduling of hearing to contest or mitigate – Correction prior to hearing.

A. Notice and scheduling of hearing. Upon the timely filing of a request for a hearing to contest a violation or to mitigate the penalty, the matter shall be scheduled to be heard at the next available appearance by the hearing examiner that is a minimum of fourteen (14) but no later than sixty (60) calendar days after the date the request was received by the city. Notice of the hearing date and time shall be served by regular first class mail to the address of the party who requested the hearing. The date and time for any hearing may be rescheduled by the hearing examiner for good cause upon the motion of a party or the hearing examiner.

B. Correction of violation prior to hearing. The hearing may be cancelled and the party requesting the hearing need not appear only if, at least two (2) business days prior to the scheduled hearing, the code enforcement officer determines that the violation has been satisfactorily corrected or abated and the monetary penalty paid in full. Where the scheduled hearing involves a repeat violation as defined in this chapter, the hearing shall not be cancelled unless the new violation has been corrected or abated to the satisfaction of the code enforcement officer and the monetary penalty and costs for the new violation(s) and any monetary penalty and costs owing for the previous violation(s) have been paid in full.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 2, 5-6-08)


1.04.150 Contested hearing – Procedure.

The hearing examiner shall conduct a hearing to contest a violation pursuant to Ch. 2.32 KCC when such hearing is properly and timely requested. The city and the person or entity to whom the notice of civil violation was issued may participate in the hearing and each party, or its legal representatives, may call witnesses and present evidence and rebuttal, subject to the following:

A. The city shall have the burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, that a violation has occurred.

B. The parties are responsible for securing the appearance of any witnesses they may wish to call; neither the city nor the hearing examiner shall have the burden of securing any witnesses on behalf of the person who is contesting the violation(s) or seeking to mitigate the penalties.

C. Because formal rules of evidence shall not apply to any such hearing, the hearing examiner shall allow hearsay testimony by the parties and not require proof of chain of custody for evidence that is presented; provided, the hearing examiner shall determine the weight to be assigned to any evidence presented.

D. Any notes, reports, summaries, photographs, or other materials prepared by the parties shall be admitted into evidence if requested; provided, the parties are free to argue the weight that should be assigned by the hearing examiner to any evidence submitted.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 2, 5-6-08)


1.04.160 Contested hearing – Decision of the hearing examiner.

A. Contents of order. Upon the conclusion of a hearing to contest a violation, the hearing examiner may issue a verbal decision pending issuance of the written decision; if necessary, the hearing examiner may delay issuing the written order for up to ten (10) business days following the hearing. In either event, the verbal decision and written order shall contain findings and conclusions based on the record that includes the following information:

1. For each alleged violation of the city code, a statement indicating whether the violation has been found committed or not committed;

2. For violations found committed, the monetary penalties and costs being assessed pursuant to this chapter;

3. For violations found committed, any required corrective actions;

4. For violations found committed, a finding that abatement of the violations by the city is authorized, at the expense of the person responsible for the violations; and

5. A statement notifying the person responsible for the violation that he or she is subject to additional civil and/or criminal penalties if any violation that was the subject of the hearing has not been corrected or abated.

B. Notice of decision. The hearing examiner may cause a a copy of the decision and order to be served upon the parties at the close of the hearing. When the hearing examiner requires more time to prepare a written order, or when a party fails to appear after requesting a contested hearing, the hearing examiner shall cause a copy of the decision and order to be served on the parties by mailing a copy to each party’s last known address within ten (10) business days of the hearing.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 2, 5-6-08)


1.04.170 Mitigation hearing – Procedure.

The hearing examiner shall conduct a hearing to mitigate the penalty on a violation when such hearing is properly and timely requested; provided, that in the event a person has requested a hearing to contest a violation and prior to the start of the hearing indicates to the hearing examiner a desire to mitigate rather than contest, the examiner shall permit the person to seek mitigation of the monetary penalty. The mitigation hearing shall be conducted according to the following general procedures:

A. The person responsible for the violation shall, as a condition of proceeding with the mitigation hearing, agree that he or she has committed the violations as set forth in the notice of the violation. The city shall be relieved of any burden of proving that the violations were committed, and such agreement by the person responsible for the violations shall be sufficient basis for the hearing examiner to find the violations committed.

B. If the person who has requested the mitigation hearing decides at the time of the hearing that he or she wishes to contest all or some of the alleged violations, the matters wishing to be contested shall, at the request of the city, be rescheduled.

C. The person responsible for the violations shall be given the opportunity to explain or provide evidence regarding the nature of the violations, why the violations exist, why the violations have not been abated or corrected, and any other information the hearing examiner determines is relevant.

D. The city shall be given the opportunity, at its discretion, to provide evidence of the nature of the violation, evidence to rebut assertions made by any party, and any other information or evidence the hearing examiner deems is relevant.

E. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing examiner shall enter an order finding the violations committed pursuant to KCC 1.04.180, and shall assess a monetary penalty in accordance with KCC 1.04.200.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 2, 5-6-08)


1.04.180 Mitigation hearing – Decision of the hearing examiner.

A. Order to be issued at close of hearing. Upon the conclusion of a penalty mitigation hearing, the hearing examiner shall issue, at that time, a written decision and order using a standard form that contains the following findings and conclusions based on the record:

1. For each alleged violation of the city code, a statement indicating that the violation has been found committed;

2. The monetary penalties and costs being assessed pursuant to this chapter;

3. Any required corrective action;

4. A statement notifying the person responsible for the violation that he or she is subject to additional civil and/or criminal penalties if any violation that was the subject of the hearing has not been corrected or abated;

5. A finding that abatement of the violations by the city is authorized, at the expense of the person responsible for the violations.

B. Notice of decision. The hearing examiner shall provide a copy of the decision and order to the parties at the close of the mitigation hearing. When the hearing examiner, for good cause shown, requires more time to prepare a written order, or when a party fails to appear after requesting a hearing, the hearing examiner shall cause a copy of the decision and order to be served on the parties by mailing a copy to the last known addresses of the parties within ten (10) business days of the hearing.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 2, 5-6-08)


1.04.190 Failure to appear – Default order.

If the person who requests a hearing to contest a violation or mitigate the penalty then fails to appear at the scheduled hearing after having been given notice in the manner provided for by this chapter, the hearing examiner shall use a standard form to immediately issue a default order, which finds committed all the violations set forth in the notice of violation, and which assesses a fine in the full amount indicated in the notice of violation. In addition, at the request of the city, the hearing examiner shall also impose upon the non-appearing party any costs to the city related to preparation for the hearing. The hearing examiner shall cause a copy of the decision to be served upon the non-appearing party by mailing a copy to the last known address of the non-appearing party within ten (10) business days of the hearing. Upon the motion of a party, the hearing examiner may rescind a default judgment only upon a showing of good cause to do so, and only if such motion has been brought within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the hearing at which the default judgment was ordered.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 2, 5-6-08)


1.04.200 Monetary penalty.

A. Monetary penalty. Each violation of a city regulation deemed committed by the hearing examiner is subject to a monetary penalty in an amount of five hundred dollars ($500) unless a different penalty amount for a given violation is expressly authorized or required by a more specific city code provision. Except where the person responsible for the violation has requested mitigation of the monetary penalty pursuant to KCC 1.04.120, the hearing examiner shall have no authority to reduce the amount of the monetary penalty. Where the person has requested to mitigate the monetary penalty, the examiner may reduce the monetary penalty for each violation, but in no case shall the penalty be reduced to an amount less than one hundred dollars ($100) for each violation found committed.

B. Payment of monetary penalty. Any monetary penalties assessed pursuant to this chapter constitute a personal obligation of the person to whom the notice of civil violation is directed. In addition, the monetary penalties assessed pursuant to this chapter may be assessed against the property that is the subject of the enforcement action. Any monetary penalty assessed must be paid in full to the city within thirty (30) days from the date of service of an uncontested notice of violation or any order of the hearing examiner that assesses monetary penalties.

C. Collection of monetary penalty – Use of collection agency. The city is authorized to take legal action to collect the monetary penalty. Pursuant to Chapter 19.16 RCW, as currently enacted or hereafter amended, the city may, at its discretion, use a collection agency for the purposes of collecting penalties and costs assessed pursuant to this chapter. The collection agency may add fees or interest charges to the original amount assigned to collections as allowed by law. No debt may be assigned to a collection agency until at least thirty (30) calendar days have elapsed from the time that the city attempts to notify the person responsible for the debt of the existence of the debt and that the debt may be assigned to a collection agency for collection if the debt is not paid. Notice of potential assignment to collections shall be made by regular first class mail to the last known address of the person responsible for the violation; provided, inability to ascertain a current mailing address shall not prohibit the debt from being assigned to collections.

D. Continuing duty to abate violations. Payment of a monetary penalty pursuant to this chapter does not relieve the person responsible for the violation of the duty to correct or abate the violation. Additional notices of violation may be issued and/or criminal charges filed for continuing failure to correct or abate a violation.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 2, 5-6-08)


1.04.210 Appeal.

An appeal of the decision of the hearing examiner must be filed with the King County superior court within twenty-one (21) calendar days of service of the decision, which shall be the exclusive means to appeal a decision of the hearing examiner rendered under this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 2, 5-6-08)


1.04.220 Repeat violation or failure to abate – Misdemeanor.

Where a person or entity has been found to have committed a violation under this chapter, regardless of whether the violation was resolved without penalty, the failure to abate the violation, or the commission of a subsequent violation, or the violation of a written order of the hearing examiner after having received notice of the order as provided in this chapter, shall each constitute a repeat violation and shall each be a misdemeanor subject to the penalties and provisions of KCC 1.04.030. The city attorney, or the city attorney’s designee, shall, at his or her discretion, have authority to file a repeat violation as either a civil violation or as a misdemeanor.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 2, 5-6-08)


1.04.225 Civil infractions.

A. In addition to, or as an alternative to, any other penalty provided for in this chapter or by law, a code enforcement officer may issue to any person who violates any provision of the Kent City Code a class 1 civil infraction as set forth in RCW 7.80.120, as currently enacted or hereafter amended. An infraction issued pursuant to this section shall be filed in the Kent municipal court and processed in the same manner as other infractions filed in the Kent municipal court.

B. Payment of a monetary penalty shall not relieve a person of the duty to correct the violation.

(Ord. No. 4282, § 2, 7-3-18)


1.04.230 Abatement.

A. Other abatement proceedings not precluded. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city from pursuing abatement of a violation pursuant to any other laws of the state of Washington or the city of Kent.

B. Costs of abatement. The costs of any abatement action taken by the city shall become a charge to the person responsible for the violation. These charges may be assessed against the person responsible for the violation or the property upon which the violation occurred, or both. The city may use any lawful means to collect these charges.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 2, 5-6-08)


1.04.240 Additional enforcement procedures.

The provisions of this chapter are not exclusive, and may be used in addition to other enforcement and penalty provisions authorized by the Kent City Code or any other law.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 2, 5-6-08)


1.04.250 Conflicting code provisions.

In the event a conflict exists between the enforcement provisions of this chapter and the enforcement provisions of any international or uniform code, statute, or regulation that is adopted in the Kent City Code and subject to the enforcement provisions of this chapter, the enforcement provisions of this chapter will prevail, unless the enforcement provisions of this chapter are preempted or specifically modified by said code, statute, or regulation.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 2, 5-6-08)


1.04.260 Duty not creating liability.

No provision or term used in this title is intended to impose any duty upon the city or any of its officers or employees which would subject them to damages in a civil action.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 2, 5-6-08)


Chapter 1.05 PUBLIC RECORDS

Sections:

1.05.010    Public records administration – Policy.

1.05.020    Cost of providing public records.

1.05.030    Index of public records not maintained.

1.05.040    –	

1.05.160    Repealed.


1.05.010 Public records administration – Policy.

The Public Records Act, currently codified at Chapter 42.56 RCW, requires public agencies to make identifiable, nonexempt public records available for inspection and copying upon request, and to publish rules of procedure to inform the public how access to public records will be accomplished. Flexibility to amend these rules of procedure is necessary to ensure the city is able to readily conform to frequent changes in the law. Therefore, in accordance with the Public Records Act and Chapter 2.76 KCC, the mayor is hereby authorized to establish and publish those policies and procedures that will apply within the city of Kent to the submitting, processing, and responding to requests for public records under the Public Records Act. These rules of procedure should aim to provide fullest assistance to requestors and timely action on requests, while also protecting public records from damage or disorganization and preventing excess interference with other essential city functions. The current version of this policy shall be available to the public on the city’s website.

(Ord. No. 3799, § 2, 5-16-06; Ord. No. 4155, § 1, 6-2-15)


1.05.020 Cost of providing public records.

In establishing the rules of procedure applicable to public records requests under KCC 1.05.010, the mayor is further authorized to establish and amend as necessary the fee schedule applicable to the costs of copying or otherwise providing public records to requesters to the fullest extent authorized by law.

(Ord. No. 4155, § 1, 6-2-15)


1.05.030 Index of public records not maintained.

A. In general. The Public Records Act requires all cities and public agencies maintain and make available a current index of certain public records. However, the Public Records Act also provides that if maintaining such an index would be unduly burdensome, or would interfere with government operation, a city need not maintain such an index but it must issue and publish a formal order specifying the reasons why and the extent to which compliance would be unduly burdensome.

B. Findings. The city of Kent is comprised of numerous departments and offices, and each department or office consists of multiple subdivisions. Each individual subdivision performs a unique public service, may utilize and produce multiple forms of “writings,” as that term is defined in the Public Records Act, and may maintain and organize these writings in several formats and in varying filing systems. Thousands of writings are produced or utilized each day by these subdivisions and may include paper records, computer files, photographs, audio recordings, video recordings, etc. Further complicating the ability to maintain a central index of records, many subdivisions of the city are physically located at various places throughout the city. As such, it is unduly burdensome, if not impossible, and would detract from the purpose of providing essential services to the citizens of Kent, to maintain a current index of public records.

C. Declaration and order. Based upon the findings set forth in subsection (B) of this section, the city council declares that it is unduly burdensome to maintain a central index of the records required by RCW 42.56.070 and, as allowed by that statute, formally orders that such an index not be maintained, so long as all indexes that are maintained for city use are available for review and copying in conformity with applicable law.

(Ord. No. 3799, § 2, 5-16-06; Ord. No. 4155, § 1, 6-2-15. Formerly 1.05.050)


1.05.040 Records subject to disclosure.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4155.

(Ord. No. 3799, § 2, 5-16-06)


1.05.060 Form and manner of request for public records.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4155.

(Ord. No. 3799, § 2, 5-16-06)


1.05.070 Submittal of a request for public records – Designation of public records officer.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4155.

(Ord. No. 3799, § 2, 5-16-06)


1.05.080 Initial response to request.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4155.

(Ord. No. 3799, § 2, 5-16-06)


1.05.090 Supplemental response to request – Additional time – Clarification.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4155.

(Ord. No. 3799, § 2, 5-16-06)


1.05.100 Disclosure of records – Process.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4155.

(Ord. No. 3799, § 2, 5-16-06)


1.05.110 Final response to request.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4155.

(Ord. No. 3799, § 2, 5-16-06)


1.05.120 Copying and delivering – Costs.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4155.

(Ord. No. 3799, § 2, 5-16-06)


1.05.130 Deposit for copying.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4155.

(Ord. No. 3799, § 2, 5-16-06)


1.05.140 Payment of required fees.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4155.

(Ord. No. 3799, § 2, 5-16-06)


1.05.150 Failure to pay required costs.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4155.

(Ord. No. 3799, § 2, 5-16-06)


1.05.160 Denial of request – Appeal.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4155.

(Ord. No. 3799, § 2, 5-16-06)

 


Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL Revised 10/19 Revised 11/19

Chapters:

Subtitle I. Governing Body and Officers

2.01    City Council Revised 10/19

2.02    Mayor

2.06    Chief Administrative Officer

Subtitle II. Departments and Offices

2.09    Departments

2.10    Employee Services Department

2.12    Finance Department

2.14    Information Technology Department

2.17    Repealed

2.20    Legal Department

2.22    Police Department

2.24    Fire Department

2.26    Parks and Community Services Department

2.28    Public Works Department

2.29    Repealed

2.30    Economic and Community Development Department

2.32    Office of the Hearing Examiner

2.34    Municipal Court Revised 10/19

2.36    Office of the City Clerk

2.40    Repealed

2.42    Repealed

Subtitle III. Boards and Commissions

2.51    Civil Service Commission of the Police Department

2.52    Civil Service Commission of the Fire Department

2.53    Human Services Commission

2.54    Lodging Tax Advisory Committee Revised 11/19

2.55    Disability Board

2.56    Cultural Communities Board

2.57    Land Use and Planning Board

2.58    Repealed

2.59    Kent Fire Department Regional Fire Authority Governing Board Revised 11/19

2.60    Parks and Recreation Commission

2.61    Arts Commission

2.62    Kent Bicycle Advisory Board

Subtitle IV. Personnel

2.76    Policies and Procedures Manual

2.77    In General

2.80    Deferred Compensation

Subtitle V. Indemnification and Claims 

2.96    Indemnification

2.97    City Claims


Chapter 2.01 CITY COUNCIL* Revised 10/19 

Sections:

2.01.010    Compensation of council members. 

2.01.020    City council meetings. 

2.01.030    Repealed.

*State law reference(s) – Number of council members, RCW 35A.12.010; procedures for election and removal of council members and the filling of vacancies, RCW 35A.12.030 et seq.; Washington optional municipal code, RCW 35A.01.010 et seq.; code of ethics, RCW 42.23.010 et seq.


2.01.010 Compensation of council members.

A. Each city council member shall be paid a monthly salary of $1,174.65 effective July 3, 2015. The duly elected president of the city council shall be paid a monthly salary of $1,238.20 effective July 3, 2015. 

A cost of living adjustment (COLA) equal to 2.5 percent of the annual wages is to be applied to this salary effective January 1, 2016, and on January 1st of each subsequent year unless amended by the salary commission.

B. Each council member may receive medical insurance coverage benefits for himself or herself as is provided to full-time employees of the city. Additionally, each council member may, at his or her expense, elect to obtain medical insurance coverage benefits for his or her family as is provided pursuant to city policy.

(Ord. No. 814, § 1; Ord. No. 1112, § 1; Ord. No. 2301, § 1; Ord. No. 1826, § 1; Ord. No. 3165, § 1, 5-3-94; Ord. No. 3421, § 1, 9-15-98; Ord. No. 3480, § 1, 10-19-99; Ord. No. 3617, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 3687, § 2, 4-20-04; Ord. No. 4169, § 1 (2015 Salary Schedule), 9-15-15. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.04.010)


2.01.020 City council meetings. Revised 10/19 

A. Meeting location. The regular and other meetings of the city council shall be held in the council chambers at the City Hall unless otherwise designated by majority of the city council at a regular or special meeting. 

B. Regular meeting date and time. The regular meetings shall be held on the first and third Tuesdays of each month, except that during the month of December of each year, there shall be only one (1) regular council meeting to be held on the second Tuesday of said month. If a regular meeting occurs on a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held on the next business day at the same hour. Regular meetings shall convene at 7:00 p.m., except that the regular meeting scheduled for the first Tuesday in August and the first Tuesday in November shall be held at 5:00 p.m. 

C. Special meetings. Special meetings shall be held as provided by law at such times as may be designated.

(Ord. No. 510, § 1; Ord. No. 1563, § 1; Ord. No. 1629, § 1; Ord. No. 1764, § 1; Ord. No. 2341, § 1; Ord. No. 2608, § 1; Ord. No. 2702; Ord. No. 3197, § 1, 11-2-94; Ord. No. 3617, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 3923, § 1, 7-7-09; Ord. No. 4104, § 1, 2-18-14; Ord. No. 4334, § 1, 9-17-19. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.04.020)

State law reference(s) – City council meetings, RCW 35A.12.110; open meetings act, RCW 42.30.010 et seq.


2.01.030 Term limits for council members.

Repealed by Ord. No. 3595. 

(Ord. No. 3283, § 1, 3-19-96)


Chapter 2.02 MAYOR*

Sections:

2.02.010    Compensation of mayor. 

2.02.020    Repealed.

2.02.030    –

2.02.040    Reserved.

*State law reference(s) – Duties and authority of the mayor, RCW 35A.12.090, 35A.12.100.


2.02.010 Compensation of mayor.

The mayor of the city shall be paid a monthly salary $11,500 effective July 3, 2015.

A cost of living adjustment (COLA) equal to 2.5 percent of the annual wages is to be applied to this salary effective January 1, 2016, and on January 1st of each subsequent year unless amended by the salary commission.

In addition to the base salary, the mayor shall be entitled to receive all benefits associated with full-time employment with the city, as established by city policy for this position. These benefits may be adjusted from time to time, on a city-wide basis, in accordance with city policy. However, adjustments increasing benefits beyond those provided to full-time employees, and any increases in salary shall be by ordinance pursuant to RCW 35A.12.070.

(Ord. No. 1977, § 1; Ord. No. 3068, § 1(2.02.010), 9-1-92; Ord. No. 3283, § 1, 3-19-96; Ord. No. 3334, § 1, 1-22-97; Ord. No. 3617, § 3, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 3687, § 3, 4-20-04; Ord. No. 4169, § 1 (2015 Salary Schedule), 9-15-15. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.02.010)


2.02.020 Term limits for mayor.

Repealed by Ord. No. 3595. 

(Ord. No. 1977, § 2; Ord. No. 3068, § 1(2.02.020), 9-1-92; Ord. No. 3283, § 1, 3-19-96. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.02.020)


2.02.030, 2.02.040  Reserved.

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3283, § 1, adopted Mar. 19, 1996, repealed §§ 2.02.030 and 2.02.040, which pertained to amount of additional compensation and exceptions from additional compensation.


Chapter 2.06 CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER*

Sections:

2.06.010    Chief administrative officer – Position created and appointment.

2.06.020    Qualifications.

2.06.030    Duties and powers.

2.06.040    Salary.

*Cross reference(s) – Personnel, title 2, subtitle IV.


2.06.010 Chief administrative officer – Position created and appointment.

There is hereby created the position of chief administrative officer who shall act as assistant to the mayor. The chief administrative officer shall be appointed by, report to, and serve at the pleasure of the mayor. All references in the Kent City Code to operations director shall mean the chief administrative officer.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 1, 6-6-00)


2.06.020 Qualifications.

The chief administrative officer must have the following or equivalent qualifications: he or she must be a graduate of a recognized college or university and have at least five (5) years’ experience in financial administration, accounting, and/or personnel management, or similar fields as deemed appropriate to the position by the appointing authority.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 1, 6-6-00)


2.06.030 Duties and powers.

The chief administrative officer shall manage the offices of administration as established in this title and shall have general oversight of the city departments as delegated by the mayor. The chief administrative officer shall be responsible for the city’s public relations and governmental affairs. The chief administrative officer shall perform other duties as prescribed by the council and/or directed by the mayor.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 1, 6-6-00)


2.06.040 Salary.

The salary of the chief administrative officer shall be set by the mayor within the limits of the annual city budget established by city council.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 1, 6-6-00)


Chapter 2.09 DEPARTMENTS

Sections:

2.09.010    Established.


2.09.010 Established.

There are hereby established departments of the city of Kent as set forth in Chs. 2.10 through 2.30 KCC as follows:

Ch. 2.10, Employee Services Department;

Ch. 2.12, Finance Department;

Ch. 2.14, Information Technology Department;

Ch. 2.20, Legal Department;

Ch. 2.22, Police Department;

Ch. 2.24, Fire Department;

Ch. 2.26, Parks and Community Services Department;

Ch. 2.28, Public Works Department; and

Ch. 2.30, Economic and Community Development Department.

These departments shall report to the mayor, or his or her designee, unless otherwise provided in this title.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 2, 6-6-00; Ord. No. 3926, § 2, 8-4-09)


Chapter 2.10 EMPLOYEE SERVICES DEPARTMENT*

Sections:

2.10.010    Department created.

2.10.020    Employee services director – Position created and appointment.

2.10.030    Qualifications.

2.10.040    Duties and powers.

2.10.050    Salary.

*Cross reference(s) – Personnel, title 2, subtitle IV.


2.10.010 Department created.

There is hereby created the employee services department for the purpose of performing all human resource functions of the city. The department shall be supervised by the employee services director who shall serve as its director, who shall have complete charge of all of the work of the department, and who shall be responsible for hiring and supervising employees of the department.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 3, 6-6-00)


2.10.020 Employee services director – Position created and appointment.

There is hereby created the position known as employee services director. The position is created in accordance with the City of Kent Policies and Procedures Manual. The employee services director shall be appointed by the mayor in accordance with the provisions of the City of Kent Policies and Procedures Manual solely on the basis of professional experience, education, and demonstrated knowledge of accepted practices relating to the duties of the department.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 3, 6-6-00)


2.10.030 Qualifications.

The employee services director must have the following or equivalent qualifications: he or she must be a graduate of a recognized college or university and have at least five (5) years’ experience in personnel management or similar fields as deemed appropriate to the position by the appointing authority.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 3, 6-6-00)


2.10.040 Duties and powers.

It shall be the duty of the employee services director to:

1. Develop, implement, and administer personnel policies and procedures for all departments of the city.

2. Act as equal employment opportunity officer and administer the equal employment opportunity program for the city.

3. Perform all personnel functions, risk management, and insurance administration functions as established in the city policies and procedures manual and as may be directed from time to time by the mayor.

4. Direct and assist in the professional development of personnel.

The employee services director shall perform such other duties as the city council, mayor, or city administrator may direct or as may be required by the laws of the state. 

(Ord. No. 3512, § 3, 6-6-00)


2.10.050 Salary.

The salary of the employee services director shall be that as established in the annual city budget.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 3, 6-6-00)


Chapter 2.12 FINANCE DEPARTMENT*

Sections:

2.12.010    Department created.

2.12.020    Finance director – Position created and appointment.

2.12.030    Qualifications.

2.12.040    Duties and powers.

2.12.050    Salary.

*Cross reference(s) – Personnel, title 2, subtitle IV; revenue and finance, title 3.


2.12.010 Department created.

There is hereby created the finance department for the purpose of performing all finance accounting and auditing functions of the city. The department shall be supervised by the finance director who shall serve as its director, who shall have complete charge of all of the work of the department, and who shall be responsible for hiring and supervising employees of the department.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 4, 6-6-00)


2.12.020 Finance director – Position created and appointment.

There is hereby created the position known as finance director. The position is created in accordance with the City of Kent Policies and Procedures Manual. The finance director shall be appointed by the mayor in accordance with the provisions of the City of Kent Policies and Procedures Manual solely on the basis of professional experience, education and demonstrated knowledge of accepted practices relating to the duties of the department.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 4, 6-6-00)


2.12.030 Qualifications.

The finance director must have the following or equivalent qualifications: he or she must be a graduate of a recognized college or university and have at least five (5) years’ experience in financial administration, accounting or similar fields as deemed appropriate to the position by the appointing authority. 

(Ord. No. 3512, § 4, 6-6-00)


2.12.040 Duties and powers.

It shall be the duty of the finance director to:

1. Be responsible for the management of the city’s investment and debt portfolios.

2. Assist city administration in budget preparation and monitoring.

3. Maintain the accounting system in accordance with recognized practices and standards.

4. Maintain the payroll system.

5. Exercise control of accounts payable.

6. Maintain an inventory of capital assets.

7. Collect all city funds, including the provision of billing and customer service for city utilities, special assessments and traffic violations.

8. Provide meter reading and related functions.

9. Monitor the operations of services provided to other city departments as directed by the mayor including purchasing, printing, building and facility maintenance operations and other support service functions. 

The finance director shall perform such other duties as the city council, mayor or city administrator may direct or as may be required by the laws of the state. 

(Ord. No. 3512, § 4, 6-6-00)


2.12.050 Salary.

The salary of the finance director shall be that as established in the annual city budget.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 4, 6-6-00)


Chapter 2.14 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEPARTMENT*

Sections:

2.14.010    Department created.

2.14.020    Information technology director – Position created and appointment.

2.14.030    Qualifications.

2.14.040    Duties and powers.

2.14.050    Salary.

*Cross reference(s) – Personnel, title 2, subtitle IV.


2.14.010 Department created.

There is hereby created the information technology department for the purpose of performing all information technology planning, implementation and support functions of the city. The department shall be supervised by the information technology director who shall serve as its director, who shall have complete charge of all of the work of the department, and who shall be responsible for hiring and supervising employees of the department.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 5, 6-6-00)


2.14.020 Information technology director – Position created and appointment.

There is hereby created the position known as information technology director. The position is created in accordance with the City of Kent Policies and Procedures Manual. The information technology director shall be appointed by the mayor in accordance with the provisions of the City of Kent Policies and Procedures Manual solely on the basis of professional experience, education and demonstrated knowledge of accepted practices relating to the duties of the department.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 5, 6-6-00)


2.14.030 Qualifications.

The information technology director must have the following or equivalent qualifications: he or she must be a graduate of a recognized college or university and have at least five (5) years’ experience in information technology or similar fields as deemed appropriate to the position by the appointing authority. 

(Ord. No. 3512, § 5, 6-6-00)


2.14.040 Duties and powers.

It shall be the duty of the information technology director to:

1. Direct the activities of the information technology department with the responsibility to provide technological leadership in systems planning, implementation and support programs.

2. Direct the development and maintenance of long-range information processing plans and budgets.

3. Act as a contact person with user departments responding to and analyzing their inquiries.

The information technology director shall perform such other duties as the city council, mayor or chief administrative officer may direct or as may be required by the laws of the state. 

(Ord. No. 3512, § 5, 6-6-00)


2.14.050 Salary.

The salary of the information technology director shall be that as established in the annual city budget.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 5, 6-6-00)


Chapter 2.17 OPERATIONS DEPARTMENT

(Repealed by Ord. No. 3512)


Chapter 2.20 LEGAL DEPARTMENT*

Sections:

2.20.010    Department created.

2.20.020    City attorney – Position created and appointment.

2.20.030    Qualifications.

2.20.040    Duties and powers.

2.20.050    Assistant city attorneys.

2.20.060    Interlocal agreements.

2.20.070    Salary.

*Cross reference(s) – Indemnification, ch. 2.96; personnel, title 2, subtitle IV.


2.20.010 Department created.

There is hereby created the legal department for the purpose of performing all the legal functions of the city. The department shall consist of the civil division, which will be responsible for representing the city in all civil matters including litigation, and the prosecution division, which will be responsible for prosecuting all misdemeanor cases in the city. The department shall be supervised by the city attorney who shall serve as its director, who shall have complete charge of all of the work of the department, and who shall be responsible for hiring and supervising employees of the department.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 7, 6-6-00)


2.20.020 City attorney – Position created and appointment.

There is hereby created the position known as city attorney. The position is created in accordance with the City of Kent Policies and Procedures Manual. The city attorney shall be appointed by the mayor in accordance with the provisions of the City of Kent Policies and Procedures Manual solely on the basis of professional experience, education and demonstrated knowledge of accepted practices relating to the duties of the department.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 7, 6-6-00)


2.20.030 Qualifications.

The city attorney must be a graduate of an accredited law school and a member in good standing of the Washington State Bar Association.

(Ord. No. 2366, § 1; Ord. No. 3512, § 7, 6-6-00. Formerly § 2.04.030)


2.20.040 Duties and powers.

It shall be the duty of the city attorney to advise all city officials elected or appointed, city employees and city boards or commissions in all legal matters pertaining to the business of the city and to approve all ordinances and resolutions as to form. The city attorney shall supervise the representation of the city in all actions brought by or against the city or against city officials in their official capacity. The city attorney shall perform such other duties as the city council, mayor or chief administrative officer may direct or as may be required by the laws of the state. The city attorney shall have complete charge of all of the work of the legal department.

(Ord. No. 2366, § 1; Ord. No. 3512, § 7, 6-6-00. Formerly § 2.04.040)


2.20.050 Assistant city attorneys.

The city attorney may appoint necessary assistants who shall have the power to perform any act which the city attorney is authorized to perform. 

(Ord. No. 2366, § 1; Ord. No. 3512, § 7, 6-6-00. Formerly § 2.04.050)


2.20.060 Interlocal agreements.

The city attorney is authorized to consult with and provide legal services to governmental agencies, municipal and public corporations or other public offices. The city attorney is authorized to enter into interlocal agreements or contracts to provide such consultation or legal services. The city attorney and assistant city attorneys are authorized to serve in a private capacity as judge pro tem, court magistrate, arbitrator or in any other capacity for a court agency so long as such service does not conflict or interfere with representation of the city. 

(Ord. No. 2366, § 1; Ord. No. 3512, § 7, 6-6-00. Formerly § 2.04.060)


2.20.070 Salary.

The salary of the city attorney shall be that as established in the annual city budget. The salary of assistant city attorneys shall be set and modified by city attorney subject to the annual city budget. 

(Ord. No. 2366, § 1; Ord. No. 2560, § 1; Ord. No. 3512, § 7, 6-6-00. Formerly § 2.04.070)


Chapter 2.22 POLICE DEPARTMENT*

Sections:

2.22.010    Findings and recitals. 

2.22.020    Creation. 

2.22.025    Chief of police – Duties. 

2.22.030    Definitions. 

2.22.040    Parking enforcement aide – Position created. 

2.22.050    Same – Position classification. 

2.22.060    Same – Duties. 

2.22.070    Same – Powers. 

*Cross reference(s) – Civil service commission of the police department, ch. 2.51; disability board, ch. 2.55; indemnification, ch. 2.96; personnel, title 2, subtitle IV; business licenses and regulations, ch. 5.01 et seq.; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 9.02 et seq.; traffic and motor vehicle regulations, ch. 9.36 et seq.

State law reference(s) – Chief of police, RCW 35A.12.020; police, qualifications, RCW 41.12.070.


2.22.010 Findings and recitals.

A. Civil service has been mandated by Washington law since 1935 for city and town firefighters and since 1937 for city and town police officers.

B. Current city ordinances and civil service rules provide for coverage of law enforcement officers and city police officers as defined in KCC 2.22.030 as police officers or uniform personnel, but do not provide for coverage of nonuniform police personnel.

C. On May 2, 1989, the city council directed that the city civil service include nonuniform police personnel. The city has met with representatives of collective bargaining units concerning the implementation of civil service for nonuniform police personnel. On July 20, 1988, the city civil service commission provided for amendment of its rules to provide for coverage of corrections officers, police specialists and other nonuniform police personnel.

D. The city has met with collective bargaining units representing nonuniform police personnel to negotiate changes to collective bargaining agreements related to such coverage.

E. It is the intent of this section to provide necessary amendments to the code to carry out the prior direction of the city council and to authorize agreements with collective bargaining units representing nonuniform police personnel.

(Ord. No. 2868, § 1, 8-15-89)

Cross reference(s) – Fire department, ch. 2.24.


2.22.020 Creation.

There is hereby created the city police department. The department shall be supervised by the chief of police. With the exception of the incumbent chief, who shall remain subject to the city’s civil service system, the position of chief of police shall be exempt from, and shall not be a classified position under the city’s civil service system. The chief of police shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the mayor. All appointees to the position of chief of police are terminable at will by the mayor except for the incumbent chief who shall be subject to the city’s civil service rules and regulations relating to demotion and termination. 

(Ord. No. 1671, § 1; Ord. No. 3150, § 3, 1-4-94. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.22.010)


2.22.025 Chief of police – Duties.

The chief of police shall be the chief police officer of the city responsible for maintaining the peace of the city. The chief of police shall have the responsibility for the appointment, removal and suspension of employees of the department subject to the city’s civil service rules and regulations, the city’s personnel policies, and labor agreements. The chief shall be responsible for the management of the police department and the administration of the department’s budget as authorized and directed by the city council and the mayor. The chief of police shall also perform such other duties as may be imposed by ordinance or as directed by the mayor.

(Ord. No. 3269, § 1, 12-19-95)


2.22.030 Definitions.

The terms, “law enforcement officer,” and “city police officer” shall cover such regular, full-time personnel of the city police department who have been appointed to offices, positions or ranks of the city police department which are herewith expressly created:

1. Chief of police;

2. Assistant chief of police;

3. Captain;

4. Lieutenant;

5. Sergeant;

6. Commissioned officer. 

(Ord. No. 1671, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.22.020)


2.22.040 Parking enforcement aide – Position created.

There is created within the police department of the city a position designated as parking enforcement aide.

(Ord. No. 2045, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.23.010)


2.22.050 Same – Position classification.

The person filling the position of parking enforcement aide shall not be deemed to be a law enforcement officer as that term is used in the law enforcement offices and firefighters retirement system, nor shall the position be a classified position within the civil service system of the city. 

(Ord. No. 2045, § 3; Ord. No. 2868, § 3, 8-15-89. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.23.030)


2.22.060 Same – Duties.

The duties of the parking enforcement aide shall include patrolling assigned areas of the city to detect violations of the city’s parking regulations, to issue citations to violators of parking regulations and to authorize the towing of vehicles parked in violation of parking regulations, to appear in court to testify when so required, and to perform related work as assigned. 

(Ord. No. 2045, § 4; Ord. No. 3005, § 1, 10-1-91. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.23.040)

Cross reference(s) – Parking in direction of travel, ch. 9.38; towing regulations, ch. 9.39.


2.22.070 Same – Powers.

The parking enforcement aide shall not have the power of arrest, but shall have authority to issue and serve citations and complaints for violation of city parking regulations. A copy of any such complaint or citation shall be filed with the clerk of the court of traffic violations bureau within forty-eight (48) hours after its issuance. In addition, the parking enforcement aide shall have the ability to authorize the towing of vehicles parked in violation of parking regulations. 

(Ord. No. 2045, § 5; Ord. No. 3005, § 2, 10-1-91. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.23.050)


Chapter 2.24 FIRE DEPARTMENT*

Sections:

2.24.010    Creation. 

2.24.030    Hazardous materials command agency. 

2.24.040    Assistance agreements – Authorized – Liability. 

2.24.050    Same – Terms. 

2.24.060    Same – Notification at incident. 

*Cross reference(s) – Civil service commission of the fire department, ch. 2.52; disability board, ch. 2.55; indemnification, ch. 2.96; personnel, title 2, subtitle IV; fireman’s relief and pension fund, § 3.40.900; fire prevention and protection, ch. 13.01 et seq.

State law reference(s) – Civil service commission, RCW 41.08.030.


2.24.010 Creation.

There is hereby created the city fire department. The department shall be supervised by the fire chief. With the exception of the incumbent chief, who shall remain subject to the city’s civil service system, the position of fire chief shall be exempt from and shall not be a classified position under the city’s civil service system. The fire chief shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the mayor. All appointees to the position of fire chief are terminable at will by the mayor except for the incumbent chief who shall be subject to the city’s civil service rules and regulations relating to demotion and termination. 

(Ord. No. 1009, § 1; Ord. No. 2372, § 1; Ord. No. 3150, § 4, 1-4-94. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.26.040)


2.24.030 Hazardous materials command agency.

The city fire department is designated as the hazardous materials incident command agency for all hazardous materials incidents within the corporate limits of the city. 

(Ord. No. 2372, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.26.100)

Cross reference(s) – Uniform fire code, ch. 13.02.


2.24.040 Assistance agreements – Authorized – Liability.

The fire chief is authorized to enter into agreements with persons, agencies, and corporations who may provide assistance with respect to a hazardous materials incident. In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 4.24 RCW, such persons, agencies, and corporations are not liable for civil damages resulting from any act or omission in the rendering of such care, assistance, or advice, other than acts or omissions constituting gross negligence or wilful or wanton misconduct, provided:

1. The city fire department and the person whose assistance is requested have entered into a written hazardous materials assistance agreement prior to the incident which incorporates the terms of KCC 2.24.050, except as specified in KCC 2.24.060.

2. The request for assistance comes from the city fire department. 

(Ord. No. 2372, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.26.110)


2.24.050 Same – Terms.

A. Hazardous materials emergency assistance agreements which are executed prior to a hazardous materials incident shall include the following terms and conditions:

1. The person requested to assist shall not be obligated to assist;

2. The person requested to assist may act only under direction of the incident commander or his representative;

3. The person requested to assist may withdraw his assistance if he deems the actions or directions of the incident commander to be contrary to accepted hazardous materials response practices;

4. The person requested to assist shall not be a public employee acting in his official capacity within the boundaries of his political subdivision;

5. Any person responsible for causing the hazardous materials incident shall not be covered by the liability standard defined in KCC 2.24.040.

B. It is the responsibility of both parties to ensure that mutually agreeable procedures are established when assistance is requested for recording the name of the person whose assistance is requested and the time and date of the request, which records shall be retained for three (3) years by the city fire department. A copy of the official incident command agency designation shall be a part of the assistance agreement specified in this section. 

(Ord. No. 2372, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.26.120)


2.24.060 Same – Notification at incident.

A. The chief of the fire department or his representative may enter into verbal hazardous materials emergency assistance agreements at the scene of an incident where execution of a written agreement prior to the incident is not possible. A notification of the terms of this section shall be presented at the scene by the incident commander or his representative to the person whose assistance is requested. The incident commander and the person whose assistance is requested shall both sign the notification which appears in subsection (B) of this section, indicating the date and time of signature. If a requesting agency deliberately misrepresents individual or agency status, that agency shall assume full liability for any damages resulting from the actions of the person whose assistance is requested, other than those damages resulting from gross negligence or wilful or wanton misconduct.

B. The notification required by subsection (A) of this section shall be as follows:

NOTIFICATION OF “GOOD SAMARITAN” LAW

You have been requested to provide emergency assistance by a representative of a hazardous materials incident command agency. To encourage your assistance, the Washington State Legislature has passed “good samaritan” legislation, RCW 70.136.050, to protect you from potential liability. The law reads, in part:

    	“Any person who, in good faith, renders emergency care, assistance, or advice with respect to a hazardous materials incident is not liable for civil damages resulting from any act or omission in the rendering of such care, assistance, or advice, other than acts or omissions constituting gross negligence or wilful or wanton misconduct.”

The law requires that you be advised of certain conditions to ensure your protection:

1. You are not obligated to assist and you may withdraw your assistance at any time.

2. You cannot profit from assisting.

3. You must agree to act under the direction of the incident commander.

4. You are not covered by this law if you caused the initial accident or if you are a public employee doing your official duty.

I have read and understand the above.

    (Name) 	___________________________

    Date __________ 	 	Time 	_____________

    	I am a representative of a designated hazardous materials incident command agency and I am authorized to make this request for assistance.

    (Name) 	___________________________

    (Agency) __________________________	

    Date __________ 	 	Time 		_____________

(Ord. No. 2372, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.26.130)

State law reference(s) – Special immunities, RCW 4.24.005 et seq.


Chapter 2.26 PARKS AND COMMUNITY SERVICES DEPARTMENT*

Sections:

2.26.010    Department created.

2.26.020    Parks director – Position created and appointment.

2.26.030    Qualifications.

2.26.040    Duties and powers.

2.26.050    Salary.

2.26.060    Human services office – Created.

2.26.070    Human services office – General duties and responsibilities.

2.26.080    Human services manager – Position created and appointment.

2.26.090    Human services staff.

2.26.100    Salary of staff.

*Cross reference(s) – Indemnification, ch. 2.96; personnel, title 2, subtitle IV; parks and recreation, ch. 4.01.

State law reference(s) – Recreation and parks, RCW 35A.67.010.


2.26.010 Department created.

There is hereby created the parks and community services department for the purpose of performing parks, recreation, human service and facility maintenance functions of the city. The department shall be supervised by the parks director who shall serve as its director, who shall have complete charge of all of the work of the department, and who shall be responsible for hiring and supervising employees of the department.

(Ord. No. 1569, § 1; Ord. No. 3512, § 8, 6-6-00. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.30.010)


2.26.020 Parks director – Position created and appointment.

There is hereby created the position known as parks director. The position is created in accordance with the City of Kent Policies and Procedures Manual. The parks director shall be appointed by the mayor in accordance with the provisions of the City of Kent Policies and Procedures Manual solely on the basis of professional experience, education and demonstrated knowledge of accepted practices relating to the duties of the department.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 8, 6-6-00)


2.26.030 Qualifications.

The parks director must have the following or equivalent qualifications: he or she must be a graduate of a recognized college or university and have at least five (5) years’ experience in parks and recreation administration or similar fields as deemed appropriate to the position by the appointing authority.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 8, 6-6-00)


2.26.040 Duties and powers.

It shall be the duty of the parks director to provide for the proper maintenance and operation of public parks, playgrounds, recreational and golf course facilities, and all other facilities belonging to the city; and to provide recreational and human service programs on behalf of the city.

The parks director shall perform such other duties as the city council, mayor or city administrator may direct or as may be required by the laws of the state. 

(Ord. No. 3512, § 8, 6-6-00)


2.26.050 Salary.

The salary of the parks and community services director shall be that as established in the annual city budget.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 8, 6-6-00)


2.26.060 Human services office – Created.

There is hereby created the human services office. The human services office shall operate as a division of the parks and community services department.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 8, 6-6-00)


2.26.070 Human services office – General duties and responsibilities.

The human services office shall plan, organize, and administer the activities and functions concerning human service issues, including the development and assessment of human service needs, determination of priorities for human services, evaluation and recommendation of funding requests, and the monitoring of performance of services provided by human service organizations and agencies. The human services office shall coordinate activities with other human service planning agencies and organizations. Additionally, the human services office shall coordinate human service activities between city administration and the city human services commission, and shall implement policy recommendations established by the human services commission and provide necessary support to the human services commission in the performance of its duties.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 8, 6-6-00)


2.26.080 Human services manager – Position created and appointment.

The human services manager shall manage the human services office under the direct supervision of the parks and community services director. The housing and human services manager shall be appointed by the parks and community services director.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 8, 6-6-00)


2.26.090 Human services staff.

The human services manager shall, in accordance with appropriate city policy, recruit and hire employees as may be budgeted from time to time by the city council to the office of housing and human services. Staff employees shall report directly to the human services manager.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 8, 6-6-00)


2.26.100 Salary of staff.

The salary of the human services manager and staff employees shall be that as established in the city annual budget.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 8, 6-6-00)


Chapter 2.28 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT*

Sections:

2.28.010    Department created.

2.28.020    Director of public works – Position created.

2.28.030    Appointment.

2.28.040    Qualifications.

2.28.050    Responsibilities – Duties.

2.28.060    Powers and duties.

2.28.070    Salary.

*Cross reference(s) – Indemnification, ch. 2.96; personnel, title 2, subtitle IV; public works contract requirements, ch. 6.01; required infrastructure improvements, ch. 6.02; improvement plan approval and inspection fees, ch. 6.03; assessments for improvements, ch. 6.04; street improvement reimbursement agreements, ch. 6.05; street and curb cuts, ch. 6.06; street use permits, ch. 6.07; street or alley vacation, ch. 6.09; street trees, ch. 6.10; water service, ch. 7.02; garbage services, ch. 7.03; sanitary sewers, ch. 7.04; storm and surface water utility, ch. 7.05; combined sewer and storm and surface water utility, ch. 7.06; surface water and drainage code, ch. 7.07; wastewater facilities plan, ch. 7.09; underground installation of electrical or communication facilities, ch. 7.10; utility services outside the city, ch. 7.11; cable television communications, ch. 7.12; water shortage emergency regulations, ch. 7.13; subdivision code, ch. 12.04.

State law reference(s) – Public works and contracts, RCW 35A.40.200.


2.28.010 Department created.

There is hereby created the public works department for the purpose of performing all public works functions of the city, except for public and private development permitting functions. The department shall be supervised by the director of public works, who shall serve as its director and who shall have complete charge of all of the work and who shall be responsible for hiring and supervising employees of the department. The department, through the director, shall report to the chief administrative officer or his or her designee. The divisions of the public works department which report to the director of public works are as follows:

1. Engineering;

2. Street maintenance and operations;

3. Fleet services;

4. Water;

5. Sewer, storm water, and drainage utility; and

6. Solid waste.

(Ord. No. 1808, § 2; Ord. No. 3512, § 7, 6-6-00; Ord. No. 3926, § 3, 8-4-09. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.18.020)


2.28.020 Director of public works – Position created.

There is created a position known as the director of public works. 

(Ord. No. 1808, § 1; Ord. No. 3512, § 7, 6-6-00; Ord. No. 3926, § 3, 8-4-09. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.18.010)


2.28.030 Appointment.

The director of public works shall be appointed by the mayor in accordance with the provisions of the City of Kent Policies and Procedures Manual solely on the basis of his or her professional qualifications with special emphasis on professional experience and education and demonstrated knowledge of accepted practices relating to the duties of his or her office. The director of public works shall report to the chief administrative officer.

(Ord. No. 1808, § 4; Ord. No. 3512, § 7, 6-6-00; Ord. No. 3926, § 3, 8-4-09. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.18.040)


2.28.040 Qualifications.

The public works director must have the following or equivalent qualifications: he or she must be a graduate of a recognized college or university and have at least five (5) years’ experience in a management engineering capacity. It is preferable, although not a requirement of the position, that the director be a graduate of a duly accredited four (4) year college or university in civil engineering and have a certificate of registration with the state board of registration for professional engineers and land surveyors. If the public works director is not a registered professional engineer, the public works director shall ensure that the deputy public works director or city engineer is a professional engineer.

(Ord. No. 1808, § 5; Ord. No. 3512, § 7, 6-6-00; Ord. No. 3926, § 3, 8-4-09. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.18.050)


2.28.050 Responsibilities – Duties.

The director of public works shall organize and supervise each division that reports to him or her pursuant to KCC 2.28.010 in the most efficient manner possible so that the interests of the citizens of the city shall be best served. The director of public works shall coordinate engineering done for the city by consultants and have ultimate responsibilities for all such projects. The director of public works shall create an effective working relationship between the department of public works and all other city departments. The director of public works shall supervise each of the divisions reporting to him or her and make periodic reports to the chief administrative officer.

(Ord. No. 1808, § 3; Ord. No. 3512, § 7, 6-6-00; Ord. No. 3926, § 3, 8-4-09. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.18.030)


2.28.060 Powers and duties.

The general powers and duties of the director of public works shall be to:

1. Supervise and assist in the engineering, surveying, and drafting work involved in public works and improvements of the city or its utilities such as preparation of estimates, plans, specifications, reports and recommendations, and public improvements.

2. Supervise the keeping of plans, plats, maps, drawings, dedications, final estimates, and specifications relating to city projects.

3. Be responsible to the mayor for the construction, inspection, and repair of public streets and city-owned utilities, and provide technical and advisory engineering assistance to other departments of the city.

(Ord. No. 1808, § 7; Ord. No. 3512, § 7, 6-6-00; Ord. No. 3926, § 3, 8-4-09. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.18.060)


2.28.070 Salary.

The salary of the director of public works shall be that as established in the city’s annual budget.

(Ord. No. 1808, § 7; Ord. No. 3512, § 7, 6-6-00; Ord. No. 3926, § 3, 8-4-09. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.18.070)


Chapter 2.29 OFFICES

(Repealed by Ord. No. 3926)


Chapter 2.30 ECONOMIC AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT*

Sections:

2.30.010    Department created.

2.30.020    Economic and community development director – Creation and appointment.

2.30.030    Qualifications.

2.30.040    Duties and powers.

2.30.050    Salary.

2.30.060    –

2.30.069    Repealed.

2.30.070    Building official – Position created and appointment.

2.30.072    –	

2.30.110    Repealed.

*Cross reference(s) – Hearing examiner, ch. 2.32; indemnification, ch. 2.96; personnel, title 2, subtitle IV; subdivisions, ch. 12.04; mobile home parks, ch. 12.05; recreation vehicle parks, ch. 12.06; administration of the zoning provisions, ch. 15.09; enforcement of the zoning code, ch. 15.10.

State law reference(s) – Planning and zoning, RCW 35A.63.010 et seq.


2.30.010 Department created.

There will be an economic and community development department for the purpose of performing community planning and all public and private permitting and development review, approval, inspection, and enforcement functions, also to include fire plan review, inspection, investigation, enforcement, and emergency preparedness functions.

(Ord. No. 3926, § 5, 8-4-09; Ord. No. 4154, § 1, 6-2-15)


2.30.020 Economic and community development director – Creation and appointment.

The department will be managed by the position of economic and community development director. The economic and community development director will be appointed by, and serve at the direction of, the mayor and will be subject to the rights and obligations of the City of Kent Policies and Procedures Manual, as may be amended from time to time. The mayor’s appointment will be made solely on the basis of professional experience, education and demonstrated knowledge of accepted practices relating to the duties of the department. The economic and community development director will have complete charge of all department work and will be responsible for hiring and supervising department employees.

(Ord. No. 3926, § 5, 8-4-09; Ord. No. 4154, § 1, 6-2-15)


2.30.030 Qualifications.

The economic and community development director must have the following or equivalent qualifications: be a graduate of a recognized college or university and have at least five (5) years’ experience in economic and community development permit processing or similar fields.

(Ord. No. 3926, § 5, 8-4-09; Ord. No. 4154, § 1, 6-2-15)


2.30.040 Duties and powers.

It will be the duty of the economic and community development department, under the supervision of its director, to:

A. Examine, review, condition, deny, or approve all aspects of public and private development permits issued by the city, including public and private street, utility, and other infrastructure construction.

B. Operate all economic development functions within the city to encourage and support new residential and business development and redevelopment.

C. Operate community planning, zoning, land use and code amendment functions.

D. Implement all applicable building codes and fire codes, as enacted under the Kent City Code and the state Building Code Act, when examining, modifying, conditioning, approving, or denying building plans and when conducting inspections.

E. Collaborate with affected departments on inspections of all development extensions or connections to public utilities.

F. Conduct code enforcement within all areas of the city.

G. Under the direction of the mayor, perform other duties as the city council, mayor, or chief administrative officer may require or as may be required by law.

(Ord. No. 3926, § 5, 8-4-09; Ord. No. 4154, § 1, 6-2-15)


2.30.050 Salary.

The salary or salary range of the economic and community development director will be that as established in the city budget.

(Ord. No. 3926, § 5, 8-4-09; Ord. No. 4154, § 1, 6-2-15)


2.30.060 Planning division – Authority.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4154.

(Ord. No. 1674, § 11; Ord. No. 3252, § 2, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 3512, § 10, 6-6-00; Ord. No. 3926, § 5, 8-4-09. Formerly § 2.30.010)


2.30.061 Planning division created.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4154.

(Ord. No. 1674, § 6; Ord. No. 3252, § 2, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 3286, § 1, 3-19-96; Ord. No. 3512, § 10, 6-6-00; Ord. No. 3926, § 5, 8-4-09. Formerly § 2.30.020)


2.30.063 Planning division – Duties and responsibilities. 

Repealed by Ord. No. 4154.

(Ord. No. 1674, § 7; Ord. No. 3026, § 1, 1-21-92; Ord. No. 3252, § 2, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 3286, § 1, 3-19-96; Ord. No. 3512, § 10, 6-6-00; Ord. No. 3926, § 5, 8-4-09. Formerly § 2.30.070)


2.30.065 Planning division – Planning director – Position created, salary, and appointment.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4154.

(Ord. No. 1674, § 8; Ord. No. 3252, § 2, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 3286, § 1, 3-19-96; Ord. No. 3512, § 10, 6-6-00; Ord. No. 3926, § 5, 8-4-09. Formerly § 2.30.080)


2.30.067 Planning division – Planning director – Qualifications.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4154.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 10, 6-6-00; Ord. No. 3926, § 5, 8-4-09. Formerly § 2.30.090)


2.30.069 Planning division – Planning director – Duties and responsibilities.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4154.

(Ord. No. 1674, § 10; Ord. No. 3252, § 2, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 3286, § 1, 3-19-96; Ord. No. 3512, § 10, 6-6-00; Ord. No. 3926, § 5, 8-4-09. Formerly § 2.30.100)


2.30.070 Building official – Position created and appointment.

There will be a position known as building official. The building official is an employee of the economic and community development department and will be appointed by, and serve at the direction of, the economic and community development director on the basis of professional experience, education, and demonstrated knowledge of accepted practices relating to the duties of the office.

(Ord. No. 3926, § 5, 8-4-09; Ord. No. 4154, § 1, 6-2-15)


2.30.072 Building official – Qualifications. 

Repealed by Ord. No. 4154.

(Ord. No. 3926, § 5, 8-4-09)


2.30.074 Building official – Duties and powers.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4154.

(Ord. No. 3926, § 5, 8-4-09)


2.30.110 Salary.

Repealed by Ord. No. 3926.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 10, 6-6-00)


Chapter 2.32 OFFICE OF THE HEARING EXAMINER*

Sections:

2.32.010    Purpose. 

2.32.020    Creation. 

2.32.030    Appointment and terms. 

2.32.040    Compensation. 

2.32.050    Qualifications. 

2.32.060    Hearing examiner pro tem – Qualifications and duties. 

2.32.070    Conflict of interest. 

2.32.080    Freedom from improper influence. 

2.32.090    Duties. 

2.32.100    Applications. 

2.32.110    Report by planning department. 

2.32.120    Open record public hearing. 

2.32.130    Decision and recommendation. 

2.32.140    Reconsideration. 

2.32.150    Appeal of decision.

2.32.155    Hearing examiner code – Fees.

2.32.160    City council action. 

2.32.170    City administrative staff are to be considered a person or party. 

*Cross reference(s) – Hearing of subdivision preliminary plats, § 12.04.177; appeals regarding required improvements, § 6.02.100; development and planning review, § 12.01.010.

State law reference(s) – Land use hearing examiner, RCW 35A.63.170.


2.32.010 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter:

A. With regard to land use matters to:

1. Provide a single, efficient, integrated land use regulatory hearing system;

2. Render land use regulatory decisions and recommendations to the city council;

3. Provide a greater degree of due process in land use regulatory hearings;

4. Separate the land use policy formulation and the land use policy administration processes.

B. With regard to other matters to:

1. Provide a single, efficient integrated system for hearing appeals of administrative decisions.

2. Provide a forum to hear other matters as established by city code.

(Ord. No. 2233, § 2; Ord. No. 2802, § 3(2.54.020), 9-6-88; Ord. No. 3169, § 1, 5-17-94. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.54.020)


2.32.020 Creation.

The office of the hearing examiner is created. The hearing examiner shall interpret, review, and implement land use regulations, hear appeals from orders, recommendations, permits, decisions or determinations made by a city official as set forth in this chapter, and review and hear other matters as provided for in this code and other ordinances. The term “hearing examiner” shall likewise include the examiner pro tem.

(Ord. No. 2233, § 3; Ord. No. 2802, § 3(2.54.030), 9-6-88; Ord. No. 3169, § 1, 5-17-94. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.54.030)


2.32.030 Appointment and terms.

The hearing examiner and examiner pro tem shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor.

(Ord. No. 2233, § 4; Ord. No. 2802, § 3(2.54.040), 9-6-88; Ord. No. 3169, § 1, 5-17-94. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.54.040)


2.32.040 Compensation.

The hearing examiner and examiner pro tem may, at the discretion of the city council, be classified as permanent part-time employees, or the city may contract with the hearing examiner and examiner pro tem for the performance of duties described in the code. The compensation paid the hearing examiner and examiner pro tem shall be that established in the city annual budget.

(Ord. No. 2233, § 5; Ord. No. 2802, § 3(2.54.050), 9-6-88. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.54.050)


2.32.050 Qualifications.

The hearing examiner and examiner pro tem shall be appointed solely with regard to their qualifications for the duties of the office which shall include, but not be limited to, persons with appropriate educational experience, such as an urban planner or public administrator, with at least five (5) years’ experience, persons who have extensive experience in planning work in a responsible capacity, and persons with legal experience, particularly where the experience is in the area of land use management of administrative law.

(Ord. No. 2233, § 6; Ord. No. 2802, § 3(2.54.060), 9-6-88. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.54.060)


2.32.060 Hearing examiner pro tem – Qualifications and duties.

In the event of the absence or the inability of the hearing examiner to act, the examiner pro tem shall have all the duties and powers of the hearing examiner.

(Ord. No. 2233, § 7; Ord. No. 2802, § 3(2.54.070), 9-6-88. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.54.070)


2.32.070 Conflict of interest.

The hearing examiner shall not conduct or participate in any hearing or decision in which the hearing examiner has a direct or indirect personal interest which might exert such influence upon the examiner that might interfere with his decision-making process. Any actual or potential conflict of interest shall be disclosed to the parties immediately upon discovery of such conflict. Participants in the land use regulatory process have the right, insofar as possible, to have a hearing examiner free from personal interest or prehearing contacts on land use regulatory matters considered by him. It is recognized that there is a countervailing public right to free access to public officials on any matter. If such personal or prehearing interest contact impairs the hearing examiner’s ability to act on the matter, such person shall so state and shall abstain therefrom to the end that the proceeding is fair and has the appearance of fairness, unless all parties agree in writing to have the matter heard by that hearing examiner.

(Ord. No. 2233, § 8; Ord. No. 2802, § 3(2.54.080), 9-6-88. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.54.080)

State law reference(s) – Conflict of interest for planning agency, RCW 35A.63.020.


2.32.080 Freedom from improper influence.

No city council member, city official or any other person shall attempt to interfere with, or improperly influence the hearing examiner in the performance of his designated duties.

(Ord. No. 2233, § 9; Ord. No. 2802, § 3(2.54.090), 9-6-88. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.54.090)


2.32.090 Duties.

The hearing examiner shall have the following duties with respect to applications of matters submitted before him or her.

A. Decisions of the hearing examiner. The hearing examiner shall receive and examine available information, conduct public hearings, prepare a record thereof, and enter findings of fact and conclusions based upon these facts, which conclusions shall represent the final action on the application, unless appealed, as specified in this section for the following:

1. All process III applications as follows:

a. Conditional use permits;

b. Sign variances;

c. Planned unit developments not requiring a change of use;

d. Preliminary plat;

e. Shoreline variance;

f. Shoreline conditional use permit;

g. Special home occupation permit; and

h. Applications for variances from the terms of the zoning code and subdivision code; provided, however, that no application for a variance shall be granted unless the hearing examiner finds:

i. The variance shall not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitation upon uses of other properties in the vicinity and zone in which the property on behalf of which the application is located;

ii. That such variance is necessary, because of special circumstances relating to the size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings of the subject property, to provide it with use rights and privileges permitted to other properties in the vicinity and in the zone in which the subject property is located; and

iii. That the granting of such variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and zone in which the subject property is situated.

2. Business license denials, revocations.

3. Code violations pursuant to Chapter 1.04 KCC.

B. The hearing examiner shall have the following duties with respect to appeals submitted before him or her.

1. All process I appeals as follows:

a. Appeals from development plan and zoning permit review decisions;

b. Appeals from performance standards procedure decisions;

c. Appeals from sign permit decisions; 

d. Appeals from administrative interpretation decisions; and

e. Appeals from the planning manager’s decision to deny an extension of a conditional certificate, and to deny or cancel a final certificate of tax exemption under the city of Kent’s tax exemption for multifamily housing in residential target areas.

2. All process II appeals as follows:

a. Appeals from administrative design review decisions;

b. Appeals from shoreline substantial development permits decisions;

c. Appeals from accessory dwelling unit permit decisions;

d. Appeals from administrative variance decisions;

e. Appeals from downtown design review decisions;

f. Appeals from multifamily design review decisions; and

g. Appeals from short subdivision committee decisions.

3. Appeals from stop work orders or notices of violation issued by a city official in the administration or enforcement of the provisions of the Kent City Code.

4. Appeals of SEPA determinations.

5. Such other matters as may be designated by ordinance.

C. Recommendations of the hearing examiner. The hearing examiner shall receive and examine available information, conduct public hearings, prepare a record thereof and enter findings of fact and conclusions based upon those facts, together with a recommendation to the city council, for the following:

1. Rezones;

2. Planned unit developments with a change of use;

3. Special use combining districts, including mobile home park combining districts;

4. Such other matters as may be designated by the council.

D. Public hearings. The hearing examiner shall conduct public hearings when required under the provisions of the State Environmental Policy Act; conduct open record public hearings or closed-record appeals in accordance with the provision of Ch. 12.01 KCC; conduct such other hearings as the city council may from time to time deem appropriate.

E. References. All references in the city code and elsewhere to the board of adjustment shall be construed as referring to the hearing examiner.

F. Recommendation or decision.

1. The hearing examiner’s recommendation or decision may be to grant or deny the application, or the hearing examiner may recommend or require of the applicant such conditions, modifications and restrictions as the hearing examiner finds necessary to make the application compatible with its environment, with applicable state laws, and to carry out the objectives and goals of the comprehensive plan, the zoning code, the subdivision code, and other codes and ordinances of the city. Conditions, modifications and restrictions which may be imposed are, but are not limited to, additional setbacks, screenings in the form of landscaping and fencing, covenants, easements and dedications of additional road rights-of-way. Performance bonds or other financial assurances may be required to insure compliance with conditions, modifications and restrictions.

2. In regard to applications for rezones, planned unit development applications which require a change in use and special use combining districts, the hearing examiner’s findings and conclusions shall be submitted to the city council, which shall have the final authority to act on such applications. The hearing by the hearing examiner shall constitute an open record pre-decision hearing before the final decision is made by the city council.

(Ord. No. 2469, § 2; Ord. No. 2802, § 3(2.54.100), 9-6-88; Ord. No. 3036, § 1, 4-7-92; Ord. No. 3169, § 1, 5-17-94; Ord. No. 3424, § 1, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3511, § 1, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3560, § 2, 6-5-01. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.54.100)


2.32.100 Applications.

Applications for all matters to be heard by the hearing examiner shall be presented to the planning department. When it is found an application meets the filing requirements of the planning department, the application shall be accepted. The planning department shall be responsible for assigning a date for the public hearing for each application. The date set for a public hearing shall not be more than one hundred (100) calendar days after the applicant has complied with all requirements and furnished all necessary data to the planning department. Hearings on project permit applications are subject to the notice and hearing requirements set forth in Ch. 12.01 KCC.

(Ord. No. 2233, § 11; Ord. No. 2802, § 3 (2.54.110), 9-6-88; Ord. No. 3424, § 2, 11-17-98. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.54.110)


2.32.110 Report by planning department.

For process III and IV project permit applications, the planning department shall coordinate and assemble the comments and recommendations of other city departments and governmental agencies having an interest in the application and shall prepare a report that includes the information described in KCC 12.01.160(B)(3). For all other matters, the appropriate city department shall prepare a report summarizing the factors involved and the department findings and supportive recommendations. At least seven (7) calendar days prior to the scheduled hearing, the report shall be filed with the hearing examiner and copies shall be mailed to the applicant and shall be made available for use by any interested party for the cost of reproduction.

(Ord. No. 2233, § 12; Ord. No. 2802, § 3 (2.54.120), 9-6-88; Ord. No. 3424, § 3, 11-17-98. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.54.120)


2.32.120 Open record public hearing.

A. Before rendering a decision or recommendation on any application, the hearing examiner shall hold at least one (1) open record public hearing thereon.

B. For project permit applications, notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be given as provided in KCC 12.01.140(H)(1). For all other applications, notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be given as provided in the ordinance governing the application. If none is specifically set forth, such notice shall be given at least ten (10) working days prior to such hearing.

C. The hearing examiner shall have the power to prescribe rules and regulations for the conduct of hearings under this chapter and also to administer oaths, and preserve order.

(Ord. No. 2233, § 13; Ord. No. 2802, § 3 (2.54.130), 9-6-88; Ord. No. 3424, § 4, 11-17-98. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.54.130)


2.32.130 Decision and recommendation.

A. When the hearing examiner renders a decision or recommendation, the hearing examiner shall make and enter written findings from the record and conclusions therefrom which support such decision. The decision shall be rendered within ten (10) working days following conclusion of all testimony and hearings, unless a longer period is mutually agreed to on the record by the applicant and the hearing examiner. The copy of such decision, including findings and conclusions, shall be transmitted electronically or by first class mail to the applicant and other parties of record in the case requesting the same. There shall be kept in the planning department a signed affidavit which shall attest that each mailing was sent in compliance with this provision.

B. In the case of Process IV applications requiring city council approval, the hearing examiner shall file a decision with the city council at the expiration of the period provided for reconsideration or, if reconsideration is accepted, within ten (10) working days after the decision on reconsideration.

(Ord. No. 2233, § 14; Ord. No. 2789, § 1, 7-5-88; Ord. No. 2802, § 3(2.54.140), 9-6-88; Ord. No. 3036, § 2, 4-7-92; Ord. No. 3424, § 5, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 4044, § 23, 8-21-12. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.54.140)


2.32.140 Reconsideration.

A party of record believing that a decision or recommendation of the hearing examiner is based on erroneous procedures, errors of law or fact, or the discovery of new evidence which could not be reasonably available at the prior hearing, may make a written request for reconsideration by the hearing examiner within five (5) working days of the date the decision or recommendation is rendered. This request shall set forth the specific errors or new information relied upon by such appellant, and the hearing examiner may, after review of the record, take further action as he or she deems proper. If a request for reconsideration is accepted, a decision is not final until after a decision on reconsideration is issued.

(Ord. No. 2233, § 15; Ord. No. 2802, § 3(2.54.150), 9-6-88; Ord. No. 3169, § 1, 5-17-94; Ord. No. 3424, § 6, 11-17-98. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.54.150)


2.32.150 Appeal of decision.

A. Any party who feels aggrieved by the hearing examiner’s decision may submit an appeal, if authorized by statute or Kent City Code, within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date the final decision of the hearing examiner is rendered to the superior court or to another designated forum.

B. No appeal may be made from a recommendation of the hearing examiner.

(Ord. No. 2233, § 16; Ord. No. 2802, § 3(2.54.160), 9-6-88; Ord. No. 3169, § 1, 5-17-94; Ord. No. 3574, § 1, 9-18-01. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.54.160)


2.32.155 Hearing examiner code – Fees.

The city council shall, by resolution, establish the fees to be charged to conduct open or closed record public hearings as well as all appeals. In the event of any conflict or ambiguity regarding any fees established by council resolution, the planning director is authorized to interpret the fee schedule(s) to resolve that conflict or ambiguity.

(Ord. No. 4019, § 2, 12-13-11)


2.32.160 City council action.

A. Any application requiring action by the city council shall be taken by the adoption of a motion, resolution, or ordinance by the city council. When taking any such final action, the city council shall make and enter findings of fact from the record and conclusions therefrom which support its action. The city council may adopt all or portions of the findings and conclusions from the hearing examiner’s recommendation.

B. In the case of an ordinance for rezone of property, the ordinance shall not be placed on the city council’s agenda until all conditions, restrictions, or modifications which may have been stipulated by the city council have been accomplished or provisions for compliance made to the satisfaction of the legal department.

C. The action of the city council, approving, modifying, or rejecting a recommendation of the hearing examiner, shall be final and conclusive. Appellants have twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date of city council action to file an appeal with the superior court.

(Ord. No. 2233, § 17; Ord. No. 2802, § 3(2.54.170), 9-6-88; Ord. No. 3169, § 1, 5-17-94; Ord. No. 3320, § 2, 11-6-96; Ord. No. 3574, § 1, 9-18-01. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.54.170)


2.32.170 City administrative staff are to be considered a person or party.

For the purpose of KCC 2.32.140 and 2.32.150, the city’s administrative staff shall be considered a “person” and/or “party” and shall have the same rights as any other person or party to make requests for reconsideration to the hearing examiner or to appeal decisions of the hearing examiner to superior court or to another designated forum.

(Ord. No. 2302, § 1; Ord. No. 2802, § 3(2.54.180), 9-6-88; Ord. No. 3574, § 1, 9-18-01. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.54.180)


Chapter 2.34 MUNICIPAL COURT Revised 10/19

Sections:

2.34.010    Municipal court established. Revised 10/19

2.34.020    Jurisdiction – Pleading, practice and procedure – References to state law. Revised 10/19

2.34.030    Court seal. Revised 10/19

2.34.040    Judges – Election – Appointment – Qualifications. Revised 10/19

2.34.050    Municipal judge salary – Costs. Revised 10/19

2.34.060    Judges pro tem – Court commissioners. Revised 10/19

2.34.070    Court administrator. Revised 10/19

2.34.080    Municipal court hours. Revised 10/19

2.34.090    Juror fees. Revised 10/19

2.34.100    Inmate participation in programs. Revised 10/19

2.34.110    Use of credit cards. Revised 10/19

2.34.120    Use of collection agencies and attorneys. Revised 10/19

2.34.130    Revenue deposits. Revised 10/19


2.34.010 Municipal court established. Revised 10/19

Effective January 1, 1994, and pursuant to Chapter 3.50 RCW, there is established “The Municipal Court of the City of Kent,” hereinafter referred to as the “municipal court.”

(Ord. No. 4333, § 2, 9-3-19)


2.34.020 Jurisdiction – Pleading, practice and procedure – References to state law. Revised 10/19

A. The municipal court shall have the jurisdiction and shall exercise all powers enumerated in Chapter 3.50 RCW and the Kent City Code, together with all such other powers and jurisdiction as are generally conferred upon courts of limited jurisdiction in the state of Washington either by common law, statutes, regulations, city code provisions, or rules established by the Washington Supreme Court.

B. Matters and subjects regarding the municipal court not addressed in this chapter shall be controlled and governed by Chapter 3.50 RCW as well as common law, statutes, regulations, city code provisions, or rules established by the Washington Supreme Court.

C. All references to state laws in this chapter are references to the laws as now enacted or hereafter amended or recodified.

(Ord. No. 4333, § 2, 9-3-19)


2.34.030 Court seal. Revised 10/19

The municipal court shall have a seal which shall be the vignette of George Washington, with the words “Seal of the Municipal Court of Kent, State of Washington,” surrounding the vignette. 

(Ord. No. 4333, § 2, 9-3-19)


2.34.040 Judges – Election – Appointment – Qualifications. Revised 10/19

A. The municipal court shall have two full-time elected judicial positions titled “Position I” and “Position II.” Position I was filled by election with the term beginning January 1, 2002. Position II was filled by election with the term beginning on January 1, 2006. Each position is filled for a term of four years. Elections required by this section shall be conducted in accordance with RCW 3.50.050.

B. A municipal court judge may, in accordance with RCW 3.50.093 and 3.50.095, be appointed by the mayor to fill an existing judicial position in the event a vacancy occurs due to death, disability, resignation, retirement, or removal. Additional municipal court judges may be appointed by the mayor in accordance with RCW 3.50.070 when public interest and the administration of justice makes such additional judge or judges necessary.

C. A person elected or appointed as municipal court judge shall be a citizen of the United States of America, a resident of King County, and an attorney admitted to practice law before the courts of record of the state of Washington.

D. Every judge of the municipal court, before entering upon the duties of the office, shall take and subscribe the following oath or affirmation: “I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Washington, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of judge of the municipal court of the city of Kent according to the best of my ability.” No bond shall be required for the faithful performance of the judge’s duties.

(Ord. No. 4333, § 2, 9-3-19)


2.34.050 Municipal judge salary – Costs. Revised 10/19

The city will automatically adjust the salary paid to the Kent municipal court judges who meet the requirements of RCW 2.56.030(22) to an amount equal to 95 percent of the salary of district court judges as set by the Washington Citizens’ Commission on Salaries for Elected Officials. The Kent municipal court judge salary adjustments required of this section shall be effective on a date commensurate with the effective date of adjustments to the salaries of district court judges made by the Washington Citizens’ Commission on Salaries for Elected Officials.

(Ord. No. 4333, § 2, 9-3-19)


2.34.060 Judges pro tem – Court commissioners. Revised 10/19

A judge pro tem or commissioner appointed in accordance with RCW 3.50.075 or 3.50.090 shall receive compensation at the rate of $60.00 per hour unless modified by resolution or ordinance. The term of the appointment shall be specified in writing but in any event shall not extend beyond the term of the elected municipal judges.

(Ord. No. 4333, § 2, 9-3-19)


2.34.070 Court administrator. Revised 10/19

There is hereby created the position of court administrator who shall be in charge of the administrative functions of the municipal court subject to the powers vested upon the municipal court judge pursuant to Chapter 3.50 RCW or court rule. The court administrator shall be appointed by and report directly to the presiding judge.

(Ord. No. 4333, § 2, 9-3-19)


2.34.080 Municipal court hours. Revised 10/19

The municipal court shall be open during all regular business days and hours as the other offices of the city shall be open, but the dates and times of open court shall be set by the presiding judge; provided, that the municipal court shall not be open on nonjudicial days.

(Ord. No. 4333, § 2, 9-3-19)


2.34.090 Juror fees. Revised 10/19

Jurors shall be paid a fee of $15.00 for each day in attendance at the municipal court and shall receive a mileage allowance pursuant to RCW 43.03.060.

(Ord. No. 4333, § 2, 9-3-19)


2.34.100 Inmate participation in programs.  Revised 10/19

Any person sentenced by the municipal court for a commitment or period of confinement at the Kent corrections facility, and who serves such commitment or confinement at the Kent corrections facility, may, pursuant to Kent corrections facility policies, be eligible for corrections facility programs or incarceration alternatives as set forth in Chapter 9.34 KCC; provided, the municipal court may, in its sound discretion, prohibit the inmate from participating in one or more programs or incarceration alternatives. The court shall state its reason(s) for limiting program consideration on the record. Upon the motion of any party and for good cause shown, reconsideration of eligibility or prohibition from programs may be argued before the court.

(Ord. No. 4333, § 2, 9-3-19)


2.34.110 Use of credit cards. Revised 10/19

The municipal court may permit the use of credit cards for purposes of billing and collecting unpaid penalties, fines, costs, assessments, and forfeitures imposed. The municipal court may enter into agreements with one or more financial institutions for the purpose of such collections. Said agreements may specify conditions, remuneration for services, and other charges deemed appropriate, upon confirmation by the city council.

(Ord. No. 4333, § 2, 9-3-19)


2.34.120 Use of collection agencies and attorneys. Revised 10/19

A. The municipal court may use collection agencies as defined in Chapter 19.16 RCW for purposes of collecting unpaid penalties on infractions, criminal fines, costs, assessments, civil judgments, or forfeitures that have been imposed by the court. The municipal court may enter into agreements, with the confirmation of the city council, with one or more attorneys or collection agencies for collection of outstanding penalties, fines, costs, assessments, and forfeitures. These agreements may specify the scope of work, remuneration for services, and other charges deemed appropriate.

B. Servicing of delinquencies by collection agencies or by collecting attorneys in which the municipal court retains control of its delinquencies shall not constitute assignment of debt.

C. The term debt shall include penalties, fines, costs, assessments, or forfeitures imposed by the municipal court.

D. The municipal court may assess, as court costs, the monies paid for remuneration for services or charges paid to collecting attorneys, to collection agencies, or, in the case of credit cards, to financial institutions.

(Ord. No. 4333, § 2, 9-3-19)


2.34.130 Revenue deposits. Revised 10/19

All fees, costs, fines, forfeitures, and other monies imposed or collected by the municipal court for the violation of any city ordinance, together with any other revenue received by the municipal court, shall be deposited with the city treasurer as part of the general fund of the city unless otherwise required by law.

(Ord. No. 4333, § 2, 9-3-19)


Chapter 2.36 OFFICE OF THE CITY CLERK*

Sections:

2.36.010    Office created.

2.36.020    City clerk – Appointment – Removal.

2.36.030    Qualifications.

2.36.040    Duties and powers.

2.36.050    Salary.

*Cross reference(s) – Personnel, title 2, subtitle IV.


2.36.010 Office created.

There is hereby created the office known as the office of the city clerk. The office shall be supervised by the city clerk.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 11, 6-6-00)


2.36.020 City clerk – Appointment – Removal.

The city clerk shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by a majority of the city council. The mayor may remove the city clerk at his or her pleasure. Such appointment or removal must be in writing, signed by the mayor and filed with the city clerk.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 11, 6-6-00)


2.36.030 Qualifications.

The city clerk must have the following or equivalent qualifications: he or she must be a graduate of a recognized college or university and have at least three (3) years’ experience working in a city clerk’s office or similar field as deemed appropriate to the position by the appointing authority.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 11, 6-6-00)


2.36.040 Duties and powers.

The city clerk shall perform such other duties as the chief administrative officer may direct or as may be required by the laws of the state. 

(Ord. No. 3512, § 11, 6-6-00)


2.36.050 Salary.

The salary of the city clerk shall be that as established in the annual city budget.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 11, 6-6-00)


Chapter 2.40 BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT SERVICES OFFICE

(Repealed by Ord. No. 3926)


Chapter 2.42 PERMIT CENTER

(Repealed by Ord. No. 3926)


Chapter 2.51 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION OF THE POLICE DEPARTMENT*

Sections:

2.51.010    Creation – Composition – Duties. 

*Cross reference(s) – Police department, ch. 2.22.

State law reference(s) – City police officers civil service, RCW 41.12.010 et seq.


2.51.010 Creation – Composition – Duties.

The civil service commission for all full-time law enforcement, police officer, and civilian (nonlaw enforcement and nonpolice officer) employees of the police department, created pursuant to Chapter 41.12 RCW, shall be composed of three (3) members who shall be appointed by the mayor. The members of the civil service commission shall hold office as provided in, and shall have and exercise all powers and duties prescribed by Chapter 41.12 RCW.

(Ord. No. 778, § 1; Ord. No. 2868, § 1(2.20.010), 8-15-89. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.20.010)


Chapter 2.52 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT*

Sections:

2.52.010    Existence recognized – Composition – Qualifications. 

2.52.020    Powers and duties relative to selection, appointment, and employment of personnel. 

*Cross reference(s) – Fire department, ch. 2.24.

State law reference(s) – Civil service, firefighters, RCW 41.08.010 et seq.


2.52.010 Existence recognized – Composition – Qualifications.

The past, present, and ongoing existence of the civil service commission of the fire department is recognized. The civil service commission shall be composed of three (3) members who shall be appointed by the mayor, and shall serve without compensation. The civil service commissioners shall have the qualifications prescribed by RCW 41.08.030.

(Ord. No. 1920, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.24.010)


2.52.020 Powers and duties relative to selection, appointment, and employment of personnel.

Pursuant to the authority conferred by Chapter 41.08 RCW, the civil service commission shall make such rules and regulations as will substantially accomplish the objectives established by state law relative to selection, appointment, and employment in the city fire department, including the fire chief.

(Ord. No. 1920, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.24.020)

Cross reference(s) – Office of housing and human services, § 2.26.060 et seq; human services fund, § 3.40.1200.


Chapter 2.53 HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION*

Sections:

2.53.030    Created. 

2.53.040    Membership, terms, residence requirements. 

2.53.050    Organization and meetings. 

2.53.060    Responsibilities. 

*Cross reference(s) – Office of housing and human services, § 2.26.060 et seq.


2.53.030 Created.

The city human services commission is hereby created. The commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to the mayor and city council.

(Ord. No. 2655, § 1; Ord. No. 3861, § 1, 10-2-07; Ord. No. 4029, § 1, 2-7-12. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.39.010)


2.53.040 Membership, terms, residence requirements.

A. Number of members. The membership of the human services commission shall be 10 members, in addition to a council representative and an optional alternate. Members are to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council, with the exception of the council representative, who shall be appointed to the commission by the council president. Each member of the commission shall have an equal vote in decisions of the commission, except for the alternate, the youth representative, and the appointed council representative, all of whom shall serve in nonvoting capacities.

B. Alternate member. An alternate may be appointed to the commission by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. Once appointed and confirmed, the alternate will serve in a nonvoting capacity when all regular members are present at a meeting of the human services commission. When a regular member of the human services commission is absent from a meeting, the alternate will serve as a pro tempore voting member for that meeting and may vote on all matters before the commission. Should a position as a regular member on the human services commission become available during the alternate’s term, the alternate will assume that position as a regular member without any further council confirmation required.

C. Terms of appointment. With respect to the members appointed and confirmed to serve on the commission, the following provisions shall apply:

1. At least four commissioners shall reside within the corporate limits of the city.

2. Appointments shall reflect a balance of interests and should be equally proportionate and contain no more than two representatives, to the extent practicable, from each of the following communities, entities, or interest groups: business, educational, spiritual, charitable, civic, past or present receivers of human services, and providers of human services. The commission shall include at least one youth representative of high school age and one council member representative.

3. All members appointed shall serve three-year terms, with the following exceptions:

a. The youth representative(s) shall be appointed to at least a one-year term, but may be appointed to as much as a three-year term; and

b. The council representative shall be appointed to a one-year term.

c. If an alternate becomes a regular member of the human services commission, the individual’s three-year term will begin anew upon appointment as a regular member.

4. When a vacancy occurs during a commissioner’s current term, the alternate will assume that position as a regular member without any further council confirmation required. The mayor shall then appoint, subject to council confirmation, a new alternate commissioner.

(Ord. No. 2655, § 1; Ord. No. 2891, § 1, 1-2-90; Ord. No. 3861, § 1, 10-2-07; Ord. No. 4029, § 1, 2-7-12; Ord. No. 4276, § 1, 5-1-18. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.39.020)


2.53.050 Organization and meetings.

The human services commission shall elect a chairperson and chair-elect from among its voting members. At the end of the current chairperson’s term, the chair-elect will become the chairperson, and the commission will then elect from its members a new chair-elect. At the end of each year, the then chair-elect will assume the chairperson role and a new chair-elect would be elected. These officers shall hold office for one (1) year. The mayor shall appoint appropriate staff to assist the commission in the preparation of those reports and records as are necessary for the proper operation of the commission. The commission shall meet upon call of the chairperson, as necessary.

(Ord. No. 2655, § 1; Ord. No. 3861, § 1, 10-2-07; Ord. No. 4029, § 1, 2-7-12. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.39.030)


2.53.060 Responsibilities.

The human services commission shall make reports and recommendations to the mayor and city council concerning human services issues including:

1. Development and assessment of human services needs in the city.

2. Determination of priorities of human services needs within the city.

3. Evaluation and recommendation on funding requests submitted to the city.

4. Evaluation and review of the performance of individual human services organizations and agencies.

5. Review of city actions which may affect the availability and quality of human services provision in the city.

6. Coordination with other groups and human services planning agencies and organizations.

(Ord. No. 2655, § 1; Ord. No. 3861, § 1, 10-2-07; Ord. No. 4029, § 1, 2-7-12. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.39.040)


Chapter 2.54 LODGING TAX ADVISORY COMMITTEE* Revised 11/19

Sections:

2.54.010    Created. 

2.54.020    Membership.  Revised 11/19

2.54.030    Terms. 

2.54.040    Responsibilities. 

*Cross reference – Lodging tax, ch. 3.23.


2.54.010 Created.

There is hereby created the lodging tax advisory committee. The committee shall serve in an advisory capacity to the mayor and city council.

(Ord. No. 3417, § 1, 8-4-98; Ord. No. 4176, § 1, 12-8-15)


2.54.020 Membership. Revised 11/19

The lodging tax advisory committee shall consist of nine members as follows:

A. Four members appointed by the city council who are representatives of businesses required to collect tax under Chapter 67.28 RCW;

B. Four members appointed by the city council who are persons involved in activities authorized to be funded by revenue received under Chapter 67.28 RCW; and

C. The council president shall appoint a member of the council to serve as a member of and to chair the lodging tax advisory committee.

(Ord. No. 3417, § 1, 8-4-98; Ord. No. 3930, § 1, 9-15-09; Ord. No. 4176, § 1, 12-8-15; Ord. No. 4336, § 1, 10-15-19)


2.54.030 Terms.

A. All members appointed pursuant to KCC 2.54.020 shall serve three-year terms. All current members of the committee as of December 30, 2015, shall continue to retain their staggered three-year terms, as shall their successor appointees, pursuant to Ordinance No. 3417. The two additional members appointed by the city council, as authorized by Ordinance No. 4176, shall serve three-year terms each. Organizations representing businesses required to collect tax under Chapter 67.28 RCW and organizations involved in activities authorized to be funded by revenue received under said tax as well as local agencies involved in tourism and promotion may submit recommendations for membership on the committee.

B. Pursuant to RCW 67.28.1817(1), as amended, the city council shall review the membership of the lodging tax advisory committee at least once annually, and shall make changes as appropriate.

(Ord. No. 3417, § 1, 8-4-98; Ord. No. 4176, § 1, 12-8-15; Ord. No. 4187, § 1, 2-16-16)


2.54.040 Responsibilities. 

The lodging tax advisory committee shall make reports and recommendations to the mayor and city council as follows:

A. The committee shall consider proposals for imposition of a city lodging tax under Chapter 67.28 RCW.

B. If such tax is adopted, the committee shall review any increases in the rate of tax imposed, repeal of any exemption from a tax imposed, or a change in the use of revenue received under Chapter 67.28 RCW. The committee shall consider any such proposal, provide for public input, and submit comments in a timely manner to the mayor and city council. The comments shall include an analysis of the extent to which the proposal will accommodate activities for tourists or increase tourism, and the extent to which the proposal will affect the long-term stability of the fund created under RCW 67.28.1815.

(Ord. No. 3417, § 1, 8-4-98; Ord. No. 4176, § 1, 12-8-15)


Chapter 2.55 DISABILITY BOARD*

Sections:

2.55.010    Creation. 

2.55.020    Membership. 

2.55.030    Terms of office. 

2.55.040    Compensation. 

2.55.050    Organization – Rules and regulations – Meetings. 

2.55.060    Functions. 

*Cross reference(s) – Police department, ch. 2.22; fire department, ch. 2.24.

State law reference(s) – Disability board, RCW 41.26.110.


2.55.010 Creation.

There is created a disability board having jurisdiction over police officers and firefighters as provided for in RCW 41.26.110 et seq.

(Ord. No. 2183, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.52.010)

State law reference(s) – Membership, RCW 41.26.110.


2.55.020 Membership.

The disability board shall consist of the following members:

1. Two (2) members of the city council to be appointed by the mayor;

2. One (1) firefighter employed by the city or retired from the city to be elected by the firefighters employed by the city or retired from the city;

3. One (1) law enforcement officer employed by the city or retired from the city to be elected by the law enforcement officers employed by the city or retired from the city;

4. One (1) member from the public at large who resides within the city to be appointed by the other four (4) duly appointed and elected members heretofore designated.

(Ord. No. 2183, § 3. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.52.030)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 41.26.110(1)(a).


2.55.030 Terms of office.

All members appointed or elected pursuant to KCC 2.55.020 shall serve a two (2) year term.

(Ord. No. 2183, § 4. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.52.040)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 41.26.110(1)(a).


2.55.040 Compensation.

The members of the disability board shall receive no compensation for their services upon the board, but shall be reimbursed for all expenses incidental to such service in the manner and amount provided for employees of the city.

(Ord. No. 2183, § 5. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.52.050)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 41.26.110.


2.55.050 Organization – Rules and regulations – Meetings.

The disability board shall elect from its membership a chairperson who shall serve a one (1) year term. The chairperson shall be entitled to succeed himself in office unless the chairperson is not reappointed or reelected to a new term. The disability board shall adopt operating rules and procedures and shall meet at such time and place as such rules and regulations shall provide.

(Ord. No. 2183, § 6. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.52.060)

State law reference(s) – Rules and regulations, RCW 41.26.115.


2.55.060 Functions.

The disability board shall perform all functions, exercise all powers and make such determinations as may be specified under RCW 41.26.005 et seq.

(Ord. No. 2183, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.52.020)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 41.26.110(3).


Chapter 2.56 CULTURAL COMMUNITIES BOARD

Sections:

2.56.010    Establishment of board.

2.56.020    Purpose.

2.56.030    Responsibilities.

2.56.040    Composition of the board.

2.56.050    Terms of appointment.

2.56.060    Staffing.

2.56.070    Meetings.

2.56.080    Attendance and vacancies.


2.56.010 Establishment of board.

There is hereby established a cultural communities board, which shall serve in an advisory capacity to the mayor and city council of the city of Kent.

(Ord. No. 4184, § 2, 12-8-15)


2.56.020 Purpose.

The cultural communities board will provide input to the mayor and city council on policy and process that seek to promote and facilitate civic engagement, integration, and access to city services by all cultural communities within the city of Kent.

(Ord. No. 4184, § 2, 12-8-15)


2.56.030 Responsibilities.

The board shall have the following responsibilities:

A. To advise on issues and serve as a resource relating to the social and civic participation of Kent’s multicultural communities to promote civic involvement.

B. To advise on policies for effective integration of new residents from Kent’s multicultural communities.

C. To advise on strategies for culturally responsive communication, services, and outreach to Kent’s diverse communities.

D. To advise on strategies for promoting inclusiveness of Kent’s multicultural communities within all aspects of city government and the community.

E. To serve as a liaison among community members, residents, businesses, and city government on issues that affect the city and its quality of life, including identifying needs, suggesting resources, and connecting cultural and ethnic communities to existing city resources.

(Ord. No. 4184, § 2, 12-8-15)


2.56.040 Composition of the board.

The board will consist of up to 18 members who shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council, two of which will be youth representatives. Membership shall be Kent residents who are representative of the cultural and ethnic diversity of the Kent community. Board members shall serve as city volunteers without compensation. Each member of the board shall have an equal vote in recommendations from the board.

(Ord. No. 4184, § 2, 12-8-15)


2.56.050 Terms of appointment.

All members appointed to the board shall serve one-year terms. A member may be reappointed by the mayor and confirmed by the council to successive one-year terms. The board chair shall be appointed annually by the board’s members.

(Ord. No. 4184, § 2, 12-8-15)


2.56.060 Staffing.

The mayor will appoint appropriate staff to assist the board in the preparation of any reports and records as are necessary for the operation of the board.

(Ord. No. 4184, § 2, 12-8-15)


2.56.070 Meetings.

The board shall meet upon the call of the mayor or chair, as necessary, but no less than once a quarter.

(Ord. No. 4184, § 2, 12-8-15)


2.56.080 Attendance and vacancies.

At any meeting of the board, the board may recommend to the mayor removal of any member who misses three consecutive meetings without being excused by the board upon an affirmative vote of a majority of the board. To fill unexpired terms, replacement appointments will be made as necessary by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. Appointments made to fill vacancies will be made to fill the portion of the unexpired term.

(Ord. No. 4184, § 2, 12-8-15)


Chapter 2.57 LAND USE AND PLANNING BOARD

Sections:

2.57.010    Creation.

2.57.020    Membership, terms, residence requirements, and compensation.

2.57.030    Organization, meetings and rules.

2.57.040    Duties and responsibilities.

2.57.050    References to planning commission.


2.57.010 Creation.

There is hereby created the land use and planning board.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 14, 6-6-00)


2.57.020 Membership, terms, residence requirements, and compensation.

A. The land use and planning board shall consist of seven (7) members, each of whom shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. Appointments shall be deemed confirmed if not acted on within thirty (30) days following the mayor’s submittal of his or her nomination to the council president.

B. The terms of office of the members of the land use and planning board shall be three (3) years. When a vacancy occurs on the land use and planning board, appointment for that position shall be for three (3) years, or for the remainder of the unexpired term, whichever is the shorter period of time. All new terms shall expire on December 31st of the last year of the term. No more than three (3) terms may expire in any given year.

C. Initial appointments shall be as follows:

1. Two (2) seats for a one (1) year term.

2. Two (2) seats for a two (2) year term.

3. Three (3) seats for a three (3) year term.

All appointments thereafter shall be for three (3) year terms.

D. Members of the land use and planning board may be dismissed by the mayor for missing twenty-five (25) percent or more of the regularly scheduled meetings in a twelve (12) month period without such absence being excused by the board, for inefficiency, for neglect of duty, for a finding by the land use and planning board of a member’s violation of any code of conduct established by the board, or for misfeasance or malfeasance in office.

E. As authorized pursuant to RCW 35.21.200, all appointees to the land use and planning board shall be residents of the city of Kent. When making the appointments, the mayor shall consider appointments from residents residing at different locations of the city.

F. The appointed members of the land use and planning board shall serve without compensation except that reimbursement for authorized travel and subsistence may be made to the extent such may be budgeted for by the city council. Reimbursement for such shall come from the city budget category designated land use and planning board, travel and mileage and subsistence.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 14, 6-6-00)


2.57.030 Organization, meetings and rules.

A. The land use and planning board shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among its members which terms shall expire December 31st each year. The secretary of the land use and planning board shall be the planning manager. The secretary shall set the land use and planning board agenda for workshops and public hearings, prepare minutes which may be taken from electronic recording of public hearings, and keep such records as are necessary for the property operation of the board, all of which shall be a matter of public record.

B. The land use and planning board shall conduct at least one (1) regular meeting each month for conducting general business, hearings, and other related business, except when there is not an agenda item to be considered or heard, in which case the land use and planning board secretary shall notify the board members, the local press and post a notice at the place the land use and planning board regularly meets, stating that due to a lack of business a meeting is cancelled. The land use and planning board shall establish and operate under a set of bylaws, which bylaws shall prescribe the rules of procedure for public hearings and workshops and a code of conduct for its members. The time and place of regular and special meetings, including workshops, shall be established by the bylaws.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 14, 6-6-00)


2.57.040 Duties and responsibilities.

A. The land use and planning board shall operate as part of the planning office and shall, except in those instances when the city council has determined to consider the matter, hold public hearings on comprehensive plan formulation and amendments, annexation zoning, zoning code and subdivision code and other assigned code formulation and amendments which have been prepared and submitted to the board by the planning office. The land use and planning board, after holding one (1) or more public hearings on these matters, shall refer the planning office’s proposals and its recommendation to the city council for the council’s final action.

B. In lieu of or in the alternative to the land use and planning board considering and holding hearings and performing other related functions on matters set forth in subsection (A) of this section, the city council may elect to perform these functions on such matters directly without taking input from the land use and planning board.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 14, 6-6-00)


2.57.050 References to planning commission.

All references in the Kent City Code to the planning commission shall mean the land use and planning board.

(Ord. No. 3512, § 14, 6-6-00)


Chapter 2.58 INDEPENDENT SALARY COMMISSION

(Repealed by Ord. No. 4169)


Chapter 2.59 KENT FIRE DEPARTMENT REGIONAL FIRE AUTHORITY GOVERNING BOARD Revised 11/19

Sections:

2.59.010    Creation.

2.59.020    Governing board appointment. Revised 11/19

2.59.030    Terms of appointment – Initial term – Regular terms.

2.59.040    Effect of failure to make appointment.

2.59.050    Removal from governing board.

2.59.060    Vacancy on governing board.


2.59.010 Creation.

On April 27, 2010, voters within the jurisdictions of the city of Kent and King County Fire Protection District No. 37 approved a proposition to create the Kent fire department regional fire authority and to approve the regional fire authority plan. The regional fire authority plan provides that the Kent city council shall appoint three (3) of its members to serve on the governing board of the Kent fire department regional fire authority. This chapter shall govern appointment of the Kent city council representatives to serve on the Kent fire department regional fire authority governing board.

The term governing board as used in this chapter shall mean the Kent fire department regional fire authority governing board.

(Ord. No. 3970, § 1, 6-15-10)


2.59.020 Governing board appointment. Revised 11/19

The council president shall appoint three members of the Kent city council to serve as the city of Kent’s representatives on the governing board.

(Ord. No. 3970, § 1, 6-15-10; Ord. No. 4336, § 2, 10-15-19)


2.59.030 Terms of appointment – Initial term – Regular terms.

The initial term for governing board members shall run from July 1, 2010, through December 31, 2011. All other terms of the governing board members shall be for approximately two (2) years starting on the first council meeting in January of each even-numbered year and ending on the first council meeting in January of the following even-numbered year.

(Ord. No. 3970, § 1, 6-15-10)


2.59.040 Effect of failure to make appointment.

If, for any reason, the governing board members have not been appointed as required by this chapter, the previous year’s governing board shall remain in place with full authority until a new governing board has been appointed.

(Ord. No. 3970, § 1, 6-15-10)


2.59.050 Removal from governing board.

At any time, the Kent city council may remove one (1) or more of its appointed members from the governing board.

(Ord. No. 3970, § 1, 6-15-10)


2.59.060 Vacancy on governing board.

In the event a council member is removed from the governing board or another event occurs that results in a vacancy being created in one (1) of the city’s representative positions on the governing board, the council president shall appoint a council member to fill the vacancy. The appointed council member shall serve the unexpired term of the council member he or she has replaced. In the event a governing board member is temporarily unable to fulfill his or her duties as a governing board member, the council president or council president pro tem may appoint a temporary replacement until such time as the regular governing board member becomes available to perform his or her duties.

(Ord. No. 3970, § 1, 6-15-10)


Chapter 2.60 PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION

Sections:

2.60.010    Parks and recreation commission created.

2.60.020    Membership, terms, residence requirements.

2.60.030    Organization and meetings.

2.60.040    Duties and responsibilities.


2.60.010 Parks and recreation commission created.

The city of Kent parks and recreation commission is hereby created. The parks and recreation commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to the mayor, city council, city administrator, and city staff. (Ord. No. 4117, § 1, 7-1-14; Ord. No. 4271, § 1, 2-6-18)


2.60.020 Membership, terms, residence requirements.

A. Number of members. The membership of the city parks and recreation commission shall consist of 12 members, in addition to an optional alternate. Members are to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. Each member of the commission shall have an equal vote in decisions of the commission, except for the alternate, who will serve in a nonvoting capacity.

B. Alternate member. An alternate may be appointed to the commission by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. Once appointed and confirmed, the alternate will serve in a nonvoting capacity when all regular members are present at a meeting of the parks and recreation commission. When a regular member of the parks and recreation commission is absent from a meeting, the alternate will serve as a pro tempore voting member for that meeting and may vote on all matters before the commission. Should a position as a regular member on the parks and recreation commission become available during the alternate’s term, the alternate will assume that position as a regular member without any further council confirmation required.

C. Terms of office. The term of office for commissioners shall be for three years, except for the initial terms as provided below.

1. Commissioners may only serve up to two consecutive terms, except for those commissioners appointed to an inaugural term that is less than three years in length. If, however, a commissioner was appointed to an inaugural term that was less than three years in length, then that commissioner shall be permitted to serve two consecutive three-year terms after the inaugural term expires.

2. The term of office of the first six commissioners appointed and confirmed shall expire December 31, 2015; the term of the second six commissioners appointed and confirmed shall expire December 31, 2016; the term of office of the final four commissioners appointed and confirmed shall expire December 31, 2017.

3. When a vacancy occurs on the parks and recreation commission, the alternate will assume that position as a regular member without any further council confirmation required. If the alternate becomes a regular member of the parks and recreation commission, the individual’s three-year term will begin anew upon appointment as a regular member. The mayor shall then appoint, subject to council confirmation, a new alternate commissioner.

D. Residence requirements. At least six persons appointed to serve on the parks and recreation commission shall reside within the corporate limits of the city. To the extent practicable, appointment shall reflect a balance and diversity of users of and interests in Kent’s parks and recreation services, and shall include one youth representative of high school age who lives within the city’s municipal boundaries.

E. Removal. The mayor may remove members from the parks and recreation commission in the following instances:

1. A commissioner resigns from the commission; or

2. A commissioner is absent from more than two consecutive regular meetings; or

3. A commissioner is absent four times within any 12-month period; or

4. Upon the joint recommendation of the commission’s chair and the parks and recreation director.

Any decision to remove a commissioner shall be final, and there shall be no appeal. (Ord. No. 4117, § 1, 7-1-14; Ord. No. 4271, § 1, 2-6-18; Ord. No. 4275, § 1, 5-1-18)


2.60.030 Organization and meetings.

A. Election of officers. The parks and recreation commission shall elect from among its members a chair, who shall preside at all meetings, and a vice chair, who shall preside in the absence of the chair. The chair and vice chair shall be elected annually. A majority of the parks and recreation commission members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and a majority of the votes cast shall be necessary to carry any motion.

B. Rules and regulations. The parks and recreation commission may adopt bylaws, rules, and regulations as necessary for the conduct of its business.

C. Meeting schedule. The parks and recreation commission shall provide a regular meeting schedule, including time, place, and frequency of meetings as necessary, but no less frequent than once a month. The parks and recreation commission may, from time to time, provide for special meetings in accordance with Chapter 42.30 RCW. Although not required for an advisory committee, all meetings of the commission will be open to the public, in accordance with Chapter 42.30 RCW, the Open Public Meetings Act.

D. Staffing. The mayor will appoint appropriate staff to assist the parks and recreation commission in the preparation of any reports and records as are necessary for the proper operation of the commission.

E. Documentation. The parks and recreation commission shall adopt procedures to ensure minutes of the meeting are recorded and a monthly summary of minutes of meetings is recorded along with all decisions. (Ord. No. 4117, § 1, 7-1-14; Ord. No. 4271, § 1, 2-6-18)


2.60.040 Duties and responsibilities.

The parks and recreation commission is advisory in nature and shall make reports and recommendations to the mayor, city council, and city staff concerning parks and recreation issues, including:

A. Ways to advocate public support, involvement, and funding of Kent parks, facilities, and programs;

B. Opportunities to engage the public in decisions affecting Kent parks, facilities, and programs;

C. Budget recommendations for the acquisition, development, and operation of parks, facilities, and programs;

D. Policy recommendations;

E. Comprehensive parks and trails planning;

F. Priorities for the acquisition of land and/or facilities;

G. Development, design, and operation of parks, facilities, and programs;

H. Capital improvements planning;

I. Rules, regulations, or other restrictions applicable to parks, facilities, and programs;

J. Concessions at park facilities;

K. Contracts, interlocal agreements, and lease agreements regarding parks and recreation activities;

L. Other matters that the mayor, city council, or parks director may refer to the parks and recreation commission for its consideration and recommendation.

Parks and recreation commission members are encouraged to play an active role in engaging the Kent community to support key park and recreation projects through public outreach efforts. (Ord. No. 4117, § 1, 7-1-14; Ord. No. 4271, § 1, 2-6-18)


Chapter 2.61 ARTS COMMISSION

Sections:

2.61.010    Created.

2.61.020    Purpose.

2.61.030    Membership.

2.61.040    Alternate member.

2.61.050    Term of appointment.

2.61.060    Officers – Meetings.

2.61.070    Rules – Minutes.

2.61.080    Budget.


2.61.010 Created.

There is hereby created the Kent arts commission.

(Ord. No. 4274, § 2, 3-20-18)


2.61.020 Purpose.

The city arts commission and staff may, alone or in cooperation with any other private, civic, or public body of any city, county, or the state, initiate, sponsor, or conduct programs calculated to further public awareness of and interest in the visual and performing arts.

(Ord. No. 4274, § 2, 3-20-18)


2.61.030 Membership.

The membership of the city arts commission shall be 14 members, in addition to a council representative and an optional alternate. Members are to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council, with the exception of the council representative, who shall be appointed to the commission by the council president. Each member of the commission shall have an equal vote in decisions of the commission, except for the alternate and appointed council representative, who shall serve in nonvoting capacities.

(Ord. No. 4274, § 2, 3-20-18)


2.61.040 Alternate member.

An alternate may be appointed to the commission by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. Once appointed and confirmed, the alternate will serve in a nonvoting capacity when all regular members are present at a meeting of the arts commission. When a regular member of the arts commission is absent from a meeting, the alternate will serve as a pro tempore voting member for that meeting and may vote on all matters before the commission. Should a position as a regular member on the arts commission become available during the alternate’s term, the alternate will assume that position as a regular member without any further council confirmation required.

(Ord. No. 4274, § 2, 3-20-18)


2.61.050 Term of appointment.

With respect to the members appointed and confirmed to serve on the commission, the following provisions shall apply:

A. Each member, exclusive of the youth representative, must reside or own property within the city or one of its utility or parks department service areas or, alternatively, work or own a business within the city’s municipal boundaries.

B. The commission shall include among its members one council representative and at least one youth representative of high school age who attends a Kent school or lives within the city’s municipal boundaries.

C. All members appointed shall serve four-year terms or the unexpired balance of the term for which appointed, whichever is the lesser period, with the following exceptions:

1. The youth representative(s) shall be appointed to at least a one-year term, but may be appointed to as much as a three-year term.

2. The council representative shall be appointed to a one-year term.

3. If an alternate becomes a regular member of the arts commission, the individual’s four-year term will begin anew upon appointment as a regular member. 

(Ord. No. 4274, § 2, 3-20-18)


2.61.060 Officers – Meetings.

The city arts commission shall elect its officers, including a chairperson, vice-chairperson, and such officers as it may deem necessary. Such persons shall occupy their respective offices for a period of one year. The arts commission shall hold regular public meetings at least monthly.

(Ord. No. 4274, § 2, 3-20-18)


2.61.070 Rules – Minutes.

The city arts commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep written minutes of its proceedings, which minutes shall be a public record.

(Ord. No. 4274, § 2, 3-20-18)


2.61.080 Budget.

The arts commission shall each year submit to the mayor and city council for approval a proposed budget for the following year in the manner provided by law for preparation and submission of budgets by appointive officials.

(Ord. No. 4274, § 2, 3-20-18)




Chapter 2.62 KENT BICYCLE ADVISORY BOARD

Sections:

2.62.010    Created.

2.62.020    Purpose.

2.62.030    Membership.

2.62.040    Duties and responsibilities of board.


2.62.010 Created.

There is hereby created the Kent bicycle advisory board.

(Ord. No. 4319, § 1, 4-2-19)


2.62.020 Purpose.

The Kent bicycle advisory board may advise the city council, the mayor, and all departments and offices of the city on matters related to bicycling including the impact city actions may have upon bicycling. Such board shall have the opportunity to contribute in an advisory capacity to all aspects of the city’s planning processes insofar as they may relate to bicycling.

(Ord. No. 4319, § 1, 4-2-19)


2.62.030 Membership.

A. Number of members. The membership of the Kent bicycle advisory board shall be 11 members, each of whom shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. The board shall serve under the direction of the mayor subject to council directives, and shall receive technical support from city staff.

B. Terms of office. The term of office for board members shall be two years. Board members may serve multiple terms.

1. Positions on the board shall be identified by a number from one through 11. The term of the odd-numbered positions shall start on April 1st of the odd-numbered year and end March 31st of the next odd-numbered year. The even-numbered positions shall start April 1st of the even-numbered year and end March 31st of the next even-numbered year.

2. Board members, when appointed to fill a vacancy prior to the end of a term, will be assigned to fill the vacant position and serve the remaining time identified for that position.

C. Representation. In order to provide the most diverse representation possible on the board its members should, to the extent possible, consist of representatives of:

1. Bike and cycling organizations;

2. Bicycle dealers;

3. Organizations concerned with safety;

4. Representatives of business organizations;

5. Interested private citizens concerned with urban cycling issues.

(Ord. No. 4319, § 1, 4-2-19)


2.62.040 Duties and responsibilities of board.

A. The board shall review proposals concerning bicycling and bicyclists in the city and advise the mayor and city council, representatives from the city departments and offices who are so delegated by the department director. Engineering staff or other city staff may provide technical assistance and provide input as needed.

B. The board shall:

1. Assist in the formulation of Kent’s comprehensive bikeway plan.

2. Review proposals and plans for spot improvements and bikeways.

3. Promote bicycling as a viable form of urban transportation.

4. Promote improved safety to reduce accidents and thefts of bicycles by educating both youth and adult cyclists, by evaluating and recommending changes in design standards for on-street and off-street bikeways, trails, and paths accessible to bicyclists and for secured parking racks and lockers.

5. Develop possible demonstration projects to encourage commuting through provision of safe, accessible routes, secure parking facilities, and facilities for commuter clean-up and changing from riding to work clothes.

(Ord. No. 4319, § 1, 4-2-19)


Chapter 2.76 POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL*

Sections:

2.76.010    Adoption. 

2.76.020    Revision. 

2.76.030    Priority. 

*Cross reference(s) – Personnel policies and procedures manual to be developed by the human resources director, § 2.10.040; police department, ch. 2.22.

State law reference(s) – Firefighters’ pension board, RCW 41.16.020; police officers’ pension fund, RCW 41.20.010; public employees retirement system, RCW 41.40.005 et seq.


2.76.010 Adoption.

The City of Kent Policies and Procedures Manual, hereafter in this chapter called the manual, adopted by Resolution 658 of the city and amended by the supplement promulgated October 14, 1971, together with all revisions thereof, is hereby adopted as the official policies and procedures manual of the city.

(Ord. No. 1784, § 1; Ord. No. 1917, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.06.010)


2.76.020 Revision.

The policies and procedures manual is intended to be a flexible document, to serve as a guide to city personnel in the operation of the city’s business. It is understood that the manual will necessarily require revision and updating from time to time in order to remain effective in assisting city personnel in answering daily operating questions and in making routine management decisions. Changes and revisions in the manual shall be made as required and approved by the mayor subject to notification to the city council.

(Ord. No. 1784, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.06.020)


2.76.030 Priority.

To the extent that any of the policies or procedures in the manual adopted in KCC 2.76.010 are inconsistent with ordinances of the city adopted prior to Ordinance 1784 adopted on August 21, 1972, the manual shall prevail.

(Ord. No. 1784, § 3. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.06.030)


Chapter 2.77 IN GENERAL

Sections:

2.77.010    Office hours. 


2.77.010 Office hours.

All offices of the city shall be open for the transaction of business from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. of each day, except for Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, and except as otherwise provided for by city policy.

(Ord. No. 1942, § 1; Ord. No. 3528, § 1, 11-7-00. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.44.050)


Chapter 2.80 DEFERRED COMPENSATION

Sections:

Part 1. Generally

2.80.010    Deferred compensation plan fund. 

Part 2. Public Employee Nonqualified Deferred Compensation Plan

2.80.200    Committee established, membership, etc. 

2.80.220    Adopted. 

2.80.230    Agreements and documents. 

2.80.240    Adoption not endorsement of plan. 

Part 3. ICMA Deferred Compensation Plan

2.80.310    Adoption. 

2.80.320    Trustee. 

2.80.330    Administrator. 

2.80.340    Fund. 

2.80.350    Adoption not endorsement of plan. 

Part 4. U.S. Conference of Mayors Deferred Compensation Program

2.80.400    Plan adopted. 

2.80.410    Mayor and employee services division director authorized to execute necessary documents. 

2.80.420    Plan assets to be held in annuity or custodial account. 

2.80.430    Program executed. 

2.80.440    Plan and its investments not endorsed. 

PART 1. GENERALLY


2.80.010 Deferred compensation plan fund.

There is hereby created a special fund which shall be designated as the deferred compensation plan fund into which shall be paid all sums deferred from the compensation of participants in the plan, and from which all authorized disbursements shall be made.

(Ord. No. 2361, § 5, 7-6-82)

Cross reference(s) – Funds, § 3.40.010 et seq.

PART 2. PUBLIC EMPLOYEE NONQUALIFIED DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN


2.80.200 Committee established, membership, etc.

A. There is hereby established a deferred compensation plan committee which shall consist of three (3) persons appointed by the mayor. The committee members shall serve for such periods as shall be determined by the mayor and shall be subject to removal and replacement as shown in Article VI of the plan adopted in KCC 2.80.220. The committee shall administer the deferred compensation plan, and the deferred compensation plan investments hereafter created, and shall have the duties as defined in the plan.

B. The members of the deferred compensation plan committee shall have the authority to sell, assign, and transfer units held under annuity contracts in the name of the city deferred compensation 457 plan and to deliver any and all written instruments necessary or proper to effectuate such transactions.

(Ord. No. 2361, § 4, 7-6-82; Ord. No. 2541, § 1, 3-4-85)


2.80.220 Adopted.

The public employee nonqualified deferred compensation plan which is on file in the city clerk’s office is hereby recognized and approved as a deferred compensation plan for the qualified employees and/or independent contractors of the city.

(Ord. No. 2361, § 1, 7-6-82)


2.80.230 Agreements and documents.

A. The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute the necessary documents for the establishment and implementation of the public employee nonqualified deferred compensation plan.

B. Upon such execution of such plan, establishment and implementation, such plan shall be made available to qualified employees and/or independent contractors of the city upon their execution of appropriate applications and/or agreements for participation therein.

(Ord. No. 2361, § 3, 7-6-82)


2.80.240 Adoption not endorsement of plan.

Adoption of this division does not constitute an endorsement of this deferred compensation plan or any financial guarantees by the city.

(Ord. No. 2361, § 6, 7-6-82)

PART 3. ICMA DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN


2.80.310 Adoption.

A. The city council adopts the International City Managers Association deferred compensation plan which is on file in the city clerk’s office and appoints the ICMA Retirement Corporation to serve as administrator.

B. The city has executed the ICMA Retirement Trust which is on file in the city clerk’s office.

(Ord. No. 2447, §§ 1, 2, 12-5-83)


2.80.320 Trustee.

The city adopts the trust agreement which is on file in the city clerk’s office and appoints the ICMA Retirement Corporation as trustee thereunder. The city directs the ICMA Retirement Corporation, as trustee, to invest all funds held under the deferred compensation plan through the ICMA Retirement Trust as soon as is practicable.

(Ord. No. 2447, § 3, 12-5-83)


2.80.330 Administrator.

The coordinator for the city’s ICMA deferred compensation plan shall receive necessary reports, notices, etc., from the ICMA Retirement Corporation as administrator, and shall cast, on behalf of the city, any required votes under the program. Administrative duties to carry out the plan may be assigned to the appropriate departments.

(Ord. No. 2447, § 4, 12-5-83)


2.80.340 Fund.

All sums deferred from the compensation of participants in the deferred compensation plan, and all authorized disbursements, shall be through the deferred compensation plan fund, established in KCC 2.80.010.

(Ord. No. 2447, § 6, 12-5-83)


2.80.350 Adoption not endorsement of plan.

Adoption of this division does not constitute an endorsement of this deferred compensation plan or any financial guarantees by the city.

(Ord. No. 2447, § 7, 12-5-83)

PART 4. U.S. CONFERENCE OF MAYORS DEFERRED COMPENSATION PROGRAM


2.80.400 Plan adopted.

The city adopts the U.S. Conference of Mayors Deferred Compensation Program and its attendant investment options and hereby establishes the city of Kent, Washington, deferred compensation plan for the voluntary participation of all eligible city employees and elected officials.

(Ord. No. 3395, § 1, 3-4-98)


2.80.410 Mayor and employee services division director authorized to execute necessary documents.

The mayor or his designee is hereby authorized (1) to enter into an administrative agreement and any and all agreements necessary to implement the program with the U.S. Conference of Mayors as plan administrator, subject to the terms of this part and further subject to final approval of the city attorney; (2) to execute, for the city, individual participation agreements with each employee requesting an individual participation agreement; (3) to act as the “administrator” of the plan representing the city. Other than the incidental expenses of collecting and disbursing the employees’ deferrals and other minor administrative matters, there is to be no cost to the city for the program.

(Ord. No. 3395, § 2, 3-4-98)


2.80.420 Plan assets to be held in annuity or custodial account.

The city and the U.S. Conference of Mayors shall hold the funds applied to this plan in either a deferred compensation variable annuity or in an I.R.C. Section 457 Custodial Account for the exclusive benefit of the city’s plan participants.

(Ord. No. 3395, § 3, 3-4-98)


2.80.430 Program executed.

The city hereby executes the program.

(Ord. No. 3395, § 4, 3-4-98)


2.80.440 Plan and its investments not endorsed.

The city’s continuance of the plan does not constitute an endorsement of the plan or of any investment options offered through the plan.

(Ord. No. 3395, § 5, 3-4-98)


Chapter 2.96 INDEMNIFICATION*

Sections:

2.96.010    Legal counsel and indemnification to be provided. 

2.96.020    Exceptions. 

2.96.030    Other legal counsel. 

2.96.040    Other rights. 

2.96.050    City attorney responsibilities. 

*Cross reference(s) – City administrator, ch. 2.03; city attorney, ch. 2.04; city clerk, ch. 2.05; finance department, ch. 2.16; information services department, ch. 2.18; human resources department, ch. 2.20; police department, ch. 2.22; fire department, ch. 2.24; parks and recreation department, ch. 2.26; department of public works, ch. 2.28; planning department, ch. 2.30; office of housing and human services, § 2.30.010 et seq.

State law reference(s) – Indemnification and claims, RCW 4.24.470.


2.96.010 Legal counsel and indemnification to be provided.

The city council shall in all cases provide competent legal counsel of its choosing, to defend any elected official, officer or employee of the city, or the member of any city board or commission who is a party, or is threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending or contemplated action, suit or proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative, by reason of the fact that such person is or was an elected official or officer or employee of the city, or member of any city board or commission. The city shall pay or indemnify such elected official, officer or employee, or member of any city board or commission as against all expenses, fees, judgments, fines and amounts paid in settlement actually and reasonably incurred by him in connection with such action, suit or proceeding, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

(Ord. No. 2176, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.48.010)


2.96.020 Exceptions.

A. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require the city to provide legal counsel of such indemnification for any elected official, officer or employee of the city, or the member of any city board or commission, in the following situations:

1. In civil matters, where the elected official, officer or employee, or board or commission member:

a. Is the plaintiff or moving party; or

b. Where it shall be finally adjudicated in any action, suit or proceeding that such elected official or officer or employee, or board or commission member shall not have acted in good faith and in the reasonable belief that his action was in the best interest of the city.

2. In criminal matters, where the elected official, officer or employee, or board or commission member:

a. Is the complaining party; or

b. Had reasonable cause to believe that such conduct was unlawful.

B. Termination of any action, suit or proceeding by judgment, order or conviction adverse to such person, or by settlement, shall not of itself create a presumption that such person did not act in good faith and in the reason or belief that his action was in the best interest of the city, and with respect to any criminal action or proceeding had reasonable cause to believe that his conduct was unlawful.

(Ord. No. 2176, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.48.020)


2.96.030 Other legal counsel.

Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any such elected official, officer or employee, or member of any city board or commission from seeking additional legal counsel other than that provided by the city. However, nothing in this chapter shall be construed as to require the city to pay any fees or other expenses incurred as a result of employment of such additional counsel.

(Ord. No. 2176, § 3. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.48.030)


2.96.040 Other rights.

The rights provided for in this chapter shall not be deemed exclusive of any other rights to which those indemnified may be entitled under any other statute, ordinance, agreement, insurance or policy of the city.

(Ord. No. 2176, § 4. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.48.040)


2.96.050 City attorney responsibilities.

In circumstances involving litigation or other legal proceeding between two (2) persons qualifying for the privileges granted in this chapter, the city attorney will not be required to represent or otherwise participate on behalf of either party.

(Ord. No. 2176, § 5. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.48.050)


Chapter 2.97 CITY CLAIMS*

Sections:

2.97.010    Claims, presentment, filing process, and appointed agent. 

2.97.020    Administration of claims. 

*State law reference(s) – Claims against municipal corporations, RCW 4.96.010 et seq.; accident and claims against the city, RCW 35A.31.010 et seq.; notice for claim, RCW 35.31.040.


2.97.010 Claims, presentment, filing process, and appointed agent.

A. All claims for damages against the city shall be presented to and filed with the city council within the applicable period of limitations within which an action must be commenced. The city council hereby appoints as its agent to receive claims for damages filed under this section the city clerk, whose office is located within City Hall at 220 Fourth Avenue South, Kent, Washington 98032.

B. Claims for damages must be submitted on either the standard claim form maintained by the Risk Management Division of the Washington State Office of Financial Management, or on the city of Kent’s own claim form. Only one (1) version of these claim forms need be presented to the city clerk. At a minimum, the following information is required:

1. The claimant’s name, date of birth, and contact information;

2. A description of the conduct and the circumstances that brought about the injury or damage;

3. A description of the injury or damage;

4. A statement of the time and place that the injury or damage occurred;

5. A listing of the names of all persons involved and contact information, if known;

6. A statement of the amount of damages claimed; and

7. A statement of the actual residence of the claimant at the time of presenting the claim and at the time the claim arose.

C. The claim form must be signed either:

1. By the claimant, verifying the claim;

2. By the attorney-in-fact for the claimant, pursuant to a written power of attorney;

3. By an attorney admitted to practice in Washington State on the claimant’s behalf; or

4. By a court-approved guardian or guardian ad litem on behalf of the claimant.

D. A claim is properly presented to the city clerk when it is delivered in person or is received by the city clerk by regular mail or by registered mail or certified mail, with return receipt requested.

E. No action shall be commenced against the city for damages arising out of tortious conduct until sixty (60) calendar days have elapsed after the claim has first been presented to and filed with the city council’s agent. The applicable period of limitations within which an action must be commenced shall be tolled during the sixty (60) calendar day period.

(Ord. No. 2562, § 1; Ord. No. 3182, § 1, 9-6-94; Ord. No. 3579, § 1, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 3928, § 1, 8-18-09. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.56.010)


2.97.020 Administration of claims.

The city attorney shall be responsible for representing the city on all claims made against the city except to the extent claims are administered and/or defended by the city’s insurers, unless the claim is administered or defended through an indemnity agreement by another insurer, in which case those claims shall be administered and defended pursuant to the terms of those contracts. The city’s risk manager shall have the authority to settle any claim against the city for an amount not to exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) per occurrence, subject to the availability of funds budgeted for settlement purposes. The mayor, in conjunction with the risk manager and city attorney, shall have the authority to enter into settlements over one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000). All settlements over one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) shall be reported to the city council.

(Ord. No. 3182, § 1, 9-6-94; Ord. No. 4000, § 1, 8-2-11)


Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE Revised 11/19 Revised 1/20  Revised 2/20 Revised 7/20

Chapters:

Subtitle I. In General

3.01    Banking Guidelines

3.02    Investment Policy  Revised 11/19

3.03    Payment of Claims, Demands and Vouchers  Revised 11/19

3.04    Biennial Budget

3.05    Repealed

3.06    Bond Registration

3.08    Fiscal Agent 

3.09    Repealed

3.10    Delinquent Accounts

3.11    Technology Infrastructure

3.12    Surplus of Real Property

Subtitle II. Taxation 

3.16    Sales or Use Tax Revised 1/20

3.17    Leasehold Excise Tax

3.18    Utility Tax on Telephone, Gas, Electric, Solid Waste, Water, Sewer and Drainage Utilities Revised 1/20

3.19    Excise Tax on Real Estate Sales

3.20    Natural or Manufactured Gas Line Use Tax

3.21    Gambling Tax Revised 1/20

3.22    Local Improvement Districts

3.23    Lodging Tax 

3.24    Repealed

3.25    Targeted Residential Investment Program Revised 7/20

3.26    Admissions Tax Revised 1/20

3.27    Annexation Sales and Use Tax

3.28    Business and Occupation Tax – Gross Receipts Revised 1/20

3.29    Tax – Administrative Provisions Revised 1/20

Subtitle III. Funds and Accounts

3.40    Specific Funds

3.41    Revolving (Imprest) Funds and Bank Account

3.43    Release of Surety Bonds 

3.45    Transfer of Funds 

3.70    Public Contracting and Procurement Revised 2/20

3.80    Recycled Product Procurement Policy 


Chapter 3.01 BANKING GUIDELINES*

Sections:

3.01.010    Payment by bank check. 

3.01.020    Competitive service review. 

3.01.030    Signature on checks. 

*State law reference(s) – Depositories, RCW 35A.40.030; deposit of public funds, RCW 39.58.010 et seq.; payment of claims and expenses, RCW 42.24.035 et seq.


3.01.010 Payment by bank check.

The payment of claims or other obligations of the city shall be paid by bank check, debit memo, or wire transfer.

(Ord. No. 2297, § 1; Ord. No. 2930, § 2, 7-3-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.06.010)


3.01.020 Competitive service review.

A. In order for the city to obtain a banking relationship that provides maximum services to the city, the city will solicit competitive proposals.

B. The banking services of the city will be reviewed every three (3) years. The council may decide to extend for an additional period of time or may direct the finance department to solicit a new agreement.

C. The banks to be considered must be full-service banks. The banks also must have complete investment departments which will, without solicitation, keep the city informed of interest rate changes, investment opportunities, or other market conditions which would affect the return or investment of city funds.

D. The banks must provide copies of all documents required by state law. The banks must meet or exceed the requirements outlined in state law.

E. Although a bank will be appointed to handle the regular checking activity, the city will reserve the right to rescind such appointment, should the banking relationship become unsatisfactory. This will require a majority vote of the city council.

F. The investment activities of the city will in no way be affected by the appointment of a bank to handle the city’s regular checking account. All investment activity will be handled at the direction of the finance director, in accordance with state laws.

(Ord. No. 2297, § 2; Ord. No. 2930, § 3, 7-3-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.06.020)

State law reference(s) – Protection of public funds, RCW 39.58.010 et seq.


3.01.030 Signature on checks.

The finance director is hereby designated as the officer authorized to sign checks. In the event of the absence or incapacity of the finance director, the city administrator is authorized to sign such checks.

(Ord. No. 2297, § 3; Ord. No. 2930, § 4, 7-3-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.06.030)

Cross reference(s) – Finance director, § 2.16.020.


Chapter 3.02 INVESTMENT POLICY Revised 11/19

Sections:

3.02.010    Policy.

3.02.020    Definitions.

3.02.030    Scope and objectives.

3.02.040    Standards of care and ethics.

3.02.050    Delegation of authority and responsibilities.

3.02.060    Authorized investments, diversification, maturities, and collateralization.

3.02.070    Dealers and institutions, safekeeping and custody, internal and external control.

3.02.080    Performance standards, reporting requirements, and advisory investment committee. Revised 11/19

3.02.090    State and federal amendments.


3.02.010 Policy.

It is the policy of the city to invest public funds in a manner that safeguards and protects the principal of the city’s investments, provides liquidity in meeting daily cash flow, and provides the highest return possible through budgetary and economic cycles. All investment activity will be in compliance with Chapter 35.39 RCW, “Fiscal – Investment of funds,” Chapter 39.59 RCW, “Public funds – Authorized investments,” and any other statutes or regulatory requirements, such as Internal Revenue Codes, which may apply.

The purpose of this investment policy is to establish the investment objectives, delegation of authority, standards of prudence, eligible investments and transactions, internal controls, reporting requirements, and custodial procedures necessary for the prudent management and investment of the funds of the city.

(Ord. No. 4238, § 2, 3-21-17)


3.02.020 Definitions.

The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

A. Banker’s acceptance means a draft bill or exchange accepted by a bank or trust company. The accepting institution guarantees payment of the bill as well as the issuer.

B. Broker means someone who brings buyers and sellers together for a commission paid by the initiator of the transaction or by both sides; he/she does not position. In the money market, brokers are active in markets in which banks buy and sell money and in interdealer markets.

C. Collateral means securities, evidence of deposit or other property which a borrower pledges to secure repayment of a loan. This also refers to securities pledged by a bank to secure deposits of public monies.

D. Certificate of deposit (CD) means a time deposit with a specific maturity evidenced by a certificate. Large denomination CDs are typically negotiable.

E. Coupon means (1) the annual rate of interest that a bond’s issuer promises to pay the bondholder on the bond’s face value; or (2) a certificate attached to a bond evidencing interest due on a payment date.

F. Commercial paper means short-term, negotiable, unsecured promissory notes. The credit of the issuer stands behind the paper. There are some issuers that put up assets as security for the issue, these are asset-backed.

G. Dealer means one who, as opposed to a broker, acts as a principal in all transactions, buying and selling for his/her own account.

H. Delivery versus payment means the delivery of securities with an exchange of money for the securities. Delivery versus receipt is the delivery of securities with an exchange of a signed receipt for the securities.

I. Discount means the difference between the cost price of a security and its value at maturity when quoted at lower than face value. A security selling below original offering price shortly after sale also is considered to be at a discount.

J. Discount securities means non-interest-bearing money market instruments that are issued at a discount and redeemed at maturity for full face value, e.g., U.S. Treasury bills.

K. Diversification means dividing investment funds among a variety of securities offering independent returns.

L. Federal credit agencies means agencies of the federal government set up to supply credit to various classes of institutions and individuals, e.g., savings and loans, small business firms, students, farmers, farm cooperatives, and exporters.

M. Federal Reserve Bank System means the central bank of the United States created by Congress and consisting of a seven-member Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., 12 regional banks, and about 5,700 commercial banks that are members of the system.

N. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) means a federal agency that insures bank deposits, currently up to $100,000 per deposit.

O. Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (FHLMC) means a public chartered agency that buys residential mortgages from lenders, packages them into new securities backed by those pooled mortgages, provides certain guarantees, and then resells the mortgage-backed securities on the open market. Shares of FHLMC stock are publicly traded on the New York Stock Exchange. The corporation is nicknamed Freddie Mac.

P. Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLB) means the institutions that regulate and lend to savings and loan associations. The FHLBs play a role analogous to that played by the Federal Reserve Banks vis-a-vis member commercial banks.

Q. Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA) means the federal corporation working under the auspices of the Department of Housing and Urban Development. Nicknamed “Fannie Mae,” FNMA was chartered under the Federal National Mortgage Association Act in 1938. It is the largest single provider of residential mortgage funds in the United States. FNMA is a private stockholder-owned corporation. The corporation’s purchases include a variety of adjustable mortgages and second loans in addition to fixed-rate mortgages. FNMA’s securities are also highly liquid and are widely accepted. FNMA assumes and guarantees that all security holders will receive timely payment of principal and interest.

R. Liquidity means a liquid asset that can be converted easily and rapidly into cash without a substantial loss of value.

S. Market value means the price at which a security is trading and could presumably be purchased or sold.

T. Master repurchase agreement means a written contract covering all future transactions between the parties to repurchase/reverse repurchase agreements that establish each party’s rights in the transactions. A master agreement will often specify, among other things, the right of the buyer-lender to liquidate the underlying securities in the event of a default by the seller-borrower.

U. Maturity means the date upon which the principal or stated value of an investment becomes due and payable.

V. Money market means the market in which short-term debt instruments (bills, commercial paper, bankers’ acceptances, etc.) are issued and traded.

W. Portfolio means a collection of securities held by an investor.

X. Rate of return means the yield obtainable on a security based on its purchase price or its current market price. This may be the amortized yield to maturity on a bond or the current income return.

Y. Repurchase agreement means a holder of securities sells these securities to an investor with an agreement to repurchase them at a fixed price on a fixed date. The security “buyer” in effect lends the “seller” money for the period of the agreement, and the terms of the agreement are structured to compensate him/her for this. Dealers use repurchase agreements extensively to finance their positions. Exception: When the Federal Reserve is said to be doing a repurchase agreement, it is lending money; that is, increasing bank reserves.

Z. Safekeeping means a service to customers rendered by banks for a fee whereby securities and valuables of all types and descriptions are held in the bank’s vaults for protection.

AA. Secondary market means a market made for the purchase and sale of outstanding issues following the initial distribution.

BB. Supranational bonds means bonds issued by international financial institutions that are generally established by agreements among nations, with member nations contributing capital and participating in management.

CC. Treasury bills means a non-interest-bearing discount security issued by the U.S. Treasury to finance the national debt. Most bills are issued to mature in three months, six months, or one year.

DD. Treasury bond means a long-term U.S. Treasury security having initial maturities of more than 10 years.

EE. Treasury notes means an intermediate-term coupon bearing U.S. Treasury securities having initial maturities from one to 10 years.

FF. Yield means the rate of annual income return on an investment, expressed as a percentage. Income yield is obtained by dividing the current dollar income by the current market price for the security. Net yield or yield to maturity is the current income yield minus any premium above par or plus any discount from par in purchase price, with the adjustment spread over the period from the date of purchase to the date of maturity of the bond.

(Ord. No. 4238, § 2, 3-21-17)


3.02.030 Scope and objectives.

A. Scope. The city commingles its funds to maximize investment earnings and to increase efficiencies with regard to investment pricing, safekeeping, and administration. Investment income will be allocated to the various funds based on their respective participation and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. The city maintains the right to separate certain funds and exclude them from the scope of this policy. Investment funds may include:

1. General fund.

2. Special revenue funds.

3. Debt service funds.

4. Capital project funds.

5. Enterprise funds (water, sewerage, golf course).

6. Internal services funds.

7. Public facilities funds.

8. Any new fund created by the city council, unless specifically exempted.

B. Objectives. The primary objectives, in priority order, of the city’s investment activities shall be safety, liquidity, and return on investment.

1. Safety. Safety of principal is the foremost objective of the city’s investment policy. City investments shall be made in a manner that seeks to ensure the preservation of capital in the overall portfolio. To mitigate credit and interest rate risk, investment decisions shall be undertaken in a manner that seeks to ensure the preservation of capital in the overall portfolio.

a. Credit risk. This is the risk of loss due to the financial failure of the security issuer or backer. The city will minimize credit risk by:

i. Limiting exposure to poor credits and concentrating the investments in the safest types of securities.

ii. Diversifying the investment portfolio so that potential losses on individual securities will be minimized; and

iii. Actively monitoring the investment portfolio holdings for rating changes, changing economic market conditions, etc.

iv. Credit rating downgrade. If the credit rating of a security is subsequently downgraded below the minimum rating level for a new investment of that security, the finance director shall evaluate the downgrade on a case-by-case basis in order to determine if the security should be held or sold. The finance director will apply the general objectives of safety, liquidity, and return to make the decision.

b. Interest rate risk. This is the risk that the market value of securities in the portfolio will fall due to increases in general interest rates. The city will mitigate the interest rate risk by:

i. Structuring the investment portfolio so that securities mature to meet cash requirements, when known, for ongoing operations, thereby avoiding the need to sell securities on the open market prior to maturity;

ii. Investing liquidity funds primarily in short-term instruments (i.e., investments maturing in less than one year); and

iii. Investing excess liquidity funds in a manner that is consistent with the established risk/return objectives of this policy within the stated maximum weighted average maturity constraint.

2. Liquidity. The city’s investment portfolio will remain sufficiently liquid to enable the city to meet all reasonably anticipated operating requirements. This will be accomplished by either maintaining a portion of the portfolio in investment vehicles offering daily liquidity at face value, such as the Washington State Local Government Investment Pool (LGIP) or structuring the portfolio so that securities mature concurrently with cash needs to meet anticipated demands. Because all possible cash demands cannot be anticipated, the portfolio should consist largely of securities with active secondary or resale markets.

3. Return on investment. The city’s investment portfolio shall be designed with the objective of attaining a market rate of return throughout budgetary and economic cycles, taking into account the city’s investment risk constraints, the cash flow characteristics of the portfolio, and earnings relative to the state of Washington LGIP. Return on investment is of lesser importance compared to the safety and liquidity objectives described above.

(Ord. No. 4238, § 2, 3-21-17)


3.02.040 Standards of care and ethics.

A. Prudence. The standard of care to be used by investment officials shall be the “prudent person” standard and shall be applied in the context of managing an overall portfolio under prevailing economic conditions at the moment of investment commitments. Investment officers acting in accordance with written procedures and exercising due diligence shall be relieved of personal responsibility for an individual security’s credit risk or market price changes, provided deviations from expectations are timely reported and appropriate action is taken to control adverse developments.

The “prudent person” standard requires that investments be made with judgment and care, under circumstances then prevailing, that a person of prudence, discretion, and intelligence would exercise in the management of his or her own affairs, not for speculation, but for investment, considering the probable safety of capital as well as the probable income to be derived.

B. Ethics and conflict of interest. Investment officials will recognize that the investment portfolio is subject to public review and evaluation. The overall program will be designed and managed with a degree of professionalism that is worthy of the public trust.

Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall refrain from knowingly engaging in personal business activity that could conflict with proper execution of the investment program, or that could impair their ability to make impartial investment decisions. Employees and investment officials responsible for investment transactions shall disclose to the mayor any material financial interests in financial institutions that conduct business within this jurisdiction. They shall further disclose any large personal financial/investment positions that could be related to the performance of the city’s portfolio. Employees and officers shall subordinate their personal investment transactions to those of the city, particularly with regard to the time of purchases and sales.

(Ord. No. 4238, § 2, 3-21-17)


3.02.050 Delegation of authority and responsibilities.

A. Governing body. The city council as the governing body will retain ultimate fiduciary responsibility for the portfolio. The city council will receive quarterly reports, designate an investment officer, and review and adopt any changes to the investment policy.

B. Investment officer. The finance director (or his/her designee) is the investment officer of the city. No person may initiate investment transactions on behalf of the investment officer without the express written consent of the investment officer.

The finance director shall be responsible for oversight of the investment program and shall help establish the investment strategies applicable to all investments of funds held by or belonging to the city, its agencies, and departments.

C. Investment advisor. The city may engage the services of an external investment advisor to assist in the management of the city’s investment portfolio in a manner consistent with the city’s objectives. Such external advisors may be granted non-discretionary authority to purchase and sell investment securities in accordance with this investment policy. Such advisors must be registered under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940.

(Ord. No. 4238, § 2, 3-21-17)


3.02.060 Authorized investments, diversification, maturities, and collateralization.

A. Authorized investments. The city is authorized by this chapter and empowered by statute (including, without limitation, RCW 39.59.020, 39.59.030, 43.84.080, and 43.250.040, including all future amendments) to invest in various securities, including, without limitation, the following:

 

	Type of Investment	Definition

	LGIP	State law allows cities to utilize the resources of the State Treasurer to maximize the potential surplus funds while ensuring the safety of public funds. A state investment pool has been designated to meet this function.

	U.S. Treasury Obligations	Certificates, notes, bonds, or strips of the United States, or other obligations of the United States or its agencies, or of any corporation wholly owned by the government of the United States.

	GSE-Agency Securities	Obligations of Government Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs) which are eligible as collateral for advances to member banks as determined by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. (These include but are not limited to Federal Home Loan Bank notes and bonds, Federal National Mortgage Association notes, Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation and Federal Farm Credit Bank bonds.)

	Repurchase Agreements	Repurchase agreements for securities; provided, that the transaction is structured so that the city obtains control over the underlying securities. If repurchase agreements are utilized, a master repurchase agreement must be signed by the finance director with the transacting bank or dealer. Additionally, the collateral must meet the authorized investment and maturity constraints of this policy.

	Bankers’ Acceptance	Bankers’ acceptances purchased on the secondary market which have at the time of investment the highest credit rating by a minimum of two recognized rating agencies (RCW 43.84.080(4)).

	Commercial Paper	Commercial paper; provided, that the finance director adheres with the policies and procedures of the State Investment Board regarding commercial paper (RCW 43.84.080(7)); the exception is that the city will not allow asset-backed commercial paper. Commercial paper not to have maturities exceeding 270 days. Commercial paper must be purchased on the secondary market and not directly from issuers. Commercial paper and corporate notes combined must not exceed more than 25 percent of the total assets of the portfolio.

	Certificates of Deposit/Bank Deposits/Saving	Investment deposits including certificates of deposit, with qualified public depositories as defined by RCW 39.58.010(2) and in accordance with the restrictions therein.

	Bonds of the State of Washington	Bonds of the state of Washington and any local government in the state of Washington, which bonds are rated A- or better at the time of investment by a nationally recognized rating agency.

	General Obligation Bonds of a State Other Than Washington	General obligation bonds of a state other than the state of Washington and general obligation bonds of a local government of a state other than the state of Washington, which bonds are rated A- or better at the time of investment by a nationally recognized rating agency.

	Corporate Notes	Corporate notes rated A- or better at the time of investment by all nationally recognized rating agencies that rate the security, subject to the current policies and procedures of the State Investment Board regarding corporate notes. Corporate notes “A-, A, or A+” with a negative outlook may not be purchased. If securities are downgraded below these minimum levels after purchase, they are considered permissible and the securities may be held or sold. Corporate notes must be purchased in the secondary market and not directly from the issuer.

	Supranational Bonds	Supranational bonds issued by international financial institutions that are generally established by agreements among nations, with member nations contributing capital and participating in management. The city may only buy bonds that have the U.S. as their largest shareholder.

B. Diversification. Diversification is required by the city to reduce overall portfolio risks while attaining market average rates of return. Diversification by institution, type of investment security, and years to maturity shall be employed to avoid over-concentration in any of these areas.

The maximum percentages listed below will provide a guide in making investment decisions. Maximum percentages for a particular issuer or investment type may be exceeded at a point in time subsequent to review and approval by the finance director. Securities need not be liquidated to realign the portfolio; however, consideration should be given to this matter when future purchases are made to ensure that appropriate diversification is maintained.

Diversification Targets:

	Authorized Investments	Maximum Portfolio Allocation	Maximum Maturity	Maximum Allocation per Issuer	Credit Quality/

Notes

	Local Government Investment Pool	100%	–	–	–

	U.S. Treasury Obligations	100%	5 years	–	–

	GSE Agency Securities	100%	5 years	–	–

	Repurchase Agreements	10%	60 days	None	State collateral requirements must be followed.

	Bankers’ Acceptances	10%	180 days	10%	Rated in the highest short-term credit rating category by at least two NRSROs.

	Certificates of Deposit/Bank Deposits/

Saving	20%	24 months	10%	If not 100% collateralized, must be rated in the highest short-term rating category by at least one NRSRO.

	Corporate Notes	25%	5 years	Rated AA or better by all NRSOs: 3%

Rated A- or better: 2%

Non-U.S. and Canada: 2% per country	Must be rated A- or better. Securities rated A-, A, or A+ with a negative outlook may not be purchased.

	Commercial Paper	25%	270 days	U.S.: 3%

Non-U.S. and Canada: 2%	Rated in the highest short-term rating category by at least two NRSROs. If rated by more than two NRSROs, it must have the highest rating from all of the organizations. Any commercial paper purchased with a maturity longer than 100 days must also have an underlying long-term senior unsecured credit rating at the time of purchase in one of the three highest rating categories of an NRSRO.

	General Obligation Bonds of Any State or Local Government	20%	5 years	5%	Must be rated A- or better.

	Supranational Bonds	20%	5 years	5%	Supranational bonds that have the United States as their largest shareholder.

C. Maturities. The city will invest in securities with maturity dates five years from the date of purchase or less.

1. The maximum weighted average maturity of the total portfolio shall not exceed three years. This maximum is established to limit the portfolio to excessive market price change exposure.

2. Liquidity funds will be held in the LGIP, bank deposits, or in short-term instruments maturing six months or less.

3. The investment portfolio will have securities that mature between one day and five years.

4. Exception to five-year maturity maximum. Investments may be invested in securities exceeding five years if the maturities of such investments are made to coincide as nearly as practicable with the expected use of the funds.

D. Collateralization. Collateralization is required on repurchase agreements. In order to anticipate market changes and provide a level of security for all funds, the collateralization level will be 102 percent of market value of principal and accrued interest. The only eligible collateral for repurchase agreements will be direct obligations of the U.S. Treasury, U.S. Government Agency, and/or U.S. Government instrumentality obligations.

Securities that are acceptable as collateral must comply with the allowable securities listed in this policy. Collateral will always be held by an independent third party with whom the entity has a current custodial agreement. A clearly marked evidence of ownership (safekeeping receipt) must be supplied to the entity and retained. The right of substitution is granted.

(Ord. No. 4238, § 2, 3-21-17)


3.02.070 Dealers and institutions, safekeeping and custody, internal and external control.

A. Authorized financial dealers and institutions. The finance director will limit banking transactions to designated banking relationships and will refer to the financial institutions list provided by the Public Deposit Commission of banks authorized to provide investment services (RCW 39.58.080). In addition, the city will approve security broker/dealers by credit worthiness, and understanding of the city’s requirements and policy. These may include “primary” dealers or regional dealers that qualify under Securities and Exchange Commission Rule 15C3-1 (Uniform Net Capital Rule). No public deposit shall be made except in a qualified public depository in the state of Washington.

A current financial statement is required to be on file for each financial institution and broker/dealer in which the city invests. Electronic links and/or files may be used to meet this requirement. If the city hires an investment advisor to assist in the management of the investment portfolio, then the city can also use the investment advisor’s approved broker/dealer list.

B. Safekeeping and custody. All security transactions, including collateral for repurchase agreements, entered into by the city shall be conducted on a delivery versus payment basis. Securities will be held by a third-party custodian designated by the finance director.

C. Internal control. The finance director shall establish a process of periodic review by the accounting staff. This review will provide internal control monitoring by assuring that policies and procedures are being complied with.

(Ord. No. 4238, § 2, 3-21-17)


3.02.080 Performance standards, reporting requirements, and advisory investment committee. Revised 11/19

A. Performance standards. The city’s investment portfolio will be designed to obtain a market average rate of return during budgetary and economic cycles, taking into account the city’s investment risk constraints and cash flow needs. Appropriate benchmarks shall be established against which portfolio performance shall be compared on a regular basis. The benchmarks shall be reflective of the actual securities being purchased and a comparison to the LGIP earnings rate should be completed on a regular basis.

B. Advisory investment committee. An investment committee will be established consisting of the mayor (or designee), finance director, the public works director, and a member of the council, who shall be appointed by the mayor to serve a two-year term, which term shall run concurrently with the term of the council president, except to the extent interim appointments become necessary. The committee will meet quarterly and will be established to serve in a general review and advisory capacity, taking into account the city’s investment objectives, available funds and current market conditions. The committee will review periodic reports which may include, but are not limited to: market value of the portfolio, percentages by type and institution, average life of the portfolio, expected cash flows, and average rate of return.

(Ord. No. 4238, § 2, 3-21-17; Ord. No. 4336, § 3, 10-15-19)


3.02.090 State and federal amendments.

If new legislation or regulation should amend the permitted instruments or institutions, those changes will be deemed to be immediately incorporated into this policy.

(Ord. No. 4238, § 2, 3-21-17)


Chapter 3.03 PAYMENT OF CLAIMS, DEMANDS AND VOUCHERS Revised 11/19

Sections:

3.03.010    City auditing officer.  Revised 11/19

3.03.020    Preparation of list of claims, demands and vouchers for council approval. 

3.03.030    Payment of claims, demands and vouchers. 

3.03.040    Claims for reimbursement for expenses of officers and employees. 

3.03.050    Claims for damages to persons or property. 


3.03.010 City auditing officer. Revised 11/19

The council president, or his or her designee, shall serve as the city auditing officer and shall act as auditor for the city for all claims, demands and vouchers presented to the city council for approval. Such claims, demands, and vouchers shall be prepared for audit and payment on a form providing for the authentication and certification by the auditing officer that the materials have been furnished, the services rendered or the labor performed as described, and the claim, demand, or voucher is a just, true, and unpaid obligation against the city.

(Ord. No. 3212, § 1, 2-21-95; Ord. No. 4336, § 4, 10-15-19)


3.03.020 Preparation of list of claims, demands and vouchers for council approval.

The city finance manager, or his or her designee, shall prepare, for the auditing officer, a list of all claims, demands and vouchers presented to the city for payment and shall present the same to the city council for approval. These claims shall be certified by each department director that the materials have been furnished, services rendered, or labor performed as described and the claim, demand, or voucher is a just, true, and unpaid obligation against the city.

(Ord. No. 3212, § 1, 2-21-95)


3.03.030 Payment of claims, demands and vouchers.

A. Claims, demands or vouchers may be paid prior to city council approval if the following conditions are met:

1. The mayor, the director of operations, the finance manager, and any designee authorized to sign the checks or warrants, shall each furnish an official bond for the faithful discharge of his or her duties in an amount determined by the city council, but not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000). A blanket fidelity bond applicable to such officials and employees in addition to others and in an amount not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) shall be sufficient to meet this requirement;

2. The city council has adopted contracting, hiring, purchasing, and disbursing policies that implement effective internal control;

3. The city council shall review all documentation supporting any claim, demand or voucher paid and for approval of all checks or warrants issued in payment of any claim, demand, or voucher at its next regularly scheduled public meeting; and

4. If, upon review, the city council disapproves a claim, demand, or voucher, the auditing officer shall cause the disapproved claim, demand, or voucher to be recognized as a receivable of the city and shall direct city administration to pursue collection diligently until the amounts disapproved are collected or until the city council is satisfied and approves the claim, demand, or voucher.

B. Notwithstanding the fact that all of the above conditions are met, the city council may stipulate that certain kinds or amounts of claims, demands, or vouchers shall not be paid before the city council has reviewed the supporting documentation and approve the issue of checks or warrants in payment of those claims, demands or vouchers.

(Ord. No. 3212, § 1, 2-21-95)


3.03.040 Claims for reimbursement for expenses of officers and employees.

Claims for reimbursement of any expenditures by officers or employees of the city for transportation, lodging, meals, or any other purpose shall be pursuant to city administrative policy.

(Ord. No. 3212, § 1, 2-21-95)


3.03.050 Claims for damages to persons or property.

Claims or demands for damages to persons or property shall be presented to the city in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 35A.31 RCW and Chapter 2.97 KCC.

(Ord. No. 3212, § 1, 2-21-95)


Chapter 3.04 BIENNIAL BUDGET

Sections:

3.04.010    Biennial budget.

3.04.020    Mid-biennial review and modification.


3.04.010 Biennial budget.

Pursuant to Chapter 35A.34 RCW, the city council hereby establishes a two (2) year fiscal biennial budget, for the city of Kent, beginning with the two (2) year fiscal biennium that begins January 1, 2013. The 2013-2014 biennial budget and all subsequent budgets shall be prepared, considered, and adopted under the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 35A.34 RCW.

(Ord. No. 4031, § 1, 3-6-12)


3.04.020 Mid-biennial review and modification.

Pursuant to RCW 35A.34.130, the city council will provide a mid-biennium review and modification of the biennial budget to commence not earlier than eight (8) months after the start of the first year of the fiscal biennium and to take effect not later than January 1st of the following year. The mayor shall first prepare the proposed budget modification. Once proposed, the mid-biennium modifications shall be sent to the city council. The proposed budget modifications shall be a public record and shall be available to the public by the provision of copies at the office of the city clerk and by providing copies in an electronically downloadable format, if possible, available through the Internet or other electronic data environment that is widely available to the public. The city council shall conduct at least two (2) public hearings on the proposed modification. The hearings shall occur at a regular or special city council meeting. The mayor shall provide publication of notice of the public hearings consistent with publication of notice for adoption of other city ordinances. The budget modifications must be passed by ordinance, and, once passed, a complete copy of the adopted budget modifications must be transmitted to the State Auditor and to the Association of Washington Cities.

(Ord. No. 4031, § 1, 3-6-12)


Chapter 3.05 WORKER’S COMPENSATION BANK ACCOUNT


(Repealed by Ord. No. 3522)


Chapter 3.05 WORKER’S COMPENSATION BANK ACCOUNT


(Repealed by Ord. No. 3522)


Chapter 3.06 BOND REGISTRATION*

Sections:

3.06.010    System of registration adopted. 

3.06.020    Bonds and obligations registered. 

3.06.030    Bond and obligation issuance. 

3.06.040    Contract for fiscal agent services authorized. 

3.06.050    Ownership, registration and assignability of instruments. 

*State law reference(s) – Bonds, issuance and registration, RCW 39.46.010 et seq.


3.06.010 System of registration adopted.

Pursuant to RCW 39.46.040, a system of registering the ownership of bonds and other interest bearing obligations of the city is adopted. The terms “bond” and “obligation” as used in this chapter shall have the meanings defined in RCW 39.46.020. The term “registrar” shall be the person designated by the city to register the ownership of bonds and other obligations under this chapter. The term “fiscal agencies” shall mean the duly appointed fiscal agencies of the state serving as such at any given time.

(Ord. No. 2418, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.30.010)


3.06.020 Bonds and obligations registered.

All bonds and other obligations issued or entered into by the city which bear or require the city to pay interest, which interest is intended by the city to be exempt from federal income taxation, shall be registered as to both principal and interest as provided in this chapter. Such registration may be carried out by a book entry system of recording the ownership of a bond or other obligation whether or not a physical instrument is issued on the books of the city or the fiscal agency of the state, or by recording the ownership of a bond or other obligation together with requiring that any transfer of ownership may be effected only by the surrender of the old bond or other obligation and either the reissuance of the old bond or other obligation or the issuance of a new bond or other obligation to the new owner. No transfer of any such bonds or other obligations shall be effective until the name of the new owner and the new owner’s mailing address, together with such other information deemed appropriate by the registrar, shall be recorded on the books of the registrar of the city.

(Ord. No. 2418, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.30.020)


3.06.030 Bond and obligation issuance.

Except as may be otherwise provided by this chapter authorizing the issuance of bonds or other obligations, registered bonds or other registered obligations may be issued in any denomination to represent several registered bonds or other obligations of smaller denominations, and the city may permit the issuance of bonds or other obligations in denominations smaller than a larger denomination bond or obligations requested to be transferred. The ordinance authorizing the issuance of the bonds or other obligations shall provide for an authenticating trustee, transfer agent, registrar, and paying agent, which shall be one (1) or more of the fiscal agencies of the state appointed in accordance with Chapter 43.80 RCW, except that with respect to installment contracts, interest-bearing leases, and other instruments or obligations not usually subject to trading, assignment, or transfer, the treasurer of the city may serve as the transfer agent, registrar, and paying officer. Any transfer agent, registrar, and paying agent or officer shall comply with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations respecting the carrying out of such duties. Unless provided for in the contract between the city and the fiscal agencies or between the state finance committee and the fiscal agencies, each such ordinance authorizing the issuance of such bonds or other obligations shall specify:

1. The terms and conditions of making payments of principal and interest;

2. The provisions for printing any physical instruments including the use of identifying numbers or other designations;

3. The record and payment dates;

4. The determination of denominations;

5. The manner of communicating to the owners of such bonds or other obligations;

6. The receipt of the physical instruments for payment of principal;

7. The destruction of such instruments and the certification of such destruction;

8. The registration and release of securing interests; and

9. Such other matters pertaining to the registration of such bonds or other obligations authorized by such ordinance as the city may deem to be necessary or appropriate.

(Ord. No. 2418, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.30.030)


3.06.040 Contract for fiscal agent services authorized.

A. The finance director is authorized to enter into a contract with the fiscal agency or agencies of the state in connection with the establishment and maintenance by such fiscal agency or agencies of a central depository system for the transfer or pledge of bonds or other obligations and for the services as authenticating trustee, transfer agent, registrar and paying agent for such bonds and other obligations. Such contract shall define the rights and duties of such fiscal agency so acting and the means and amount of compensation thereof. In addition, in lieu of making provisions in each ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds or other obligations, such contract may make specific provision for the procedures for payment, identification by numbers or other designations, the manner of issuance or reissuance of certificates, the manner of transfer, the manner of communication to owners of bonds or other obligations for accounting to the city and for cancelled certificate of destruction, registration and release of securing interest and for such other matters as may be appropriate.

B. Until such contract is entered into, the city incorporates by reference all the terms of the contract respecting registration of bonds and other obligations entered into between the state finance committee and the fiscal agencies.

(Ord. No. 2418, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.30.040)


3.06.050 Ownership, registration and assignability of instruments.

Any physical instrument issued or executed by the city subject to registration under this chapter shall state on its face that the principal thereof and interest thereon shall be paid only to the owner thereof registered as such on the books of the registrar as of the record date defined in the instrument, and that such instrument, either principal or interest, may not be assigned except on the books of the registrar.

(Ord. No. 2418, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.30.050)


Chapter 3.08 FISCAL AGENT*

Sections:

3.08.010    Designated. 

*Cross reference(s) – Finance director, § 2.16.020.

State law reference(s) – Appointment of fiscal agent, RCW 43.80.110.


3.08.010 Designated.

Pursuant to the authorization contained in RCW 43.80.110, the fiscal agent as designated by the state is hereby designated as fiscal agent for the city for payment of bonds and coupons thereof, all in accordance with the requirements of RCW 43.80.100 et seq.

(Ord. No. 1771, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.08.010)


Chapter 3.09 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION


(Repealed by Ord. No. 4048)


Chapter 3.09 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION


(Repealed by Ord. No. 4048)


Chapter 3.10 DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS*

Sections:

3.10.010    Definitions. 

3.10.020    Service charge on delinquent accounts. 

3.10.030    Exemption. 

*Cross reference(s) – Finance department, ch. 2.12.

State law reference(s) – Warrants, interest rate, etc., RCW 35A.21.110, 35.21.320.


3.10.010 Definitions.

The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.

Delinquent shall mean any account not paid within thirty (30) days from the date shown on the invoice as the “invoice date.”

Donor shall mean any person, firm, corporation, agency, or state or local government unit that promises or pledges to contribute or that donates money or other assets to the city without expectation of repayment by the city through monies, products, or services from the city.

Grantor agencies shall mean any local government, state agency, or firm that provides federal, state, or county financial assistance in the form of grants or other entitlements.

(Ord. No. 1678, § 1; Ord. No. 3658, § 1, 9-2-03. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.10.020)


3.10.020 Service charge on delinquent accounts.

If any person, firm, or corporation fails or neglects to pay any city invoice within thirty (30) days from the date shown on the invoice as the “invoice date,” a service charge of one (1) percent of the amount of the unpaid balance on the account or two dollars ($2), whichever is greater, will be imposed one (1) month from the date payment was due, and at the end of each succeeding monthly period, until all past due amounts are paid in full. 

Any invoice or service charge due under this chapter and unpaid shall constitute a debt to the city. The city may, pursuant to Chapter 19.16 RCW, use a collection agency to collect outstanding debts, or it may seek collection by court proceedings, which remedies shall be in addition to all other remedies.

(Ord. No. 1678, § 1; Ord. No. 3658, § 1, 9-2-03. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.10.010)


3.10.030 Exemption.

A. Donors and grantor agencies. Donors or grantor agencies shall be exempt from the delinquency and collection provisions of this chapter.

B. Code enforcement. Code enforcement fines and penalties that have been assessed in accordance with Ch. 1.04 KCC shall be exempt from the delinquency and collection provisions of this chapter and shall be subject to the delinquency and collection provisions of Ch. 1.04 KCC.

C. Public records. Duplication fees owed for public records produced in accordance with Ch. 1.05 KCC shall be exempt from the delinquency and collection provisions of this chapter and shall be subject to the delinquency and collection provisions of Ch. 1.05 KCC.

D. Utility taxes. Utility taxes imposed by the city upon all persons engaged in certain utility business activities defined in Ch. 3.18 KCC shall be exempt from the delinquency and collection provisions of this chapter and shall be subject to the delinquency and collection provisions of Ch. 3.18 KCC.

E. Gambling taxes. Gambling taxes shall be exempt from the delinquency and collection provisions of this chapter and shall be subject to the delinquency and collection provisions of Ch. 3.21 KCC.

F. Local improvement districts. Bills for local improvement districts (LIDs) shall be exempt from the delinquency and collection provisions of this chapter and shall be subject to the delinquency and collection provisions of Chs. 3.22 and 6.04 KCC.

G. Business licenses and regulations. Business license and other license penalties assessed in accordance with KCC Title 5 shall be exempt from the delinquency and collection provisions of this chapter and shall be subject to the delinquency and collection provisions of KCC Title 5.

H. City utility services. Invoices for the furnishing of city utility services shall be exempt from the delinquency and collection provisions of this chapter and shall be subject to the delinquency and collection provisions of Ch. 7.01 KCC.



I. Maintenance of landscaping. Invoices for maintenance of landscaping required by Chapter 15.07 KCC shall be exempt from the delinquency and collection provisions of this chapter and shall be subject to the delinquency and collection provisions of Chapter 15.07 KCC.

J. Contracts. If a written contract states different payment terms, the delinquency and collection provisions of the contract shall apply.

(Ord. No. 1678, § 1; Ord. No. 3658, § 1, 9-2-03. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.10.030)


Chapter 3.11 TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE

Sections:

3.11.010    Technology fee established.


3.11.010 Technology fee established.

In order to accommodate the high cost and need to continually replace telecommunications, data, network, hardware, and software systems caused by a continuous and rapidly changing technology environment, the technology fees shall be applied to the following transactions:

A. Utility billing. A fee of one dollar ($1) per bill for every utility bill issued, whether the bill includes any combination of water, sewer, or storm drainage charges.

B. Business license fees. A fee of one dollar ($1) per business license transaction unless the business is exempt from payment of the business license fee.

C. Parks and recreation fees. A fee of one dollar ($1) per transaction for each registration for any parks and recreation program. For the purposes of this subsection, “transaction” shall mean the process of collecting and receipting fees and charges in the form of cash, check, or credit card payment for programs, services, or miscellaneous resale items offered by the parks and recreation department. The fee shall not apply to the following:

1. The fee shall not apply to any transactions or registrations at the Riverbend Golf Course;

2. The fee shall not apply to registrations or transactions with a total cost less than ten dollars ($10);

3. The fee shall not apply to drop-in transactions (such as, for example and without limitation, lunch at the Senior Center or one (1) time payment for use of the weight room at Kent Commons).

D. For all other applications, permits, inspections, registrations, transactions, and approvals established under the Kent City Code, the fee shall be established by council resolution.

(Ord. No. 4019, § 3, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 4064, § 1, 12-11-12)


Chapter 3.12 SURPLUS OF REAL PROPERTY

Sections:

3.12.010    Consideration for surplus.

3.12.020    Properties affected.

3.12.030    Exempt properties and property interests.

3.12.040    Public meeting.

3.12.050    Notice.

3.12.060    Meeting requirements.

3.12.070    Surplus decision by resolution.

3.12.080    Valuation by appraisal.

3.12.090    Procedural compliance with other regulatory requirements.


3.12.010 Consideration for surplus.

When city administration or the city council recommends one or more parcels of real property to be declared as surplus to the city’s needs, and the city council determines that the city should consider the property for surplus, the council and staff must comply with this process before listing or selling the property, subject only to the exceptions listed in this policy.

(Ord. No. 4203, § 1, 5-17-16)


3.12.020 Properties affected.

This policy applies to the sale, transfer, or exchange of the following properties:

A. Properties that were received or obtained for a specific public purpose; or

B. Properties that constitute at least one legal lot (unless subject to KCC 3.12.030); or

C. Properties that are owned in fee.

(Ord. No. 4203, § 1, 5-17-16)


3.12.030 Exempt properties and property interests.

Because of their size, configuration, or character, these properties are exempt from this process:

A. Property owned by any of the city’s utilities, to any statutory street or alley vacation, or to other surplus process when state law provides a separate process to surplus those properties; or

B. Partial or remnant properties, such as strips purchased for road widening purposes, areas conveyed as a result of lot line adjustments or boundary disputes, or partial or full lots remaining and unused after project completion; or

C. Easements, licenses, and other subordinate interests in real property; or

D. Properties sold, transferred, or exchanged to a local, state, or federal agency.

(Ord. No. 4203, § 1, 5-17-16; Ord. No. 4216, § 1, 10-18-16)


3.12.040 Public meeting.

When the council determines that specific property or properties should be considered for surplus, the city must hold at least one informational public meeting and receive public comment at one of the following venues:

A. Council committee meeting;

B. Council workshop;

C. Regular council meeting;

D. Special council meeting; or

E. A community forum at a location that is more convenient to the neighborhood potentially affected by the proposed surplus.

(Ord. No. 4203, § 1, 5-17-16)


3.12.050 Notice.

Prior to holding any meeting as provided for in KCC 3.12.040, the city must provide the following notice:

A. Post notice at all main site entrances at least 20 days prior to the first public meeting. The notice should be easily visible and verbiage should be clear, succinct, and legible; and

B. Publish notice at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation at least 20 days prior to the public meeting. The notice should be clear, conspicuous and brief, describing, at a minimum, the property’s location by street address or other appropriate location descriptor and stating that the property is being considered for surplus; and

C. Mail notice at least 20 days prior to the public meeting to all property owners of record as listed by the King County assessor’s office whose property is located within 1,000 feet of the site proposed for surplus; and

D. Post notice on the city’s website in a location intended to provide notice of public meetings or public events at least 20 days prior to the public meeting.

(Ord. No. 4203, § 1, 5-17-16)


3.12.060 Meeting requirements.

At the meeting the city will:

A. Allow members of the public to gain information and speak in support or opposition to the proposal.

1. Depending upon the number of persons wishing to speak, councilmembers can limit the amount of time given to each speaker or terminate or continue the meeting depending upon the time available to address the proposed sale.

2. If held at a community forum, an “open house” informational meeting is allowed, so that individual staff members can answer individual questions.

B. Allow members of the public to submit written statements for council consideration.

C. After the meeting, the city council may continue the meeting, hold additional meetings or community forums, or conclude the process. If the council continues the meeting or holds additional meetings, notice of the continuation or new meeting(s) or forum(s) will be posted on the city’s website. No other notice is required.

D. All persons who submit written documents at the meeting, who speak at the meeting and provide their mailing address, or who otherwise request in writing to be parties of record for the proposed surplus will be added to the mailing list for further communications and notices on the subject.

(Ord. No. 4203, § 1, 5-17-16)


3.12.070 Surplus decision by resolution.

Once all meetings are completed, the city council may surplus the property by resolution.

(Ord. No. 4203, § 1, 5-17-16)


3.12.080 Valuation by appraisal.

The city may order appraisals, reappraisals, or peer review appraisals at any time before or during the surplus process, as needed.

(Ord. No. 4203, § 1, 5-17-16)


3.12.090 Procedural compliance with other regulatory requirements.

If other regulatory requirements require notice or meetings while the property is under consideration for surplus, the city may combine those notice and meeting or hearing requirements with the notice and meeting requirements in this surplus policy.

(Ord. No. 4203, § 1, 5-17-16)


Chapter 3.16 SALES OR USE TAX* Revised 1/20

Sections:

3.16.010    Imposed.

3.16.020    Rate of tax.

3.16.030    Additional sales or use tax.

3.16.035    Additional sales or use tax for housing. Revised 1/20

3.16.040    Administration and collection.

3.16.050    Inspection of records.

3.16.060    Collection by state.

3.16.070    Failure to collect or pay tax, penalty.

*Cross reference(s) – General business licenses, ch. 5.01; special amusement licenses, ch. 5.02; taxicabs and vehicles for hire license, ch. 5.03; gun clubs, ch. 5.04; pawnbrokers, ch. 5.05; going out of business sales, ch. 5.06; solicitors, ch. 5.07.

State law reference(s) – Sales or use tax authority, RCW 82.14.010 et seq.


3.16.010 Imposed.

There is hereby imposed a sales or use tax, as the case may be, upon every taxable event, as defined in RCW 82.14.020, occurring within the city. The tax shall be imposed upon and collected from those persons from whom the state sales or use tax is collected pursuant to RCW 82.08.010 et seq. and 82.12.010 et seq.

(Ord. No. 1651, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.02.010)

State law reference(s) – Sales and use tax levy authority, RCW 82.14.030.


3.16.020 Rate of tax.

The rate of the tax imposed shall be one-half of one (1) percent of the selling price or value of the article used, as the case may be; provided, that during such period as there is in effect a sales or use tax imposed by King County, the rate of tax imposed by this section shall be four hundred twenty-five one-thousandths of one (1) percent.

(Ord. No. 1651, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.02.020)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 82.14.030(1).


3.16.030 Additional sales or use tax.

A. There is hereby imposed a sales or use tax, as the case may be, as authorized by RCW 82.14.030(2), upon every taxable event, as defined in RCW 82.14.020, occurring within the city. The tax shall be imposed upon and collected from those persons from whom the state sales tax or use tax is collected pursuant to RCW 82.08.010 et seq. and 82.12.010 et seq.

B. The rate of the tax imposed shall be one-half of one (1) percent of the selling price or value of the article used, as the case may be; provided, however, that during such period as there is in effect a sales tax or use tax imposed by King County under section 17(2), chapter 49, Laws of 1982, First Extraordinary Session, at a rate equal to or greater than the rate imposed by this subsection, King County shall receive fifteen (15) percent of the tax imposed by subsection (A) above; provided further, that during such period as there is in effect a sales tax or use tax imposed by King County under section 17(2), chapter 49, Laws of 1982, First Extraordinary Session, at a rate which is less than the rate imposed by subsection (A) above that amount of revenues equal to fifteen (15) percent of the rate of the tax imposed by King County under that state law.

(Ord. No. 2368, § 1; Ord. No. 2377, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.02.100)

State law reference(s) – Additional tax authorized, RCW 82.14.030(2).


3.16.035 Additional sales or use tax for housing. Revised 1/20

A. There is hereby imposed an additional sales or use tax as authorized by RCW 82.14.540 upon every taxable event, as defined in RCW 82.14.020, occurring within the city.

B. The rate of the tax shall be the maximum rate permitted under RCW 82.14.540.

C. The tax shall be imposed upon and collected from those persons from whom the state sales or use tax is collected pursuant to Chapters 82.08 and 82.12 RCW, but shall be credited against the state’s share of the tax.

D. Funds collected under this subsection shall be used in accordance with RCW 82.14.540 (or as may be amended in the future) for acquiring, rehabilitating, or constructing affordable housing, which may include new units of affordable housing within an existing structure or facilities providing supportive housing services, or funding the operations and maintenance costs of new units of affordable or supportive housing.

E. The finance director shall report annually to the State Department of Commerce on the collection and use of the funds as required by RCW 82.14.540.

F. This additional sales or use tax shall expire 20 years after the date on which the tax is first imposed, unless further extended by amendment to RCW 82.14.540.

(Ord. No. 4341, § 1, 11-19-19)


3.16.040 Administration and collection.

The administration and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions of RCW 82.14.050.

(Ord. No. 1651, § 4. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.02.030)


3.16.050 Inspection of records.

The city hereby consents to the inspection of such records of the city as are necessary to qualify the city for inspection of records of the State Department of Revenue pursuant to RCW 82.32.330.

Ord. No. 1651, § 4. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.02.040)

State law reference(s) – Inspection of state records by the city, RCW 82.32.330.


3.16.060 Collection by state.

The mayor is authorized to enter into an agreement with the State Department of Revenue for the collection and administration of the tax imposed by this chapter.

(Ord. No. 1651, § 5. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.02.050)

State law reference(s) – Collection and administration by state, RCW 82.14.050.


3.16.070 Failure to collect or pay tax, penalty.

Any seller who fails or refuses to collect the tax as required with the intent to violate the provisions of this chapter or to gain some advantage or benefit, either directly or indirectly, and any buyer who refuses to pay any tax due under this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

(Ord. No. 1651, § 6. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.02.060)


Chapter 3.17 LEASEHOLD EXCISE TAX*

Sections:

3.17.010    Excise tax levied. 

3.17.020    Rate. 

3.17.030    Administration and collection. 

3.17.040    Exemptions. 

3.17.050    Consent to inspection of records. 

3.17.060    Contract. 

*State law reference(s) – Leasehold excise tax, RCW 82.29A.010 et seq.


3.17.010 Excise tax levied.

There is hereby levied and shall be collected a leasehold excise tax upon the act or privilege of occupying or using publicly owned real or personal property within the city through a “leasehold interest” as defined by RCW 82.29A.020(1). The tax shall be paid, collected, and remitted to the State Department of Revenue at the time and in the manner prescribed by RCW 82.29A.050.

(Ord. No. 1982, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 3.03.010, 3.05.010)


3.17.020 Rate.

The rate of the tax imposed shall be as provided in RCW 82.29A.030 of the taxable rent as defined by RCW 82.29A.020(2).

(Ord. No. 1982, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 3.03.020, 3.05.020)

State law reference(s) – Levy authorized, RCW 82.29A.030.


3.17.030 Administration and collection.

The administration and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions of RCW 82.29A.010 et seq.

(Ord. No. 1982, § 3. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 3.03.030, 3.05.030)


3.17.040 Exemptions.

Leasehold interests exempted by RCW 82.29A.130 shall be exempt from the tax imposed pursuant to this chapter.

(Ord. No. 1982, § 4. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 3.03.040, 3.05.040)

State law reference(s) – Exemption for leasehold interest in land, buildings, etc., used to manufacture alcohol fuel, etc., RCW 82.29A.135.


3.17.050 Consent to inspection of records.

The city hereby consents to the inspection of such records of the city as are necessary to qualify the city for inspection of records of the State Department of Revenue pursuant to RCW 82.32.330.

(Ord. No. 1982, § 5. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 3.03.050, 3.05.050)


3.17.060 Contract.

The mayor is authorized to execute a contract with the State Department of Revenue for the administration and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter. The city attorney shall approve the form and content of such contract.

(Ord. No. 1982, § 6. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 3.03.060, 3.05.060)

State law reference(s) – Collection, RCW 82.29A.080.


Chapter 3.18 UTILITY TAX ON TELEPHONE, GAS, ELECTRIC, SOLID WASTE, WATER, SEWER AND DRAINAGE UTILITIES* Revised 1/20

Sections:

3.18.001    Administrative provisions. Revised 1/20

3.18.010    Definitions. Revised 1/20

3.18.020    Certain utilities subject to tax. Revised 1/20

3.18.025    Reserved. 

3.18.030    Utility tax, when due. Revised 1/20

3.18.040    Repealed. Revised 1/20

3.18.050    Repealed. Revised 1/20

3.18.060    Repealed. Revised 1/20

3.18.070    Repealed. Revised 1/20

3.18.080    Repealed. Revised 1/20

3.18.090    Repealed. Revised 1/20

*Cross reference(s) – Application for and billing out utility services, ch. 7.01; water services, ch. 7.02; solid waste services, ch. 7.03; sanitary sewer services, ch. 7.04; storm and surface water utility, ch. 7.05; combined sewer and storm and surface water utility services, ch. 7.06; surface water and drainage, ch. 7.07; utility services outside the city, ch. 7.11.

State law reference(s) – Utility tax, RCW 82.16.010 et seq.; excise tax on telephone business, RCW 35A.82.060; network telephone service, RCW 35A.82.065; referendum procedure, RCW 35.21.706; minimum waiting period, RCW 35.21.865; tax limitation, RCW 35.21.870.


3.18.001 Administrative provisions. Revised 1/20

The administrative provisions contained in Chapter 3.29 KCC shall be fully applicable to the provisions of this chapter except as expressly stated to the contrary herein.

(Ord. No. 4342, § 1, 11-19-19)


3.18.010 Definitions. Revised 1/20

The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Cable television business means: 

1. A system providing service pursuant to a franchise issued by the city under the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, Public Law No. 98-549, 47 U.S.C. Section 521, as it may be amended or superseded; or 

2. Any system that competes directly with such franchised system by employing antennas, microwaves, wires, wave guides, coaxial cables, or other conductors, equipment, or facilities designed, construed, or used for the purpose of: 

a. Collecting and amplifying local and distant broadcast television signals and distributing and transmitting them;

b. Transmitting original cable cast programming not received through television broadcast signals; or

c. Transmitting television pictures, film, and videotape programs not received through broadcast television signals, whether or not encoded or processed to permit reception by only selected receivers; provided, however, that “cable television business” shall not include entities that are subject to charges as “commercial TV stations” under 47 U.S.C. Section 158, as it may be amended or superseded.

Cellular telephone service means any two-way voice and/or data telephone or similar communications system based in whole or in substantial part on wireless radio communications, including cellular mobile service, and which is not subject to regulation by the Washington State Utilities and Transportation Commission that conflicts with or overrides this chapter. Cellular telephone service includes other wireless radio communications services including, without limitation, specialized mobile radio, paging services, personal communications, and data services, and any other evolving wireless radio communications technology that accomplishes a purpose substantially similar to cellular telephone service. Cellular telephone service is included within the definition of “telephone business” for the purposes of this chapter.

Competitive telephone service means the providing by any person, firm, or corporation of telecommunications equipment or apparatus, or service related to that equipment or apparatus such as repair or maintenance service, if the equipment or apparatus is of a type which can be provided by persons that are not subject to regulation as telephone companies under RCW Title 80 and for which a separate charge is made.

Gross income means the value proceeding or accruing from the performance of the particular public service business involved, including operations incidental thereto, but without any deduction on account of the cost of the commodity furnished or sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs, interest, discount, delivery costs, taxes, or any other expense whatsoever paid or accrued and without any deduction on account of losses. In addition, when determining total gross income from cellular telephone service, “gross income” shall include all income from cellular telephone service (including roaming charges incurred outside this state) provided to customers whose “place of primary use” is in the city, regardless of the location of the facilities used to provide the service. The customer’s place of primary use is, with respect to each telephone: (a) the customer’s address shown on the telephone service company’s records; or (b) the customer’s place of residence if the telephone is for personal use, and in both cases must be located within the licensed service area of the home service provider. Roaming charges and cellular telephone charges to customers whose place of primary use is outside the city of Kent will not be taxable even though those cellular services are provided within the city of Kent. There is a rebuttable presumption that the address shown on the cellular telephone service company’s records is the place of primary use and is accurate. If the cellular telephone service company knows or should have known that a customer’s place of primary use address for a telephone is within the city, then the gross income from cellular telephone service provided to that customer with respect to that telephone is to be included in the company’s gross income.

Network telephone service means the providing by any person, firm, or corporation of access to a local telephone network, local telephone network switching service, toll service, or coin telephone services, or the providing of telephonic, video, data, or similar communication, or transmission for hire via a local telephone network, toll line or channel, cable, microwave, or similar communication or transmission system. “Network telephone service” includes interstate service, including toll service, originating from or received on telecommunications equipment or apparatus in this state if the charge for the service is billed to a person in this state. “Network telephone service” includes the provision of transmission to and from the site of an internet provider via a local telephone network, toll line or channel, cable, microwave, or similar communication or transmission system. “Network telephone service” does not include the providing of competitive telephone service, the providing of cable television service, the providing of broadcast services by radio or television stations, or the provision of internet service as defined in RCW 82.04.297, including the reception of dial-in connection, provided at the site of the internet service provider.

Solid waste means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid wastes including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, swill, sewage sludge, infectious, hazardous, or toxic wastes, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles or parts thereof, and recyclable or reusable materials collected, in whole or in part, for recycling or salvage.

Solid waste collection service means receiving solid waste for transfer, storage, processing, treatment, or disposal including, but not limited to, all residential and commercial collection services, public or private solid waste disposal sites, transfer stations, and similar operations. Solid waste collection service includes the activities of transferring, processing, treating, storing, or disposing of the solid waste collected.

Telephone business means the business of providing network telephone service and cellular telephone service as those terms are defined in this section and includes cooperative or farmer line telephone companies or associations operating an exchange. “Competitive telephone service” shall not be considered “telephone business.” Telephone business shall include 100 percent of the business and total gross income derived from calls originating and/or billed to subscribers within the city.

(Ord. No. 2758, § 1; Ord. No. 3091, § 1, 2-16-93; Ord. No. 3645, § 1, 6-3-03; Ord. No. 4061, § 1, 12-11-12; Ord. No. 4281, § 1, 6-19-18; Ord. No. 4342, § 1, 11-19-19. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.04.040(1)(a))

Cross reference(s) – Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.01.030.

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 82.04.065.


3.18.020 Certain utilities subject to tax. Revised 1/20

A. In addition to the other business and license fees required by the ordinances of the city, the city levies upon all persons, firms, or corporations (including the city) engaged in certain business activities a utilities tax to be collected as follows:

1. Upon every person, firm, or corporation engaging in or carrying on any telephone business within the city, an annual tax equal to six percent of the total gross income, including revenues from intrastate toll, derived from the operation of such business within the city. This six percent tax will be allocated as follows: 4.7 percent to the general fund, 0.3 percent to youth/teen programs, and one percent to street improvement programs.

2. Upon every person, firm, or corporation engaging in or carrying on a business of selling, wheeling, furnishing, distributing, or producing gas, whether manufactured or natural, for commercial or domestic use or purposes, a fee or tax equal to six percent of the total gross income from such business in the city during the tax year for which the license is required. This six percent tax will be allocated as follows: 4.7 percent to the general fund, 0.3 percent to youth/teen programs, and one percent to street improvement programs.

3. Upon every person, firm, or corporation engaged in or carrying on the business of selling, wheeling, furnishing, or distributing electricity for light and power, a fee or tax equal to six percent of the total gross income from such business in the city during the tax year for which a license is required. This six percent tax will be allocated as follows: 4.7 percent to the general fund, 0.3 percent to youth/teen programs, and one percent to street improvement programs.

4. Upon every person, firm, or corporation engaged in or carrying on the business of providing cable television services, a tax equal to six percent of the total gross income from that business in the city during the tax year for which the license is required. All revenue received from this tax must be applied only to funding the city’s information technology department operations and capital projects budgets in the proportion determined by the city council in its biennial budget, including all amendments.

5. Upon every person, firm, or corporation engaging in or carrying on a business providing solid waste collection services, a tax equal to 18.4 percent of the total gross income from such business in the city during the tax year for which the license is required. This 18.4 percent tax will be allocated as follows: 6.5 percent to the general fund, 0.3 percent to youth/teen programs, one percent to street improvement programs, and 10.6 percent to maintain and repair residential streets, including related impacts to curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and other road amenities, including crosswalks along with necessary appurtenances, and improvements related to residential traffic calming, but this 10.6 percent portion of the solid waste utility tax shall not be used to expand, extend, or widen existing residential streets or to build new residential streets. The amount used from this fund for neighborhood traffic calming devices and crosswalks shall not exceed $150,000 in any year.

6. Upon every person (including the city) engaging in or carrying on the business of selling, furnishing, or distributing water services, a tax equal to 13 percent of the total gross income from that business in the city during the tax year; upon every person (including the city) engaging in or carrying on the business of selling, furnishing, or distributing sewer services, a tax equal to 9.5 percent of the total gross income from that business in the city during the tax year; and upon every person (including the city) engaging in or carrying on the business of selling, furnishing, or distributing drainage services, a tax equal to 19.5 percent of the total gross income from such business in the city during the tax year. Unless otherwise directed by the city council in its budget process, the total of these tax revenues will be allocated as follows: 43.85 percent to the general fund for the use as allocated in the city’s budget; 30.77 percent to the capital resources fund, subject to the limitations provided in subsection (A)(6)(a) of this section; 15.38 percent dedicated solely to the repayment and elimination of debt in the city’s “other capital projects” fund subject to the limitations provided in subsection (A)(6)(b) of this section; 7.69 percent to street improvement programs; and 2.31 percent to youth/teen programs.

a. Unless otherwise allocated by council, these funds must be applied equally to (i) information technology capital programs directed at funding long- and short-term hardware and software replacement, and (ii) street capital programs, but further restricted to funding street maintenance, repair, and signage only.

b. The 15.38 percent internal tax allocation will be dedicated to the city’s capital resources fund for the sole purpose of retiring all debt in the city’s other capital projects fund; provided, starting January 1, 2023, or the first day of the year following the date the debt in the other capital projects fund is fully retired, whichever occurs first, this internal tax allocation will be dedicated to the general fund for use as provided for in the city’s budget.

B. In computing the tax provided in subsection (A) of this section, the taxpayer may deduct from total gross income the following items:

1. The actual amount of credit losses and uncollectible receivables sustained by the taxpayer.

2. Amounts derived from transactions in interstate and foreign commerce which the city is prohibited from taxing under the laws and Constitution of the United States.

(Ord. No. 2390, § 1; Ord. No. 2514, § 1; Ord. No. 3274, § 1, 1-2-96; Ord. No. 3314, § 1, 10-1-96; Ord. No. 3319, § 2, 10-15-96; Ord. No. 3321, § 1, 11-6-96; Ord. No. 3370, § 1, 11-18-97; Ord. No. 3456, § 1, 5-4-99; Ord. No. 3489, § 1, 11-16-99; Ord. No. 3594, § 1, 2-19-02; Ord. No. 3645, § 1, 6-3-03; Ord. No. 4020, § 1, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 4061, § 1, 12-11-12; Ord. No. 4128, § 1, 11-4-14; Ord. No. 4134, § 1, 12-16-14; Ord. No. 4213, § 1, 8-16-16; Ord. No. 4217*, § 1, 10-18-16; Ord. No. 4293, § 1, 11-20-18; Ord. No. 4342, § 1, 11-19-19. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.04.040(2))


3.18.025 Reserved. 

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3274, § 1, adopted Jan. 2, 1996, repealed § 3.18.025, which pertained to certain utilities subject to interim tax.


3.18.030 Utility tax, when due. Revised 1/20

The utility tax imposed by KCC 3.18.020 shall be due and payable in monthly installments and remittance thereof shall be made on or before the last day of the following month in which the tax accrued. On or before said due date, the taxpayer shall file with the finance department a return upon a form to be prescribed and provided by the finance department, which return shall contain a statement by the taxpayer, stating that the amount of tax for which it is liable for the preceding monthly period, that the information therein given and the amount of tax liability therein reported are full and true, and that the taxpayer knows the same to be true. This statement shall be signed by the taxpayer or its authorized agent. Taxpayers expected to owe less than one thousand dollars ($1,000) per month may submit taxes on a quarterly basis; taxes shall be due on the last day of the month following the end of the quarter in which the tax accrued. Quarterly period for the purpose of this chapter shall mean each three-month period of the calendar year, commencing on January 1st.

(Ord. No. 2390, § 1; Ord. No. 2758, § 1; Ord. No. 3074, § 1(3.04.080), 11-3-92; Ord. No. 3645, § 1, 6-3-03; Ord. No. 4061, § 1, 12-11-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 1, 11-19-19. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.04.110)


3.18.040 Taxpayer’s records. Revised 1/20

Repealed by Ord. No. 4342.

(Ord. No. 3074, § 1(3.04.090), 11-3-92; Ord. No. 3645, § 1, 6-3-03; Ord. No. 4061, § 1, 12-11-12)


3.18.050 Tax – Payment failure – Penalty and collection. Revised 1/20

Repealed by Ord. No. 4342.

(Ord. No. 3074, § 1(3.04.100), 11-3-92; Ord. No. 3645, § 1, 6-3-03; Ord. No. 4061, § 1, 12-11-12)


3.18.060 Overpayment of tax. Revised 1/20

Repealed by Ord. No. 4342.

(Ord. No. 3074, § 1(3.04.110), 11-3-92; Ord. No. 3645, § 1, 6-3-03; Ord. No. 4061, § 1, 12-11-12)


3.18.070 Appeal to hearing examiner. Revised 1/20

Repealed by Ord. No. 4342.

(Ord. No. 3074, § 1(3.04.120), 11-3-92; Ord. No. 3645, § 1, 6-3-03; Ord. No. 4061, § 1, 12-11-12)


3.18.080 False returns. Revised 1/20

Repealed by Ord. No. 4342.

(Ord. No. 3074, § 1(3.04.130), 11-3-92; Ord. No. 3645, § 1, 6-3-03; Ord. No. 4061, § 1, 12-11-12)


3.18.090 Noncompliance – Civil penalty. Revised 1/20

Repealed by Ord. No. 4342.

(Ord. No. 3074, § 1(3.04.140), 11-3-92; Ord. No. 3645, § 1, 6-3-03; Ord. No. 4061, § 1, 12-11-12)


Chapter 3.19 EXCISE TAX ON REAL ESTATE SALES*

Sections:

3.19.010    Tax levied. 

3.19.020    Capital improvements – Use and limitations. 

3.19.030    Date payable, interest. 

3.19.040    Seller’s obligation. 

3.19.050    Tax lien on real property. 

3.19.060    King County collection – Administrative fee. 

3.19.070    Same – County treasurer as agent. 

3.19.080    Refunds. 

3.19.090    State law and regulations adopted by reference. 

State law reference(s) – Excise tax on real estate sales, RCW 82.46.010 et seq.


3.19.010 Tax levied.

A. Imposition. Pursuant to RCW 82.46.010, there is hereby imposed an excise tax on each sale of real property, constituting a taxable event as defined in RCW 82.45.010 et seq. and occurring within the corporate limits of the city. The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be one-quarter (1/4) of one (1) percent of the selling price of all real property upon which this tax is imposed by this subsection. 

B. Additional excise tax. Pursuant to RCW 82.46.035, there is hereby imposed an additional excise tax on each sale of real property constituting a taxable event as defined in RCW 82.45.010 et seq. and occurring within the corporate limits of the city for development and maintenance of parks projects. The rate of the additional tax imposed under this chapter shall be one-quarter (1/4) of one (1) percent of the selling price on real property upon which this tax is imposed by this subsection.

C. Other. The taxes imposed under this section shall be collected from persons who are taxable by the state under Chapter 82.45 RCW and Chapter 458-61 WAC, upon the occurrence of any taxable event, as defined therein, within the corporate limits of the city. Additionally, the taxes imposed under this section shall comply with all applicable rules, regulations, laws, and court decisions regarding real estate excise taxes imposed by the state under Chapter 82.45 RCW and Chapter 458-61 WAC. The provisions of those chapters shall apply as through fully set forth herein.

(Ord. No. 2573, § 1; Ord. No. 3592, § 1, 2-19-02. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.09.010(A), (B))

State law reference(s) – Authorized, RCW 82.46.010.


3.19.020 Capital improvements – Use and limitations.

A. Use of proceeds. Subject to the limitations specified in this chapter, all proceeds from the tax imposed by this chapter shall be used by the city for financing capital projects specified in the capital facilities plan element of the city’s comprehensive plan pursuant to Chapter 82.46 RCW. Capital projects may include those listed in RCW 35.43.040.

B. Special assessments not limited. This chapter shall not limit the existing authority of the city to impose special assessments in the manner prescribed by law on property benefited thereby.

(Ord. No. 2573, § 1; Ord. No. 3592, § 1, 2-19-02. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.09.010(C), (D))

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 82.46.030 (2), (3).


3.19.030 Date payable, interest.

The taxes imposed by this chapter shall become due and payable immediately at the time of sale. If not paid within thirty (30) days thereafter, the amount unpaid shall be subject to interest and penalties pursuant to Chapter 82.46 RCW and all other applicable laws.

(Ord. No. 2573, § 1; Ord. No. 3592, § 1, 2-19-02. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.09.060) 

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 82.45.100 (1), 82.46.040.


3.19.040 Seller’s obligation.

The taxes imposed in this chapter are the obligation of the seller and may be enforced through an action of debt against the seller or in the manner prescribed for the foreclosure of mortgages. Resort to one (1) course of enforcement is not an election not to pursue the other.

(Ord. No. 2573, § 1; Ord. No. 3592, § 1, 2-19-02. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.09.020)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 82.46.050.


3.19.050 Tax lien on real property.

The taxes imposed in this chapter and any interest or penalties thereon shall constitute a specific lien upon each piece of real property sold from the time of sale until the tax is paid, which lien may be enforced in the manner prescribed for the foreclosure of mortgages.

(Ord. No. 2573, § 1; Ord. No. 3592, § 1, 2-19-02. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.09.030)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 82.46.040.


3.19.060 King County collection – Administrative fee.

The King County treasurer shall place one (1) percent of the proceeds of the taxes imposed by this chapter in the King County Current Expense Fund to defray costs of collection. The remaining proceeds from the city taxes imposed by this chapter shall be remitted to the city on a monthly basis.

(Ord. No. 2573, § 1; Ord. No. 3592, § 1, 2-19-02. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.09.040)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 82.46.030.


3.19.070 Same – County treasurer as agent.

The taxes imposed by this chapter shall be paid to and collected by the King County treasurer. The county treasurer shall act as agent for the city. The county treasurer shall cause a stamp evidencing satisfaction of the lien to be affixed to the instrument of sale or conveyance prior to its recording, or to the real estate excise tax affidavit in the case of used mobile home sales. A receipt issued by the county treasurer for the payment of the tax shall be evidence of the satisfaction of the lien imposed by KCC 3.19.050, and may be recorded in the manner prescribed for recording satisfactions of mortgages. No instrument of sale or conveyance evidencing a sale subject to the tax may be accepted by the King County auditor for filing or recording until the tax is paid and the stamp affixed thereto. If the tax is not due on the transfer, the instrument shall not be accepted until a suitable notation of this fact is made on the instrument by the county treasurer.

(Ord. No. 2573, § 1; Ord. No. 3592, § 1, 2-19-02. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.09.050)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 82.46.060.


3.19.080 Refunds.

If, upon written application by a taxpayer to the King County treasurer for a refund, it appears a tax has been paid in excess of the amount actually due or upon a sale or other transfer declared to be exempt, such excess amount or improper payment shall be refunded by the county treasurer to the taxpayer. No refund shall be made unless the state has first authorized the refund of an excessive amount or an improper amount paid, unless such improper amount was paid as a result of miscalculation. Any refund made shall be withheld from the next monthly distribution to the city.

(Ord. No. 2573, § 1; Ord. No. 3592, § 1, 2-19-02. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.09.070)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 82.45.100(3), (4).


3.19.090 State law and regulations adopted by reference.

Chapters 82.45 and 82.46 RCW, Chapter 458-61 WAC, and any and all subsequent amendments are hereby adopted by this reference as if set forth in full in this chapter.

(Ord. No. 2573, § 1; Ord. No. 3592, § 1, 2-19-02. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.09.080)


Chapter 3.20 NATURAL OR MANUFACTURED GAS LINE USE TAX*

Sections:

3.20.010    Imposed. 

3.20.020    Rate. 

3.20.030    Exemptions. 

3.20.040    Credits. 

3.20.050    Administration and collection. 

3.20.060    Contract execution. 

*State law reference(s) – Natural gas tax, Chapter 82.14 RCW.


3.20.010 Imposed.

There is hereby levied and there shall be collected from every person in this city a use tax for the privilege of using natural gas or manufactured gas within the city as a consumer.

(Ord. No. 2927, § 1(3.50.010), 6-19-90)


3.20.020 Rate.

The tax shall be imposed in an amount equal to the value of the article used by the taxpayer multiplied by the rate in effect for the tax on the natural gas businesses under RCW 35.21.870 within the city under KCC 3.18.020(A)(2). The value of the article used does not include any amounts that are paid for the hire or use of a natural gas business in transporting the gas subject to tax under this subsection if those amounts are subject to tax under RCW 35.21.870.

(Ord. No. 2927, § 1(3.50.020), 6-19-90)


3.20.030 Exemptions.

The tax imposed under this chapter shall not apply to the use of natural or manufactured gas if the person who sold the gas to the consumer has paid a tax under RCW 35.21.870 with respect to the gas for which exemption is sought under this section.

(Ord. No. 2927, § 1(3.50.030), 6-19-90)


3.20.040 Credits.

There shall be a credit against the tax levied under this section in an amount equal to any tax paid by:

1. The person who sold the gas to the consumer when that tax is a gross receipts tax similar to that imposed pursuant to RCW 35.21.870 by another state with respect to the gas for which a credit is sought under this section; or

2. The person consuming the gas upon which a use tax similar to the tax imposed by this section was paid to another state with respect to the gas for which a credit is sought under this subsection.

(Ord. No. 2927, § 1(3.50.040), 6-19-90)


3.20.050 Administration and collection.

The use tax hereby imposed shall be paid by the consumer. The administration and collection of the tax hereby imposed shall be pursuant to RCW 82.14.050.

(Ord. No. 2927, § 1(3.50.050), 6-19-90)


3.20.060 Contract execution.

The mayor is authorized to execute a contract with the State Department of Revenue for the administration and collection of the tax imposed by this section. The city attorney shall approve the form and content of such contract.

(Ord. No. 2927, § 1(3.50.060), 6-19-90)


Chapter 3.21 GAMBLING TAX* Revised 1/20

Sections:

3.21.010    Gambling activities and tax. Revised 1/20

3.21.020    Administration and collection. Revised 1/20

3.21.030    Filing declaration of intent. Revised 1/20

3.21.040    Tax due. Revised 1/20

3.21.041    Repealed. Revised 1/20

3.21.042    Repealed. Revised 1/20

3.21.043    Repealed. Revised 1/20

3.21.050    Records required. Revised 1/20

3.21.051    Repealed. Revised 1/20

3.21.052    Repealed. Revised 1/20

3.21.053    Repealed. Revised 1/20

3.21.054    Repealed. Revised 1/20

3.21.055    Taxes, penalties, service charges, and fees constitute debt to municipality. Revised 1/20

3.21.060    Penalties. Revised 1/20

*State law reference(s) – Gambling, RCW 9.46.010 et seq.; authority to tax certain gambling activity, RCW 9.46.110.


3.21.010 Gambling activities and tax. Revised 1/20

A. Tax imposed. In accordance with RCW 9.46.110, the following taxes are levied upon all persons, associations, and organizations who have been duly licensed by the Washington State Gambling Commission to conduct or operate gambling activities:

1. For bingo games and raffles, a tax rate of five percent of the gross receipts received therefrom less the amount awarded as cash or merchandise prizes;

2. For amusement games, a tax rate of two percent of the gross receipts from any such amusement games less the amount awarded as prizes, which is an amount less than the actual amount of costs of enforcement by the city of the provisions of Chapter 9.46 RCW;

3. For punch boards and pull-tabs for bona fide charitable or nonprofit organizations and for commercial stimulant operators, a tax rate of 10 percent based on the gross receipts from the operation of the games less the amount awarded as cash or merchandise prizes;

4. Commencing July 1, 2013, for social card games not prohibited by subsection (D) of this section, a tax rate of seven percent of the gross revenue from those games. Beginning January 1, 2017, this tax rate will return to 11 percent of the gross revenue from those games.

B. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the words and terms used herein shall have the same meaning given to each pursuant to Chapter 9.46 RCW, as same exist or may from time to time be amended; and as set forth under the rules of the Washington State Gambling Commission, WAC Title 230, as the same exists or may hereafter be amended, unless otherwise specifically provided herein.

C. Exemption from tax. No tax shall be imposed under the authority of this chapter on bingo or amusement games when such activities or any combination thereof are conducted by any bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization as defined in Chapter 9.46 RCW, which organization has no paid operating or management personnel and has gross receipts from bingo or amusement games, or any combination thereof, not exceeding $5,000 per year less the amount awarded as cash or merchandise prizes. For raffles conducted by bona fide charitable or nonprofit organizations, no tax shall be imposed under this chapter on the first $10,000 per year of gross receipts, less the amount awarded as cash or merchandise for prizes.

D. House-banked card rooms. Pursuant to RCW 9.46.295 and to the city’s police power and legislative authority, the operation or conduct of house-banked card rooms by any person, association, or organization as a commercial stimulant, as defined in Chapter 9.46 RCW, is allowed within the city of Kent pursuant to KCC Title 15. It is further provided that bona fide charitable or nonprofit organizations, as defined in Chapter 9.46 RCW, may operate or conduct social card games if said social card games have been duly licensed by the Washington State Gambling Commission and if they are otherwise operated or conducted in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. A violation of this section shall not be subject to KCC 1.01.140.

(Ord. No. 1888, § 1; Ord. No. 2050, § 1; Ord. No. 3362, § 1, 9-16-97; Ord. No. 3460, § 1, 6-1-99; Ord. No. 3949, § 1, 4-6-10; Ord. No. 4084, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4257, § 1, 11-21-17; Ord. No. 4342, § 2, 11-19-19. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.16.010)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 9.46.110.


3.21.020 Administration and collection. Revised 1/20

The administrative provisions contained in Chapter 3.29 KCC shall be fully applicable to the provisions of this chapter except as expressly stated to the contrary herein. The administration and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be by the finance director, pursuant to the rules and regulations of the State Gambling Commission. The finance director shall adopt and publish such rules and regulations as may be reasonably necessary to enable the collection of the tax imposed herein.

(Ord. No. 1888, § 3; Ord. No. 3362, § 1, 9-16-97; Ord. No. 4257, § 1, 11-21-17; Ord. No. 4342, § 2, 11-19-19. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.16.020)


3.21.030 Filing declaration of intent. Revised 1/20

For the purpose of identifying who shall be subject to the tax imposed by this chapter, any person, association, or organization intending to conduct or operate any gambling activity authorized by RCW 9.46.010 et seq. shall, prior to commencement of any such activity, file with the finance director a sworn declaration of intent to conduct or operate such activity, together with a copy of the license issued in accordance with RCW 9.46.010 et seq. Thereafter, for any period covered by such state license or any renewal thereof, any person, association, or organization shall, on or before the fifteenth day of the month following the end of the quarterly period in which the tax accrued, file with the finance director a sworn statement on a form to be provided and prescribed by the city council for the purpose of ascertaining the tax due for the preceding quarterly period.

(Ord. No. 1888, § 4; Ord. No. 3362, § 1, 9-16-97; Ord. No. 4257, § 1, 11-21-17; Ord. No. 4342, § 2, 11-19-19. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.16.030)


3.21.040 Tax due. Revised 1/20

A. Quarterly tax reporting and payment. Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section for taxes due in excess of $50,000 annually, the tax imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable in quarterly installments.

B. Monthly tax reporting and payment. The tax imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable in monthly installments when the gambling taxes due in the previous calendar year were in excess of $50,000. In that event, the tax remittance, together with the return forms, shall be made on or before the final day of the month immediately after the month in which the tax accrued.

1. Whenever any person, association, or organization taxed under this chapter quits business, sells out, or otherwise disposes of its business, or terminates the business, any tax due shall become due and payable immediately, and such taxpayer shall, within 10 days after the last date the establishment is open for business, file a return and pay the tax due.

2. Whenever it appears to the finance director that the collection of taxes from any person, association, or organization may be in jeopardy, the finance director, after not less than 10 days’ notice to the taxpayer, is authorized to require that the taxpayer remit taxes due and returns at such shorter intervals than otherwise provided, as the finance director deems appropriate under the circumstances.

(Ord. No. 3362, § 1, 9-16-97; Ord. No. 3949, § 2, 4-6-10; Ord. No. 4257, § 1, 11-21-17; Ord. No. 4342, § 2, 11-19-19)


3.21.041 Administration and collection of tax. Revised 1/20

Repealed by Ord. No. 4342.

(Ord. No. 3362, § 1, 9-16-97; Ord. No. 4257, § 1, 11-21-17)


3.21.042 Method of payment. Revised 1/20

Repealed by Ord. No. 4342.

(Ord. No. 3362, § 1, 9-16-97; Ord. No. 4257, § 1, 11-21-17)


3.21.043 Failure to make timely payment of tax or fee. Revised 1/20

Repealed by Ord. No. 4342.

(Ord. No. 1888, § 5; Ord. No. 2034, § 1; Ord. No. 2603, § 1; Ord. No. 3059, § 1, 8-4-92; Ord. No. 3362, § 1, 9-16-97; Ord. No. 3949, § 3, 4-6-10; Ord. No. 4257, § 1, 11-21-17. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.16.040)


3.21.050 Records required. Revised 1/20

A. Each person, association, or organization engaging in an activity taxable under this chapter shall maintain records respecting that activity which truly, completely, and accurately disclose all information necessary to determine the taxpayer’s tax liability hereunder during each base tax period. Such records shall be kept and maintained for a period of not less than three years. In addition, all information and items required by the Washington State Gambling Commission under Chapter 230-08 WAC, and the United States Internal Revenue Service, respecting taxation, shall be kept and maintained for the periods required by those agencies.

B. All books, records, and other items required to be kept and maintained under this section shall be subject to and immediately made available for inspection and audit at any time, with or without notice, at the place where such records are kept upon the demand of the finance director or his designee for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter.

C. Where the taxpayer does not keep all of the books, records, or items required to be kept or maintained under this section within the jurisdiction of the city so that the auditor may examine them conveniently, the taxpayer shall either:

1. Produce and make available for inspection in this jurisdiction all of the required books, records, or other items within 10 days following a request by the auditor that he do so;

2. Bear the actual cost of inspection by the auditor or his designee at the location of which books, records or items are located; provided, that a taxpayer choosing to bear these costs shall pay in advance to the finance director the estimated costs thereof, including, but not limited to, round trip fare by the most rapid means, lodging, meals, and incidental expenses. The actual amounts due or to be refunded for expenses shall be determined following the examination of the records.

D. A taxpayer who fails, neglects, or refuses to produce such books and records either within or without this jurisdiction, in addition to being subject to other civil and criminal penalties provided by this chapter, shall be subject to a jeopardy fee or tax assessment by the auditor which penalty fee or jeopardy assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct and shall be the amount of the fee or tax owing by the taxpayer unless he can prove otherwise. The taxpayer shall be notified by the finance director by posting in the mails of the United States, addressed to the taxpayer to the last address on file with the finance department, a statement of the amount of tax so determined by jeopardy assessment, together with any penalty and/or interest, and the total of such amounts shall thereupon become immediately due and payable.

(Ord. No. 1888, § 8; Ord. No. 3362, § 1, 9-16-97; Ord. No. 4257, § 1, 11-21-17; Ord. No. 4342, § 2, 11-19-19. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.16.050)


3.21.051 Overpayment or underpayment of tax. Revised 1/20

Repealed by Ord. No. 4342.

(Ord. No. 3362, § 1, 9-16-97; Ord. No. 4257, § 1, 11-21-17)


3.21.052 Failure to make return. Revised 1/20

Repealed by Ord. No. 4342.

(Ord. No. 3362, § 1, 9-16-97; Ord. No. 4257, § 1, 11-21-17)


3.21.053 Tax additional to others. Revised 1/20

Repealed by Ord. No. 4342.

(Ord. No. 3362, § 1, 9-16-97; Ord. No. 4257, § 1, 11-21-17)


3.21.054 Finance director to make rules. Revised 1/20

Repealed by Ord. No. 4342.

(Ord. No. 3362, § 1, 9-16-97; Ord. No. 4257, § 1, 11-21-17)


3.21.055 Taxes, penalties, service charges, and fees constitute debt to municipality. Revised 1/20

Any tax due and unpaid under this chapter and all penalties, service charges, or fees shall constitute a debt to the city. The city may, pursuant to Chapter 19.16 RCW, use a collection agency to collect outstanding debts, or it may seek collection by court proceedings, which remedies shall be in addition to all other existing remedies. Further, as provided for in RCW 9.46.110(4), as now enacted or hereafter amended, taxes and associated penalties and charges imposed under this chapter shall become a lien upon personal and real property used in the gambling activity in the same manner as provided for under RCW 84.60.010 for property taxes. The lien shall attach on the date the tax becomes due and shall relate back and have priority against real and personal property to the same extent as ad valorem taxes.

(Ord. No. 3362, § 1, 9-16-97; Ord. No. 3949, § 4, 4-6-10; Ord. No. 4257, § 1, 11-21-17; Ord. No. 4342, § 2, 11-19-19)


3.21.060 Penalties. Revised 1/20

Any person who shall fail or refuse to pay the tax as required in this chapter, or who shall willfully disobey any rule or regulation promulgated by the city council under this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $250 or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any such fine shall be in addition to the tax required. Officers, directors, and managers of any organization conducting gambling activities shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of the tax and for the payment of any fine imposed under this chapter.

(Ord. No. 1888, § 6; Ord. No. 3362, § 1, 9-16-97; Ord. No. 4257, § 1, 11-21-17; Ord. No. 4342, § 2, 11-19-19. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.16.060)


Chapter 3.22 LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS*

Sections:

3.22.010    Procedures relating to local improvement districts and utility local improvement districts. 

3.22.020    Powers and duties of city engineer – Assessment roll. 

3.22.030    Delinquent installments – Penalties. 

3.22.040    Notice of delinquent assessments. 

3.22.050    Foreclosure of delinquent assessments. 

3.22.060    Issuance of bonds. 

*Cross reference(s) – Local improvement district bond guarantee fund, § 3.40.500; assessments for local improvements, ch. 6.04; street improvement reimbursement agreements, ch. 6.05.


3.22.010 Procedures relating to local improvement districts and utility local improvement districts.

A local improvement, the cost of which is to be borne in whole or in part by special assessments on the property benefited thereby, may be ordered only by an ordinance, pursuant either to a resolution or petition therefor and in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 35.43 RCW through Chapter 35.56 RCW, as amended.

(Ord. No. 1979, § 1; Ord. No. 2563, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.20.010)


3.22.020 Powers and duties of city engineer – Assessment roll.

A. The city engineer is designated as the officer responsible for determining the sufficiency and accuracy of any petition filed to initiate a proceeding for the formation of a local improvement district or utility local improvement district. Upon the filing of a petition found by the city engineer to be sufficient or upon the adoption of a resolution initiating a proceeding for the formation of a local improvement district or utility local improvement district, the city engineer shall cause an estimate to be made of the cost and expense of the proposed improvement and shall certify it to the city council, together with all papers and information in the city engineer’s possession touching the proposed improvement, a description of the boundaries of the district, and a statement of what portion of the cost and expense of the improvement should be borne by the property owners within the proposed district.

B. The city engineer shall prepare the final plans and contract documents and shall obtain bids for the construction of the improvement.

C. As soon as possible after an ordinance ordering the formation of a local improvement takes effect and after the cost and expense thereof can be determined, the city engineer shall make out a preliminary assessment roll and certify the same to the city council, which preliminary assessment roll shall contain the description of each separate lot, tract parcel of land or other property to be assessed, the amount to be charged, levied or assessed against the same, and the name of the owner thereof, if known.

Ord. No. 2563, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.20.020)


3.22.030 Delinquent installments – Penalties.

Whenever any installment upon any local improvement district assessment or utility local improvement district assessment shall become delinquent, each of such delinquent installments remaining unpaid at the date of delinquency shall have added thereto a penalty equal to the rate of interest provided by ordinance for the bonds or installment note or notes issued to pay the costs of the improvement in such local improvement district or utility local improvement district plus five (5) percent. When not otherwise provided by ordinance, such delinquent installments shall bear interest at the same rate as is provided by ordinance for the final assessment roll for such local improvement district or utility local improvement district or for the bonds or installment note or notes issued in payment or part payment of the cost of the improvement in such local improvement district or utility local improvement district.

(Ord. No. 2563, § 3. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.20.030)


3.22.040 Notice of delinquent assessments.

It shall be the duty of the city treasurer on or before the first day of July of each year to notify by certified mail the persons whose names appear on the assessment roll as the owners of property charged with assessments or installments which are more than two (2) years delinquent on the first day of January preceding, or for which the final installment has been delinquent since the first day of January of the preceding year, for the purpose of foreclosing the delinquent assessment or delinquent installment as provided by Chapter 35.50 RCW. If the person whose name appears on the tax rolls of the King County assessor as the owner of the property, or the address shown for the owner on such rolls, differs from that appearing on the city assessment roll, then the city treasurer shall also mail a copy of the notice to that person or that address. The notice shall state the amount due upon each separate lot, tract, or parcel of land and the date after which proceedings to foreclose will be commenced.

(Ord. No. 2563, § 4. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.20.040)


3.22.050 Foreclosure of delinquent assessments.

When any local improvement district or utility local improvement district assessment is payable in installments, upon failure to pay any installment due, the assessment shall become immediately due and payable, and the collection thereof shall be enforced by foreclosure. The payment of all delinquent installments, together with interest, penalty and costs, at any time before the entry of judgment in foreclosure shall extend the time of payment on the remainder of the assessment installments as if there had been no delinquency or foreclosure. Foreclosure proceedings may be commenced at any time on or before November 15 of the year in which, on the first day of January of such year, two (2) installments of any local improvement district or utility local improvement district assessment were delinquent or the final installment was delinquent for more than one (1) year. In case of foreclosure, there shall be added to the costs and expenses provided by Chapter 35.50 RCW, such reasonable attorneys’ fees as the court may adjudge to be equitable, and the amount thereof shall be apportioned to each delinquent assessment or installment appearing on that roll. When one (1) or more delinquent installments are paid before the foreclosure proceedings are completed, payment of such costs shall be a prerequisite to the city’s dismissal of such proceedings unless otherwise ordered by the court.

(Ord. No. 2563, § 5; Ord. No. 2650, § 2; Ord. No. 2675. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.20.050)


3.22.060 Issuance of bonds.

All local improvement district and utility local improvement district bonds shall be issued and registered in compliance with the applicable provisions of state and federal law and the ordinances authorizing the issuance and sale of the bonds.

(Ord. No. 2563, § 7. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.20.060)


Chapter 3.23 LODGING TAX*

Sections:

3.23.010    Definitions. 

3.23.020    Levied – Amount. 

3.23.030    Tax deemed in addition to license fees or other taxes. 

3.23.040    Fund created – Use of funds. 

3.23.050    Collection and administration. 

*Cross reference(s) – Lodging tax advisory committee, ch. 2.54.


3.23.010 Definitions.

The definitions of the terms “selling price,” “seller,” “buyer,” “consumer,” and all other definitions set forth in RCW 82.08.010 and the definition of “sale at retail,” and “retail sale” set forth in RCW 82.04.050 as currently enacted or hereinafter amended are hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein. The definitions of the terms “acquisition,” “municipality,” “operation,” “person,” “tourism,” “tourism promotion,” “tourism-related facility” and “tourist” set forth in RCW 67.28.080 as currently enacted or hereinafter amended are hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein. 

(Ord. No. 3426, 1, 12-8-98)


3.23.020 Levied – Amount.

Effective February 1, 1999, there is hereby levied, as authorized by RCW 67.28.181, a special excise tax of one (1) percent on the sale of or charge made for the furnishing of lodging that is subject to tax under Chapter 82.08 RCW. Pursuant to RCW 82.08.010 and 82.04.050(1)(f), the tax imposed applies to the sale of or charge for the furnishing of lodging by a hotel, rooming house, tourist court, motel, or trailer camp, and the granting of any similar license to use real property, as distinguished from the renting or leasing of real property. It shall be presumed that the occupancy of real property for a continuous period of one (1) month or more constitutes a rental or lease of real property and not a mere license to use and enjoy the same. 

(Ord. No. 3426, 1, 12-8-98)


3.23.030 Tax deemed in addition to license fees or other taxes.

The tax levied in this chapter shall be in addition to any license fee or any other tax imposed or levied under any law or any other ordinance of the city. 

(Ord. No. 3426, 1, 12-8-98)


3.23.040 Fund created – Use of funds.

There is created a special fund in the treasury of the city and all taxes collected under this chapter shall be placed in this special fund to be used solely for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of tourism promotion, or acquisition of or operation of tourism-related facilities or to pay for other uses as authorized in Chapter 67.28 RCW, as now permitted or hereafter amended. Until withdrawn for use, the monies accumulated in such fund may be invested by the city in any manner authorized by law. 

(Ord. No. 3426, 1, 12-8-98)


3.23.050 Collection and administration.

The Washington State Department of Revenue is designated and shall act as an agent of the city for purposes of collection and administration of the tax in the manner provided by and consistent with State law. 

(Ord. No. 3426, 1, 12-8-98)

State law reference(s) – RCW 67.28.181 provides that municipalities such as the city of Kent are authorized to levy and collect a special excise tax on the sale or charge made for the furnishing of lodging that is subject to tax under Chapter 82.08 RCW.


Chapter 3.24 REAL ESTATE EXCISE TAX


(Repealed by Ord. No. 3592)


Chapter 3.24 REAL ESTATE EXCISE TAX


(Repealed by Ord. No. 3592)


Chapter 3.25 TARGETED RESIDENTIAL INVESTMENT PROGRAM Revised 7/20

Sections:

3.25.010    Purpose. Revised 7/20

3.25.020    Definitions. Revised 7/20

3.25.030    General terms of the tax exemptions. Revised 7/20

3.25.040    General project eligibility. Revised 7/20

3.25.050    Midway residential targeted area guidelines. Revised 7/20

3.25.060    Downtown residential targeted area guidelines. Revised 7/20

3.25.070    Application procedure. Revised 7/20

3.25.080    Application review and issuance of conditional certificate. Revised 7/20

3.25.090    Extension of conditional certificate. Revised 7/20

3.25.100    Application for final certificate. Revised 7/20

3.25.110    Issuance of final certificate. Revised 7/20

3.25.120    Annual certification and report. Revised 7/20

3.25.130    Cancellation of tax exemption. Revised 7/20

Prior legislation: Ords. 3560, 3922, 4111, 4157, and 4222.


3.25.010 Purpose.  Revised 7/20

As provided for in Chapter 84.14 RCW, the purpose of this chapter is to provide limited exemptions from ad valorem property taxation for multifamily housing in designated urban centers to:

1. Encourage increased residential opportunities within urban centers designated by the city council as residential targeted areas; and

2. Stimulate new construction on vacant and underutilized sites and the rehabilitation of existing vacant and underutilized buildings for multifamily housing in residential targeted areas to increase and improve housing opportunities; and

3. Assist in directing future population growth in designated urban centers, thereby reducing development pressure on single-family residential neighborhoods; and

4. Achieve development densities which are more conducive to transit use in designated urban centers. 

(Ord. No. 4360, § 2, 5-19-20)


3.25.020 Definitions. Revised 7/20

When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context indicates otherwise:

1. Administrator means the Kent economic development director or his/her designee.

2. Multifamily housing means one or more new multistory buildings designed for permanent residential occupancy, each with four or more dwelling units.

3. Owner means the property owner of record.

4. Permanent residential occupancy means multifamily housing that provides either rental or owner occupancy on a nontransient basis. This includes owner-occupied or rental accommodation that is leased for a period of at least one month. This excludes hotels and motels that predominately offer rental accommodation on a daily or weekly basis.

5. Residential targeted areas include (a) the geographic area of greater Downtown Kent bordered generally by Titus Street, the Green River, Willis Street, South 240th/James Street, and Cloudy Street, and only including zones that permit multifamily housing, and (b) the Midway subarea as laid out in the Midway subarea plan, which geographic area is bordered generally by Interstate 5 on the east, and the city limits on the west and south. See Exhibits A and B to Ordinance No. 4360 for maps of the greater Downtown Kent residential targeted area and Midway residential targeted area, respectively.

(Ord. No. 4360, § 2, 5-19-20)


3.25.030 General terms of the tax exemptions. Revised 7/20

A. Duration of exemption. The value of improvements qualifying under this chapter is exempt from ad valorem property taxation beginning January 1st of the year immediately following the calendar year after issuance of the final certificate of tax exemption.

B. Limits on exemption. The exemption does not apply to the value of land or to the value of improvements not qualifying under this chapter, nor does the exemption apply to increases in assessed valuation of land and nonqualifying improvements. This chapter does not apply to increases in assessed valuation made by the assessor on nonqualifying portions of buildings and value of land nor to increases made by lawful order of a county board of equalization, the Department of Revenue, or a county, to a class of property throughout the county or specific area of the county to achieve the uniformity of assessment or appraisal required by law. At the conclusion of the exemption period, the new housing cost shall be considered as new construction for the purposes of Chapter 84.55 RCW.

(Ord. No. 4360, § 2, 5-19-20)


3.25.040 General project eligibility. Revised 7/20

A proposed project must meet the specific project eligibility requirements of the residential targeted area provided in this chapter and the following general requirements in order to be considered for a property tax exemption:

A. Location. The project must be located within a designated residential targeted area as defined in KCC 3.25.020. If any portion of a legally created lot is within the residential targeted area, then the entire lot shall be deemed to lie within the residential targeted area.

B. Tenant displacement. Prior to approval of an application under KCC 3.25.080, the applicant shall provide the administrator with documentation satisfactory to the administrator that RCW 84.14.030 has been complied with, including, but not limited to, the following:

1. All tenants of residential rental structures on the project site have been notified per state statute of the termination of their tenancy;

2. The applicant’s efforts to refer tenants to similar, alternative housing resources; and

3. Any other actions the applicant has taken to minimize the hardship on tenants whose tenancies will be terminated by the proposed project.

C. Size. The project must include at least four units of multifamily housing. At least 50 percent of the space within the proposed project shall be intended for permanent residential occupancy.

D. Proposed completion date. New construction or rehabilitation of multifamily housing must be completed within three years from the date of approval of the application.

E. Compliance with guidelines and standards. The project must be designed to comply with the city’s comprehensive plan, building, fire, housing, and zoning codes, downtown design review guidelines, multifamily design review, mixed use design review as applicable, and any other applicable regulations. The project must comply with any other standards and guidelines adopted by the city council for the residential targeted area.

F. Parking. Parking shall be located in structured parking garages, under buildings, or underground.

G. Onsite management. Projects creating 100 or more rental units under this section must include 24-hour, seven-day-per-week onsite management by a company with at least five years of experience in rental management.

H. Use of existing financial incentive programs. The project shall not be eligible for exemption under this chapter if its construction is being aided in whole or in part by any local, state or federal financial incentives, tax credits, or other grant funding programs.

(Ord. No. 4360, § 2, 5-19-20)


3.25.050 Midway residential targeted area guidelines.  Revised 7/20

In the Midway residential targeted area, only new construction projects shall be eligible for tax exemptions under this chapter as follows:

A. Eight-year exemption. The value of new housing construction improvements qualifying under this chapter is exempt from ad valorem property taxation for eight successive years beginning January 1st of the year immediately following the calendar year of issuance of the certificate.

B. Twelve-year exemption. The value of new housing construction improvements qualifying under this chapter is exempt from ad valorem property taxation for 12 successive years beginning January 1st of the year immediately following the calendar year of issuance of the certificate, if 20 percent of the residential units will be rented or sold as affordable housing units to low-income households. For purposes of this subsection, low-income household means a single person, family, or unrelated persons living together whose adjusted income is at or below 30 percent of the median family income adjusted for family size for King County, as reported by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. For the purposes of housing intended for owner occupancy, affordable housing means residential housing that is within the means of low-income households.

(Ord. No. 4360, § 2, 5-19-20)


3.25.060 Downtown residential targeted area guidelines. Revised 7/20

In the downtown residential targeted area, new construction, conversion, and rehabilitation projects shall be eligible for tax exemptions under this chapter as follows:

A. Eight-year exemption. The value of new housing construction, conversion, and rehabilitation improvements qualifying under this chapter is exempt from ad valorem property taxation for eight successive years beginning January 1st of the year immediately following the calendar year of issuance of the certificate.

B. Twelve-year exemption. The value of new housing construction, conversion, and rehabilitation improvements qualifying under this chapter is exempt from ad valorem property taxation for 12 successive years beginning January 1st of the year immediately following the calendar year of issuance of the certificate, if all of the residential units will be sold as affordable housing units for owner occupancy to moderate-income households. For purposes of this subsection, moderate-income household means a single person, family, or unrelated persons living together whose adjusted income is between 100 and 120 percent of the median family income adjusted for family size for King County, as reported by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. For the purposes of housing intended for owner occupancy, affordable housing means residential housing that is within the means of moderate-income households.

(Ord. No. 4360, § 2, 5-19-20)


3.25.070 Application procedure.  Revised 7/20

A property owner who wishes to propose a project for a tax exemption shall complete the following procedures:

A. The application provided by the city shall be filed with the administrator along with the required initial application fee of $1,000. The application shall be filed prior to the issuance of the building permit for the project.

B. A complete application shall include:

1. A completed city of Kent application form setting forth the grounds for the exemption.

2. A brief written description of the project, and floor and site plans of the proposed project, which may be revised by the owner, provided such revisions are made and presented to the administrator prior to the city’s final action on the exemption application.

3. A statement from the owner acknowledging the potential tax liability when the project ceases to be eligible for exemption under this chapter.

4. An affidavit signed by the owner stating the occupancy record of the property for a period of 12 months prior to filing the application.

5. Verification of the correctness of the information submitted by the owner’s signature and affirmation made under penalty of perjury under the laws of the state of Washington.

(Ord. No. 4360, § 2, 5-19-20)


3.25.080 Application review and issuance of conditional certificate.  Revised 7/20

The administrator may certify as eligible an application which is determined to comply with the requirements of this chapter. A decision to approve or deny an application shall be made within 90 calendar days of receipt of a complete application.

A. Approval. The administrator may approve the application if he/she finds that:

1. The proposed project is or will be, at the time of completion, in conformance with all applicable local plans, regulations, and design guidelines.

2. The owner has complied with all standards and guidelines adopted by the city under this chapter, including but not limited to the project eligibility and application requirements.

B. Contract required. If an application is approved, the applicant shall enter into a contract with the city, approved by the city council, regarding the terms and conditions of the project under this chapter.

C. Issuance of conditional certificate. Following approval of the contract, the administrator shall issue a conditional certificate of acceptance of tax exemption. The conditional certificate shall expire three years from the date of approval unless an extension is granted as provided in this chapter.

D. Application denial. If an application is denied, the administrator shall state in writing the reasons for denial and shall send notice to the applicant at the applicant’s last known address within 10 calendar days of the denial. Per RCW 84.14.070, an applicant may appeal a denial to the city council within 30 calendar days of receipt of the denial by filing a complete appeal application and council appeal fee with the city clerk. The appeal before the city council will be based on the record made before the administrator. The administrator’s decision will be upheld unless the applicant can show that there is no substantial evidence on the record to support the administrator’s decision. The city council’s decision on appeal will be final.

E. Amendment of contract. An owner may request an amendment(s) to the contract by submitting a request in writing to the administrator, together with a fee of $500, at any time within three years of the date of the approval of the contract. The date for expiration of the conditional certificate shall not be extended by contract amendment unless all the conditions for extension set forth in KCC 3.25.090 are met.

(Ord. No. 4360, § 2, 5-19-20)


3.25.090 Extension of conditional certificate. Revised 7/20

A. The conditional certificate and time for completion of the project may be extended by the administrator for a period not to exceed a total of 24 consecutive months. To obtain an extension, the applicant must submit a written request, along with a processing fee of $50, stating the grounds for the extension. An extension may be granted if the administrator determines that:

1. The anticipated failure to complete construction or rehabilitation within the required time period is due to circumstances beyond the control of the owner;

2. The owner has been acting and could reasonably be expected to continue to act in good faith and with due diligence; and

3. All the conditions of the original contract between the applicant and the city will be satisfied upon completion of the project.

B. If an extension is denied, the administrator shall state in writing the reason for denial and shall send notice to the applicant’s last known address within 10 calendar days of the denial. An applicant may appeal the denial of an extension to the hearing examiner within 14 calendar days of receipt of the denial by filing a complete appeal application and appeal of administrative decision fee with the administrator. The appeal before the hearing examiner shall be as provided in Chapter 12.01 KCC for a Process I action. No appeal to the city council is provided from the hearing examiner’s decision.

(Ord. No. 4360, § 2, 5-19-20)


3.25.100 Application for final certificate.  Revised 7/20

Upon completion of the improvements agreed upon in the contract between the applicant and the city and upon issuance of a temporary or permanent certificate of occupancy, the applicant may request a final certificate of tax exemption by filing with the administrator the following, in accordance with RCW 84.14.090, along with a $1,000 fee:

A. A statement of expenditures made with respect to each multifamily housing unit and the total expenditures made with respect to the entire property;

B. A description of the completed work and a statement of qualification for the exemption;

C. The total monthly rent or total sale amount of each multifamily housing unit rented or sold to date;

D. Any additional information requested by the city pursuant to meeting any reporting requirements under Chapter 84.14 RCW; and

E. A statement that the work was completed within the required three-year period or any authorized extension.

(Ord. No. 4360, § 2, 5-19-20)


3.25.110 Issuance of final certificate.  Revised 7/20

Within 30 calendar days of receipt of all materials required for a final certificate, the administrator shall determine whether the specific improvements satisfy the requirements of the contract, application, and this chapter.

A. Granting of final certificate. If the administrator determines that the project has been completed in accordance with this chapter and the contract between the applicant and the city has been completed within the authorized time period, the city shall, within 10 calendar days of the expiration of the 30-day review period above, file a final certificate of tax exemption with the King County assessor.

B. Recording. The administrator is authorized to cause to be recorded, at the owner’s expense, in the real property records of the King County department of records and elections, the contract with the city, as amended if applicable, and such other document(s) as will identify such terms and conditions of eligibility for exemption under this chapter as the administrator deems appropriate for recording.

C. Denial and appeal. The administrator shall notify the applicant in writing that a final certificate will not be filed if the administrator determines that:

1. The improvements were not completed within the authorized time period;

2. The improvements were not completed in accordance with the contract between the applicant and the city; or

3. The owner’s property is otherwise not qualified under this chapter.

An applicant may appeal a denial to the hearing examiner within 14 calendar days of issuance of the denial of a final certificate by filing a complete appeal application and appeal of administrative decision fee with the administrator. The appeal before the hearing examiner shall be as provided in Chapter 12.01 KCC for a Process I action. No appeal to the city council is provided from the hearing examiner’s decision. The applicant may appeal the hearing examiner’s decision to the King County superior court, under RCW 34.05.510 through 34.05.598, if the appeal is filed within 30 calendar days of receiving notice of that decision.

(Ord. No. 4360, § 2, 5-19-20)


3.25.120 Annual certification and report.  Revised 7/20

Within 30 calendar days after the first anniversary of the date the city issued the final certificate of tax exemption and each year thereafter for the duration of the tax exemption period, the property owner shall file a notarized declaration and annual report with the administrator indicating the following:

A. A statement of occupancy and vacancy of the multifamily units during the previous 12 months;

B. A certification that the property has not changed use and continues to be in compliance with the contract with the city and this chapter;

C. A description of any subsequent improvements or changes to the property made after the city issued the final certificate of tax exemption;

D. The total monthly rent of each multifamily housing unit rented or the total sale amount of each multifamily housing unit sold to an initial purchaser during the 12 months ending with the anniversary date;

E. A breakdown of the number, type, and specific multifamily housing units rented or sold during the 12 months ending with the anniversary date; and

F. Any additional information requested by the city pursuant to meeting any reporting requirements under Chapter 84.14 RCW.

City staff may also conduct onsite verification of the declaration and reporting. Failure to submit the annual declaration and report shall result in a review of the exemption per RCW 84.14.110.

(Ord. No. 4360, § 2, 5-19-20)


3.25.130 Cancellation of tax exemption. Revised 7/20

A. If the administrator determines (1) the owner is not complying with the terms of the contract or this chapter; (2) the use of the property is changed or will be changed to a use that is other than residential; (3) the project violates applicable zoning requirements, land use regulations, building or fire code requirements; or (4) the property for any reason no longer qualifies for the tax exemption, the tax exemption shall be canceled and additional taxes, interest, and penalties imposed pursuant to state law. This cancellation may occur in conjunction with the annual review or at any other time when noncompliance has been determined. If the owner intends to convert the multifamily housing to another use, the owner shall notify the administrator and the King County assessor in writing within 60 calendar days of the change in use. Upon such change in use, the tax exemption shall be canceled and additional taxes, interest, and penalties imposed pursuant to state law.

B. Notice and appeal. Upon determining that a tax exemption is to be canceled, the administrator shall notify the owner by mail, return receipt requested. The property owner may appeal the determination by filing a notice of appeal and appeal of administrative decision fee with the city clerk within 30 calendar days, specifying the factual and legal basis for the appeal. The hearing examiner will conduct a hearing under Chapter 12.01 KCC for a Process I action. An aggrieved party may appeal the hearing examiner’s decision to the King County superior court under RCW 34.05.510 through 34.05.598.

(Ord. No. 4360, § 2, 5-19-20)


Chapter 3.26 ADMISSIONS TAX Revised 1/20

Sections:

3.26.010    Exercise of revenue license power. Revised 1/20

3.26.015    General administrative provisions apply. Revised 1/20

3.26.020    Definitions. Revised 1/20

3.26.025    Tax imposed. Revised 1/20

3.26.030    Tax rate. Revised 1/20

3.26.035    Exemptions. Revised 1/20

3.26.036    Deductions. Revised 1/20

3.26.040    Tax due. Revised 1/20

3.26.050    Repealed. Revised 1/20

3.26.060    Repealed. Revised 1/20

3.26.070    Repealed. Revised 1/20

3.26.080    Repealed. Revised 1/20

3.26.090    Repealed. Revised 1/20

3.26.100    Repealed. Revised 1/20

3.26.110    Repealed. Revised 1/20


3.26.010 Exercise of revenue license power. Revised 1/20

The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the power of the city to license for revenue. The provisions of this chapter are subject to periodic statutory or administrative rule changes or judicial interpretations of the ordinances or rules. The responsibility rests with the licensee or taxpayer to reconfirm tax computation procedures and remain in compliance with the city code.

(Ord. No. 4342, § 3, 11-19-19)


3.26.015 General administrative provisions apply. Revised 1/20

The administrative provisions contained in Chapter 3.29 KCC shall be fully applicable to the provisions of this chapter except as expressly stated to the contrary herein.

(Ord. No. 4342, § 3, 11-19-19)


3.26.020 Definitions. Revised 1/20

The following definitions shall apply throughout this chapter:

A. Admission charge, in addition to its usual and ordinary meaning, means a monetary charge for an event open to the public including, but not limited to, the following:

1. A charge made for season tickets or subscriptions;

2. A cover charge or a charge made for use of seats and tables, reserved or otherwise, and similar accommodations;

3. A charge made for food and refreshments in any place where any free entertainment, recreation, or amusement is provided;

4. If a general admission fee is charged for entry onto the premises where a rental occurs and if the rental of equipment or facilities is necessary to the enjoyment of a privilege for which a general admission is charged, the combined charges shall be considered as the admission charge; provided, however, that a general admission fee must be charged for entry onto the premises where a rental occurs before the rental can be taxed under this chapter;

5. If a general admission fee is charged for entry onto the premises where an activity occurs (such as, and without limitation, a bowling alley or ice skating rink) and if the activity charge is necessary to the enjoyment of a privilege for which a general admission is charged, the combined charges shall be considered as the admission charge; provided, however, that a general admission fee must be charged for entry onto the premises where an activity occurs before the activity charge can be taxed under this chapter;

6. Automobile parking charges if the amount of the charge is determined according to the number of passengers in the automobile;

7. If the ticket price is accompanied by a service charge, mailing fee, or other ancillary payment, per ticket and/or per order, whether or not they are printed on the ticket, the admission tax shall be based upon the total sum of the admission price plus any such surcharge(s).

8. Any other charge for entrance and observation.

B. Collecting entity means any person, business, association, organization, or other entity entrusted with the collection and remittance of admission taxes under this chapter.

C. Governmental entity means any federal, state, or local government, or branch thereof, and also includes any public facility or any public facility, service, or utility district that is exempt from federal income taxation pursuant to Section 501(c)(1) or (3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as it may be amended from time to time.

D. Nonprofit tax-exempt organization means an organization, corporation, or association organized and operated for the advancement, appreciation, public exhibition, or performance, preservation, study, and/or teaching of the performing arts, visual arts, history, science, or a public charity providing human services, or a public education entity, which is currently exempt from federal income taxation pursuant to Section 501(c)(1) or (3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as it may be amended from time to time.

E. Secondary or elementary school means any public or private primary school, middle school, junior high school, high school, or any accredited college, junior college, university, or the recognized student body association thereof.

F. By way of illustration only, this tax applies to any nonexempt admission charge, as defined in this section, collected for admission to any theater, cinema, dance hall, cabaret, adult entertainment cabaret, circus, side show, outdoor amusement park, dinner theatre, music concerts, radio shows, and television shows.

G. Chapter shall mean Chapter 3.26 KCC, as it may be amended or replaced from time to time.

(Ord. No. 4342, § 3, 11-19-19)


3.26.025 Tax imposed. Revised 1/20

In accordance with RCW 35.21.280, there is levied and shall be collected a tax from every person, without regard to age, who pays an admission charge to any place within the city limits. The tax shall be measured by applying the rate set forth in this chapter to the admission charge. The tax shall be held in trust by the business, association, organization, or other entity charging and collecting admission taxes until the taxes are remitted to the finance director under KCC 3.26.030. No tax shall be levied on any person who is admitted free of charge and the tax on reduced admission charges shall be calculated on the reduced charge and not on the regular admission charge.

(Ord. No. 3678, § 1, 1‑20‑04; Ord. No. 3964, § 1, 6‑15‑10; Ord. No. 4342, § 3, 11-19-19. Formerly 3.26.010)


3.26.030 Tax rate. Revised 1/20

The amount of the tax charged on admission charges shall be equal to the admission charge multiplied by the rate of five percent.

(Ord. No. 3678, § 1, 1‑20‑04; Ord. No. 4342, § 3, 11-19-19. Formerly 3.26.020)


3.26.035 Exemptions. Revised 1/20

No tax shall be imposed under the authority of this chapter on the following:

A. Admission charges for any activity of any elementary or secondary school, any governmental entity, or any nonprofit tax-exempt organization. However, governmental activities operated in the manner of a separate business enterprise shall not be exempt from this tax. By way of example and not limitation, a business enterprise subject to the admissions tax levy could include an event center or golf course, if operated as a business activity in a separate fund.

B. Events sponsored by nonprofit tax-exempt organizations if the nonprofit tax-exempt organization publicly sponsors and promotes the event and the nonprofit tax-exempt organization receives the use and benefit of the admission charges collected.

(Ord. No. 4342, § 3, 11-19-19)


3.26.036 Deductions. Revised 1/20

In computing the tax imposed by this chapter, the following amounts may be deducted from the measure of the tax: Amounts derived from business which the city is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution of this state or the Constitution or laws of the United States.

(Ord. No. 4342, § 3, 11-19-19)


3.26.040 Tax due. Revised 1/20

A. The tax imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable in quarterly installments.

1. Whenever any collecting entity quits business, sells out, or otherwise disposes of its business, or terminates the business, any tax due shall become due and payable immediately, and the collecting entity shall, within 10 days thereafter, submit a return form and pay the tax due.

2. Whenever it appears to the finance director that the collection of taxes from any collecting entity may be in jeopardy, the finance director, after not less than 10 days’ prior written notice to the collecting entity, is authorized to require that the collecting entity remit taxes due and deliver returns at shorter intervals than otherwise provided, as the finance director deems it appropriate under the circumstances.

(Ord. No. 3678, § 1, 1‑20‑04; Ord. No. 4342, § 3, 11-19-19)


3.26.050 Method of payment. Revised 1/20

Repealed by Ord. No. 4342.

(Ord. No. 3678, § 1, 1‑20‑04)


3.26.060 Failure to make timely payment of tax or fee – Penalties.  Revised 1/20

Repealed by Ord. No. 4342.

(Ord. No. 3678, § 1, 1‑20‑04)


3.26.070 Records required. Revised 1/20

Repealed by Ord. No. 4342.

(Ord. No. 3678, § 1, 1-20-04)


3.26.080 Overpayment or underpayment of tax. Revised 1/20

Repealed by Ord. No. 4342.

(Ord. No. 3678, § 1, 1-20-04)


3.26.090 Failure to make return. Revised 1/20

Repealed by Ord. No. 4342.

(Ord. No. 3678, § 1, 1-20-04)


3.26.100 Tax additional to others. Revised 1/20

Repealed by Ord. No. 4342.

(Ord. No. 3678, § 1, 1-20-04)


3.26.110 Finance director to make rules. Revised 1/20

Repealed by Ord. No. 4342.

(Ord. No. 3678, § 1, 1-20-04)


Chapter 3.27 ANNEXATION SALES AND USE TAX

Sections:

3.27.010    Imposition of tax.

3.27.020    Definitions.

3.27.030    Credit against state tax.

3.27.040    Term of tax.

3.27.050    Use of tax revenue.

3.27.060    Limitation of revenues.

3.27.070    Thresholds.


3.27.010 Imposition of tax.

A. There is imposed a sales or use tax, as authorized by RCW 82.14.415, which tax shall be collected from those persons who are taxable by the state under Chapters 82.08 and 82.12 RCW, upon the occurrence of any taxable event within the city.

B. The rate of tax imposed under this chapter shall be 0.2 percent, and shall be in addition to other taxes authorized by law.

(Ord. No. 3947, § 2, 2-16-10)


3.27.020 Definitions.

The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

A. Annexation area means the Panther Lake Annexation Area, and all other areas annexed to Kent after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter that meet the requirements of RCW 82.14.415. The Panther Lake Annexation Area includes all territory described in city of Kent Ordinance No. 3936, which annexed an unincorporated area of King County, Washington, of approximately three thousand three hundred forty-seven (3,347) acres contiguous to the corporate limits of the city of Kent, effective July 1, 2010.

B. Municipal services means those services customarily provided to the public by city government.

C. Fiscal year means the year beginning July 1st and ending the following June 30th.

D. Threshold amount means the maximum amount of tax distributions as determined by the city in accordance with KCC 3.27.070 that the Washington State Department of Revenue shall distribute to the city generated from the tax imposed under this chapter in a fiscal year.

(Ord. No. 3947, § 2, 2-16-10)


3.27.030 Credit against state tax.

The tax authorized under this section shall be a credit against the state tax under Chapter 82.08 or 82.12 RCW. The Washington State Department of Revenue shall perform the collection of these taxes on behalf of the city, at no cost to the city, and shall remit the tax to the city as provided in RCW 82.14.060 and 82.14.415.

(Ord. No. 3947, § 2, 2-16-10)


3.27.040 Term of tax.

A. The tax imposed by this chapter shall only be imposed at the beginning of the state of Washington’s fiscal year and shall continue for no more than ten (10) years from the date the tax is first imposed. Tax rate increases due to additional annexed areas shall be effective on July 1st of the fiscal year following the fiscal year in which the annexation occurred; provided, that notice is given to the Washington State Department of Revenue as set forth in KCC 3.27.070.

B. The tax shall also cease to be distributed to the city for the remainder of the fiscal year once the threshold amount, as set forth pursuant to KCC 3.27.070, has been reached. Distributions of tax under this chapter shall begin again on July 1st of the next fiscal year and continue until the new threshold amount has been reached or June 30th, whichever is sooner. Any revenue generated by the tax in excess of the threshold amount shall belong to the state of Washington.

(Ord. No. 3947, § 2, 2-16-10)


3.27.050 Use of tax revenue.

All revenue collected under this chapter shall be used solely to provide, maintain, and operate municipal services for the annexation area defined by the city for the sales and use tax credit.

(Ord. No. 3947, § 2, 2-16-10)


3.27.060 Limitation of revenues.

The revenues from the tax authorized in this chapter may not exceed the difference between the city’s estimated cost to provide, maintain, and operate municipal services for the annexation area and the general revenues that the city would typically expect to receive from the annexation area during a year. If the revenues from the tax authorized in this chapter and the revenues from the annexation area exceed the costs to provide, maintain, and operate municipal services for the annexation area during a given year, the city shall notify the state Department of Revenue and the tax distributions authorized in this section shall be suspended for the remainder of the year.

(Ord. No. 3947, § 2, 2-16-10)


3.27.070 Thresholds.

A. The threshold amount for the first fiscal year following the annexation and adoption of the tax authorized by this chapter is as follows: three million eight hundred and seventy-two thousand six hundred seventy-eight dollars ($3,872,678).

B. The city finance director shall forward to the Washington State Department of Revenue the threshold amount for the first fiscal year following the annexation and adoption of the tax.

C. No later than March 1st of each year, the finance director shall provide the Washington State Department of Revenue with a new threshold amount for the next fiscal year, and notice of any applicable tax rate changes.

(Ord. No. 3947, § 2, 2-16-10)


Chapter 3.28 BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION TAX – GROSS RECEIPTS Revised 1/20

Sections:

3.28.010    Purpose. Revised 1/20

3.28.020    Exercise of revenue license power. Revised 1/20

3.28.028    Administrative provisions. Revised 1/20

3.28.030    Definitions. Revised 1/20

3.28.040    Agency – Sales and services by agent, consignee, bailee, factor, or auctioneer. Revised 1/20

3.28.050    Imposition of the tax – Tax or fee levied. Revised 1/20

3.28.070    Multiple activities credit when activities take place in one or more cities with eligible gross receipt taxes. Revised 1/20

3.28.071    Tax credit. Revised 1/20

3.28.075    Deductions to prevent multiple taxation of certain manufacturing activities involving more than one city with an eligible gross receipts tax. Revised 1/20

3.28.076    Assignment of gross income derived from intangibles. Revised 1/20

3.28.077    Allocation and apportionment of income when activities take place in more than one jurisdiction. Revised 1/20

3.28.078    Allocation and apportionment of printing and publishing income when activities take place in more than one jurisdiction. Revised 1/20

3.28.090    Exemptions. Revised 1/20

3.28.100    Deductions. Revised 1/20

3.28.120    Tax part of overhead. Revised 1/20

3.28.130    Limitation of revenue received. Revised 1/20

3.28.140    Severability clause. Revised 1/20


3.28.010 Purpose. Revised 1/20

This chapter implements Washington Constitution Article XI, Section 12 and RCW 35A.82.020 and 35A.11.020, which give municipalities the authority to license for revenue. In the absence of a legal or constitutional prohibition, municipalities have the power to define taxation categories as they see fit in order to respond to the unique concerns and responsibilities of local government. The city of Kent has developed over the last half century into a major manufacturing/warehousing hub. However, due to recent changes in sales tax and property tax laws, the city no longer receives sufficient revenue from warehousing activities to support the transportation infrastructure needed to serve warehouse activities. As a result, the city no longer generates sufficient revenue to maintain the level of general city services that supports this business base, and to maintain and operate its considerable past investment in local streets and arterial infrastructure. This chapter, then, is intended to generate additional revenue to maintain, repair, and operate the city’s existing transportation network in order to fairly allocate the cost to provide those services and to maintain that infrastructure to those business entities that contribute most to the use and degradation of city streets.

(Ord. No. 4054, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 4, 11-19-19)


3.28.020 Exercise of revenue license power. Revised 1/20

The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the power of the city to license for revenue. The provisions of this chapter are subject to periodic statutory or administrative rule changes or judicial interpretations of the ordinances or rules. The responsibility rests with the licensee or taxpayer to reconfirm tax computation procedures and remain in compliance with the city code. 

(Ord. No. 4054, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 4, 11-19-19)


3.28.028 Administrative provisions. Revised 1/20

The administrative provisions contained in Chapter 3.29 KCC shall be fully applicable to the provisions of this chapter except as expressly stated to the contrary herein. 

(Ord. No. 4054, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 4, 11-19-19)


3.28.030 Definitions. Revised 1/20

In construing the provisions of this chapter, the following definitions shall be applied. Words in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular. 

A. Advance, reimbursement.

1. Advance means money or credits received by a taxpayer from a customer or client with which the taxpayer is to pay costs or fees on behalf of the customer or client.

2. Reimbursement means money or credits received from a customer or client to repay the taxpayer for money or credits expended by the taxpayer in payment of costs or fees of the customer or client.

B. Agricultural product, farmer.

1. Agricultural product means any product of plant cultivation or animal husbandry including, but not limited to: a product of horticulture, grain cultivation, vermiculture, viticulture, or aquaculture as defined in RCW 15.85.020; plantation Christmas trees; turf; or any animal including but not limited to an animal that is a private sector cultured aquatic product as defined in RCW 15.85.020, or a bird, or insect, or the substances obtained from such an animal. “Agricultural product” does not include animals intended to be pets.

2. Farmer means any person engaged in the business of growing or producing, upon the person’s own lands or upon the lands in which the person has a present right of possession, any agricultural product whatsoever for sale. “Farmer” does not include a person using such products as ingredients in a manufacturing process, or a person growing or producing such products for the person’s own consumption. “Farmer” does not include a person selling any animal or substance obtained therefrom in connection with the person’s business of operating a stockyard or a slaughter or packing house. “Farmer” does not include any person in respect to the business of taking, cultivating, or raising timber.

C. Artistic or cultural organization. As used in this chapter: 

1. The term “artistic or cultural organization” means an organization which is organized and operated exclusively for the purpose of providing artistic or cultural exhibitions, presentations, or performances or cultural or art education programs, as defined in subsection (C)(10) of this section, for viewing or attendance by the general public. 

2. The organization must be a not-for-profit corporation under Chapter 24.03 RCW.

3. The organization must be managed by a governing board of not less than eight individuals, none of whom is a paid employee of the organization or by a corporation sole under Chapter 24.12 RCW.

4. No part of its income may be paid directly or indirectly to its members, stockholders, officers, directors, or trustees except in the form of services rendered by the corporation in accordance with its purposes and bylaws.

5. Salary or compensation paid to its officers and executives must be only for actual services rendered, and at levels comparable to the salary or compensation of like positions within the state.

6. Assets of the corporation must be irrevocably dedicated to the activities for which the exemption is granted and, on the liquidation, dissolution, or abandonment by the corporation, may not inure directly or indirectly to the benefit of any member or individual except a nonprofit organization, association, or corporation which also would be entitled to the exemption.

7. The corporation must be duly licensed or certified when licensing or certification is required by law or regulation.

8. The amounts received that qualify for exemption must be used for the activities for which the exemption is granted.

9. Services must be available regardless of race, color, national origin, ancestry, religion, age, sex, marital status, sexual orientation, Vietnam or disabled veteran status, or the presence of any mental or physical disability.

10. The term artistic or cultural exhibitions, presentations, or performances or cultural or art education programs is limited to:

a. An exhibition or presentation of works of art or objects of cultural or historical significance, such as those commonly displayed in art or history museums;

b. A musical or dramatic performance or series of performances; or

c. An educational seminar or program, or series of such programs, offered by the organization to the general public on an artistic, cultural, or historical subject.

D. Business includes all activities engaged in with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage to the taxpayer or to another person or class, directly or indirectly.

E. Business and occupation tax or gross receipts tax means a tax imposed on or measured by the value of products, the gross income of the business, or the gross proceeds of sales, as the case may be, and that is the legal liability of the business.

F. Commercial or industrial use means the following uses of products, including byproducts, by the extractor or manufacturer thereof:

1. Any use as a consumer; and

2. The manufacturing of articles, substances, or commodities.

G. Competitive telephone service means the providing by any person of telecommunications equipment or apparatus, or service related to that equipment or apparatus such as repair or maintenance service, if the equipment or apparatus is of a type which can be provided by persons that are not subject to regulation as telephone companies under RCW Title 80 and for which a separate charge is made.

H. Consumer means the following:

1. Any person who purchases, acquires, owns, holds, or uses any tangible or intangible personal property irrespective of the nature of the person’s business and including, among others, without limiting the scope hereof, persons who install, repair, clean, alter, improve, construct, or decorate real or personal property of or for a consumer other than for the purpose of:

a. Resale as tangible or intangible personal property in the regular course of business;

b. Incorporating such property as an ingredient or component of real or personal property when installing, repairing, cleaning, altering, imprinting, improving, constructing, or decorating such real or personal property of or for consumers;

c. Incorporating such property as an ingredient or component of a new product or as a chemical used in processing a new product when the primary purpose of such chemical is to create a chemical reaction directly through contact with an ingredient of a new product; or

d. Consuming the property in producing ferrosilicon which is subsequently used in producing magnesium for sale, if the primary purpose of such property is to create a chemical reaction directly through contact with an ingredient of ferrosilicon;

2. Any person engaged in any business activity taxable under KCC 3.28.050(A)(7);

3. Any person who purchases, acquires, or uses any competitive telephone service as herein defined, other than for resale in the regular course of business;

4. Any person who purchases, acquires, or uses any personal, business, or professional service defined as a retail sale or retail service in this section, other than for resale in the regular course of business; 

5. Any person who is an end user of software;

6. Any person engaged in the business of “public road construction” in respect to tangible personal property when that person incorporates the tangible personal property as an ingredient or component of a publicly owned street, place, road, highway, easement, right-of-way, mass public transportation terminal or parking facility, bridge, tunnel, or trestle by installing, placing, or spreading the property in or upon the right-of-way of a publicly owned street, place, road, highway, easement, bridge, tunnel, or trestle or in or upon the site of a publicly owned mass public transportation terminal or parking facility;

7. Any person who is an owner, lessee, or has the right of possession to or an easement in real property which is being constructed, repaired, decorated, improved, or otherwise altered by a person engaged in business;

8. Any person who is an owner, lessee, or has the right of possession to personal property which is being constructed, repaired, improved, cleaned, imprinted, or otherwise altered by a person engaged in business;

9. Any person engaged in “government contracting.” Any such person shall be a consumer within the meaning of this subsection in respect to tangible personal property incorporated into, installed in, or attached to such building or other structure by such person. 

Nothing contained in this or any other subsection of this section shall be construed to modify any other definition of “consumer.”

I. Delivery means the transfer of possession of tangible personal property between the seller and the buyer or the buyer’s representative. Delivery to an employee of a buyer is considered delivery to the buyer. Transfer of possession of tangible personal property occurs when the buyer or the buyer’s representative first takes physical control of the property or exercises dominion and control over the property. Dominion and control means the buyer has the ability to put the property to the buyer’s own purposes. It means the buyer or the buyer’s representative has made the final decision to accept or reject the property, and the seller has no further right to possession of the property and the buyer has no right to return the property to the seller, other than under a warranty contract. A buyer does not exercise dominion and control over tangible personal property merely by arranging for shipment of the property from the seller to itself. A buyer’s representative is a person, other than an employee of the buyer, who is authorized in writing by the buyer to receive tangible personal property and take dominion and control by making the final decision to accept or reject the property. Neither a shipping company nor a seller can serve as a buyer’s representative. It is immaterial where the contract of sale is negotiated or where the buyer obtains title to the property. Delivery terms and other provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code (RCW Title 62A) do not determine when or where delivery of tangible personal property occurs for purposes of taxation.

J. Director means the finance director of the city or any officer, agent or employee of the city designated to act on the director’s behalf.

K. Digital automated service, digital code, and digital goods have the same meaning as in RCW 82.04.192. 

L. Digital products means digital goods, digital codes, digital automated services, and the services described in RCW 82.04.050(2)(g) and (6)(b).

M. Eligible gross receipts tax. The term “eligible gross receipts tax” means a tax which:

1. Is imposed on the act or privilege of engaging in business activities within KCC 3.28.050; and 

2. Is measured by the gross volume of business, in terms of gross receipts, and is not an income tax or value added tax; and

3. Is not, pursuant to law or custom, separately stated from the sales price; and 

4. Is not a sales or use tax, business license fee, franchise fee, royalty, or severance tax measured by volume or weight, or concession charge, or payment for the use and enjoyment of property, property right, or a privilege; and

5. Is a tax imposed by a local jurisdiction, whether within or without the state of Washington, and not by a country, state, province, or any other nonlocal jurisdiction above the county level.

N. Engaging in business.

1. The term “engaging in business” means commencing, conducting, or continuing in business, and also the exercise of corporate or franchise powers, as well as liquidating a business when the liquidators thereof hold themselves out to the public as conducting such business. 

2. This section sets forth examples of activities that constitute engaging in business in the city, and establishes safe harbors for certain of those activities so that a person who meets the criteria may engage in de minimis business activities in the city without having to register and obtain a business license or pay city business and occupation taxes. The activities listed in this section are illustrative only and are not intended to narrow the definition of “engaging in business” in subsection (N)(1) of this section. If an activity is not listed, whether it constitutes engaging in business in the city shall be determined by considering all the facts and circumstances and applicable law. 

3. Without being all inclusive, any one of the following activities conducted within the city by a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker, or another acting on its behalf, constitutes engaging in business and requires a person to register and obtain a business license:

a. Owning, renting, leasing, maintaining, or having the right to use, or using, tangible personal property, intangible personal property, or real property permanently or temporarily located in the city.

b. Owning, renting, leasing, using, or maintaining an office, place of business, or other establishment in the city.

c. Soliciting sales.

d. Making repairs or providing maintenance or service to real or tangible personal property, including warranty work and property maintenance.

e. Providing technical assistance or service, including quality control, product inspections, warranty work, or similar services, on or in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf.

f. Installing, constructing, or supervising installation or construction of real or tangible personal property.

g. Soliciting, negotiating, or approving franchise, license, or other similar agreements.

h. Collecting current or delinquent accounts.

i. Picking up and transporting tangible personal property, solid waste, construction debris, or excavated materials.

j. Providing disinfecting and pest control services, employment and labor pool services, home nursing care, janitorial services, appraising, landscape architectural services, security system services, surveying, and real estate services including the listing of homes and managing real property.

k. Rendering professional services such as those provided by accountants, architects, attorneys, auctioneers, consultants, engineers, professional athletes, barbers, baseball clubs and other sports organizations, chemists, psychologists, court reporters, dentists, doctors, detectives, laboratory operators, teachers, and veterinarians.

l. Meeting with customers or potential customers, even when no sales or orders are solicited at the meetings.

m. Training or recruiting agents, representatives, independent contractors, brokers, or others, domiciled or operating on a job in the city, acting on its behalf, or for customers or potential customers.

n. Investigating, resolving, or otherwise assisting in resolving customer complaints.

o. In-store stocking or manipulating products or goods, sold to and owned by a customer, regardless of where sale and delivery of the goods took place.

p. Delivering goods in vehicles owned, rented, leased, used, or maintained by the person or another acting on its behalf.

4. If a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker, or another acting on the person’s behalf, engages in no other activities in or with the city but the following, it need not register and obtain a business license and pay tax:

a. Meeting with suppliers of goods and services as a customer.

b. Meeting with government representatives in their official capacity, other than those performing contracting or purchasing functions.

c. Attending meetings, such as board meetings, retreats, seminars, and conferences, or other meetings, wherein the person does not provide training in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf. This provision does not apply to any board of director member or attendee engaging in business, such as a member of a board of directors who attends a board meeting.

d. Renting tangible or intangible property as a customer when the property is not used in the city.

e. Attending but not participating in a “trade show” or “multiple vendor events.” Persons participating at a trade show shall review the city’s trade show or multiple vendor event ordinances.

f. Conducting advertising through the mail.

g. Soliciting sales by phone from a location outside the city.

5. A seller located outside the city merely delivering goods into the city by means of common carrier is not required to register and obtain a business license; provided, that it engages in no other business activities in the city. Such activities do not include those in subsection (N)(4) of this section.

6. The city expressly intends that engaging in business includes any activity sufficient to establish nexus for purposes of applying the tax under the law and the constitutions of the United States and the state of Washington. Nexus is presumed to continue as long as the taxpayer benefits from the activity that constituted the original nexus generating contact or subsequent contacts.

O. Extracting is the activity engaged in by an extractor and is reportable under the extracting classification.

P. Extractor means every person who from the person’s own land or from the land of another under a right or license granted by lease or contract, either directly or by contracting with others for the necessary labor or mechanical services, for sale or for commercial or industrial use, mines, quarries, takes, or produces coal, oil, natural gas, ore, stone, sand, gravel, clay, mineral, or other natural resource product; or fells, cuts, or takes timber, Christmas trees, other than plantation Christmas trees, or other natural products; or takes fish, shellfish, or other sea or inland water foods or products. “Extractor” does not include persons performing under contract the necessary labor or mechanical services for others, or persons meeting the definition of “farmer.”

Q. Extractor for hire means a person who performs under contract necessary labor or mechanical services for an extractor.

R. Gross income of the business means the value proceeding or accruing by reason of the transaction of the business engaged in and includes gross proceeds of sales, compensation for the rendition of services, gains realized from trading in stocks, bonds, or other evidences of indebtedness, interest, discount, rents, royalties, fees, commissions, dividends, and other emoluments however designated, all without any deduction on account of the cost of tangible property sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs, interest, discount, delivery costs, taxes, or any other expense whatsoever paid or accrued and without any deduction on account of losses.

S. Gross proceeds of sales means the value proceeding or accruing from the sale of tangible personal property, digital goods, digital codes, digital automated services, or for other services rendered, without any deduction on account of the cost of property sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs, interest, discount paid, delivery costs, taxes, or any other expense whatsoever paid or accrued and without any deduction on account of losses.

T. Manufacturing means the activity conducted by a manufacturer and is reported under the manufacturing classification.

U. Manufacturer, to manufacture.

1. Manufacturer means every person who, either directly or by contracting with others for the necessary labor or mechanical services, manufactures for sale or for commercial or industrial use from the person’s own materials or ingredients any products. When the owner of equipment or facilities furnishes, or sells to the customer prior to manufacture, materials or ingredients equal to less than 20 percent of the total value of all materials or ingredients that become a part of the finished product, the owner of the equipment or facilities will be deemed to be a processor for hire, and not a manufacturer. A business not located in this city that is the owner of materials or ingredients processed for it in this city by a processor for hire shall be deemed to be engaged in business as a manufacturer in this city.

2. To manufacture means all activities of a commercial or industrial nature wherein labor or skill is applied, by hand or machinery, to materials or ingredients so that as a result thereof a new, different or useful product is produced for sale or commercial or industrial use, and shall include:

a. The production of special made or custom made articles;

b. The production of dental appliances, devices, restorations, substitutes, or other dental laboratory products by a dental laboratory or dental technician; 

c. Crushing and/or blending of rock, sand, stone, gravel, or ore; and

d. The producing of articles for sale, or for commercial or industrial use, from raw materials or prepared materials by giving such materials, articles, and substances of trade or commerce new forms, qualities, properties, or combinations including, but not limited to, such activities as making, fabricating, processing, refining, mixing, slaughtering, packing, aging, curing, mild curing, preserving, canning, and the preparing and freezing of fresh fruits and vegetables. 

“To manufacture” shall not include the production of digital goods or the production of computer software if the computer software is delivered from the seller to the purchaser by means other than tangible storage media, including the delivery by use of a tangible storage media where the tangible storage media is not physically transferred to the purchaser.

V. Newspaper means a publication offered for sale regularly at stated intervals at least once a week and printed on newsprint in tabloid or broadsheet format folded loosely together without stapling, glue, or any other binding of any kind.

Magazine or periodical means any printed publication, other than a newspaper, issued and offered for sale regularly at stated intervals at least once every three months, including any supplement or special edition of the publication. Any publication meeting this definition qualifies regardless of its content.

W. Nonprofit corporation or nonprofit organization means a corporation or organization in which no part of the income can be distributed to its members, directors, or officers and that holds a current tax exempt status as provided under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as hereafter amended, or is specifically exempted from the requirement to apply for its tax exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as hereafter amended. Where the term “nonprofit organization” is used, it is meant to include a nonprofit corporation.

X. Office or place of business means a fixed location or permanent facility where the regular business of the person is conducted and which is either owned by the person or over which the person exercises legal dominion and control. The regular business of the person is presumed conducted at a location: 

1. Whose address the person uses as its business mailing address;

2. Where the place of primary use is shown on a telephone billing or a location containing a telephone line listed in a public telephone directory or other similar publication under the business name; 

3. Where the person holds itself out to the general public as conducting its regular business through signage or other means; and

4. Where the person is required to obtain any appropriate state and local business license or registration unless they are exempted by law from such requirement.

A vehicle such as a pick-up, van, truck, boat or other motor vehicle is not an office or place of business. A post office box is not an office or place of business.

If a person has an office or place of business, the person’s home is not an office or place of business unless it meets the criteria for office or place of business above. If a person has no office or place of business, the person’s home or apartment within the city will be deemed the place of business.

Y. Person means any individual, receiver, administrator, executor, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust, estate, firm, copartnership, joint venture, club, company, joint stock company, business trust, municipal corporation, political subdivision of the state of Washington, corporation, limited liability company, association, society, or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit, or otherwise, and the United States or any instrumentality thereof.

Z. Processing for hire means the performance of labor and mechanical services upon materials or ingredients belonging to others so that as a result a new, different, or useful product is produced for sale, or commercial or industrial use. A processor for hire is any person who would be a manufacturer if that person were performing the labor and mechanical services upon that person’s own materials or ingredients. If a person furnishes, or sells to the customer prior to manufacture, materials or ingredients equal to 20 percent or more of the total value of all materials or ingredients that become a part of the finished product, the person will be deemed to be a manufacturer and not a processor for hire.

AA. Product means tangible personal property, including articles, substances, or commodities created, brought forth, extracted, or manufactured by human or mechanical effort. 

Byproduct means any additional product, other than the principal or intended product, which results from extracting or manufacturing activities and which has a market value without regard to whether or not such additional product was an expected or intended result of the extracting or manufacturing activities.

BB. Retailing means the activity of engaging in making sales at retail and is reported under the retailing classification.

CC. Retail service shall include the sale of or charge made for personal, business, or professional services including amounts designated as interest, rents, fees, admission, and other service emoluments however designated, received by persons engaging in the following business activities: 

1. Amusement and recreation services including but not limited to golf, pool, billiards, skating, bowling, swimming, bungee jumping, ski lifts and tows, basketball, racquet ball, handball, squash, tennis, batting cages, day trips for sightseeing purposes, and others, when provided to consumers. “Amusement and recreation services” also includes the provision of related facilities such as basketball courts, tennis courts, handball courts, swimming pools, and charges made for providing the opportunity to dance. The term “amusement and recreation services” does not include instructional lessons to learn a particular activity such as tennis lessons, swimming lessons, or archery lessons;

2. Abstract, title insurance, and escrow services; 

3. Credit bureau services; 

4. Automobile parking and storage garage services; 

5. Landscape maintenance and horticultural services but excluding (a) horticultural services provided to farmers and (b) pruning, trimming, repairing, removing, and clearing of trees and brush near electric transmission or distribution lines or equipment, if performed by or at the direction of an electric utility; 

6. Service charges associated with tickets to professional sporting events; and 

7. The following personal services: physical fitness services, tanning salon services, tattoo parlor services, steam bath services, Turkish bath services, escort services, and dating services. 

8. The term shall also include the renting or leasing of tangible personal property to consumers and the rental of equipment with an operator.

DD. Sale, casual or isolated sale.

1. Sale means any transfer of the ownership of, title to, or possession of property for a valuable consideration and includes any activity classified as a “sale at retail,” “retail sale,” or “retail service.” It includes renting or leasing, conditional sale contracts, leases with option to purchase, and any contract under which possession of the property is given to the purchaser but title is retained by the vendor as security for the payment of the purchase price. It also includes the furnishing of food, drink, or meals for compensation whether consumed upon the premises or not.

2. Casual or isolated sale means a sale made by a person who is not engaged in the business of selling the type of property involved on a routine or continuous basis. 

EE. Sale at retail, retail sale.

1. Sale at retail or retail sale means every sale of tangible personal property (including articles produced, fabricated, or imprinted) to all persons irrespective of the nature of their business and including, among others, without limiting the scope hereof, persons who install, repair, clean, alter, improve, construct, or decorate real or personal property of or for consumers, other than a sale to a person who presents a resale certificate under RCW 82.04.470 and who: 

a. Purchases for the purpose of resale as tangible personal property in the regular course of business without intervening use by such person; or 

b. Installs, repairs, cleans, alters, imprints, improves, constructs, or decorates real or personal property of or for consumers, if such tangible personal property becomes an ingredient or component of such real or personal property without intervening use by such person; or 

c. Purchases for the purpose of consuming the property purchased in producing for sale a new article of tangible personal property or substance, of which such property becomes an ingredient or component or is a chemical used in processing, when the primary purpose of such chemical is to create a chemical reaction directly through contact with an ingredient of a new article being produced for sale; or 

d. Purchases for the purpose of consuming the property purchased in producing ferrosilicon which is subsequently used in producing magnesium for sale, if the primary purpose of such property is to create a chemical reaction directly through contact with an ingredient of ferrosilicon; or 

e. Purchases for the purpose of providing the property to consumers as part of competitive telephone service, as defined in RCW 82.04.065. The term shall include every sale of tangible personal property which is used or consumed or to be used or consumed in the performance of any activity classified as a “sale at retail” or “retail sale” even though such property is resold or utilized as provided in subsection (EE)(1)(a), (b), (c), (d), or (e) of this section following such use; or

f. Purchases for the purpose of satisfying the person’s obligations under an extended warranty as defined in subsection (EE)(7) of this section, if such tangible personal property replaces or becomes an ingredient or component of property covered by the extended warranty without intervening use by such person.

2. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” also means every sale of tangible personal property to persons engaged in any business activity which is taxable under KCC 3.28.050(A)(7).

3. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall include the sale of or charge made for tangible personal property consumed and/or for labor and services rendered in respect to the following: 

a. The installing, repairing, cleaning, altering, imprinting, or improving of tangible personal property of or for consumers, including charges made for the mere use of facilities in respect thereto, but excluding charges made for the use of coin-operated laundry facilities when such facilities are situated in an apartment house, rooming house, or mobile home park for the exclusive use of the tenants thereof, and also excluding sales of laundry service to nonprofit health care facilities, and excluding services rendered in respect to live animals, birds, and insects; 

b. The constructing, repairing, decorating, or improving of new or existing buildings or other structures under, upon, or above real property of or for consumers, including the installing or attaching of any article of tangible personal property therein or thereto, whether or not such personal property becomes a part of the realty by virtue of installation, and shall also include the sale of services or charges made for the clearing of land and the moving of earth excepting the mere leveling of land used in commercial farming or agriculture; 

c. The charge for labor and services rendered in respect to constructing, repairing, or improving any structure upon, above, or under any real property owned by an owner who conveys the property by title, possession, or any other means to the person performing such construction, repair, or improvement for the purpose of performing such construction, repair, or improvement and the property is then reconveyed by title, possession, or any other means to the original owner; 

d. The sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered in respect to the cleaning, fumigating, razing, or moving of existing buildings or structures, but shall not include the charge made for janitorial services; and for purposes of this section the term “janitorial services” shall mean those cleaning and caretaking services ordinarily performed by commercial janitor service businesses including, but not limited to, wall and window washing, floor cleaning and waxing, and the cleaning in place of rugs, drapes, and upholstery. The term “janitorial services” does not include painting, papering, repairing, furnace or septic tank cleaning, snow removal, or sandblasting; 

e. The sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered in respect to automobile towing and similar automotive transportation services, but not in respect to those required to report and pay taxes under Chapter 82.16 RCW; 

f. The sale of and charge made for the furnishing of lodging and all other services, except telephone business and cable service, by a hotel, rooming house, tourist court, motel, trailer camp, and the granting of any similar license to use real property, as distinguished from the renting or leasing of real property, and it shall be presumed that the occupancy of real property for a continuous period of one month or more constitutes a rental or lease of real property and not a mere license to use or enjoy the same. For the purposes of this subsection, it shall be presumed that the sale of and charge made for the furnishing of lodging for a continuous period of one month or more to a person is a rental or lease of real property and not a mere license to enjoy the same; 

g. The installing, repairing, altering, or improving of digital goods for consumers;

h. The sale of or charge made for tangible personal property, labor, and services to persons taxable under subsections (EE)(3)(a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), and (g) of this section when such sales or charges are for property, labor, and services which are used or consumed in whole or in part by such persons in the performance of any activity defined as a “sale at retail” or “retail sale” even though such property, labor, and services may be resold after such use or consumption. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to modify subsection (EE)(1) of this section and nothing contained in subsection (EE)(1) of this section shall be construed to modify this subsection.

4. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include the providing of competitive telephone service to consumers. 

5.a. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include the sale of prewritten software other than a sale to a person who presents a resale certificate under RCW 82.04.470, regardless of the method of delivery to the end user. For purposes of this subsection (EE)(5)(a) the sale of prewritten computer software includes the sale of or charge made for a key or an enabling or activation code, where the key or code is required to activate prewritten computer software and put the software into use. There is no separate sale of the key or code from the prewritten computer software, regardless of how the sale may be characterized by the vendor or by the purchaser. 

The term “sale at retail” or “retail sale” does not include the sale of or charge made for:

i. Custom software; or

ii. The customization of prewritten software. 

b.i. The term also includes the charge made to consumers for the right to access and use prewritten computer software, where possession of the software is maintained by the seller or a third party, regardless of whether the charge for the service is on a per use, per user, per license, subscription, or some other basis.

ii.(A) The service described in subsection (EE)(5)(b)(i) of this section includes the right to access and use prewritten software to perform data processing.

(B) For purposes of this subsection (EE)(5)(b)(ii) data processing means the systematic performance of operations on data to extract the required information in an appropriate form or to convert the data to usable information. Data processing includes check processing, image processing, form processing, survey processing, payroll processing, claim processing, and similar activities. 

6. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include the sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered in respect to the building, repairing, or improving of any street, place, road, highway, easement, right-of-way, mass public transportation terminal or parking facility, bridge, tunnel, or trestle which is owned by a municipal corporation or political subdivision of the state, the state of Washington, or by the United States and which is used or to be used primarily for foot or vehicular traffic including mass transportation vehicles of any kind.

7. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include the sale of or charge made for an extended warranty to a consumer. For purposes of this subsection, extended warranty means an agreement for a specified duration to perform the replacement or repair of tangible personal property at no additional charge or a reduced charge for tangible personal property, labor, or both, or to provide indemnification for the replacement or repair of tangible personal property, based on the occurrence of specified events. The term “extended warranty” does not include an agreement, otherwise meeting the definition of “extended warranty” in this subsection, if no separate charge is made for the agreement and the value of the agreement is included in the sales price of the tangible personal property covered by the agreement. 

8. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include the sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered in respect to the constructing, repairing, decorating, or improving of new or existing buildings or other structures under, upon, or above real property of or for the United States, any instrumentality thereof, or a county or city housing authority created pursuant to Chapter 35.82 RCW, including the installing or attaching of any article of tangible personal property therein or thereto, whether or not such personal property becomes a part of the realty by virtue of installation.

9. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall not include the sale of services or charges made for the clearing of land and the moving of earth of or for the United States, any instrumentality thereof, or a county or city housing authority. Nor shall the term include the sale of services or charges made for cleaning up for the United States, or its instrumentalities, radioactive waste and other byproducts of weapons production and nuclear research and development. 

10. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall not include the sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered for environmental remedial action.

11. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include the following sales to consumers of digital goods, digital codes, and digital automated services:

a. Sales in which the seller has granted the purchaser the right of permanent use;

b. Sales in which the seller has granted the purchaser a right of use that is less than permanent;

c. Sales in which the purchaser is not obligated to make continued payment as a condition of the sale; and

d. Sales in which the purchaser is obligated to make continued payment as a condition of the sale.

A retail sale of digital goods, digital codes, or digital automated services under this subsection (EE)(11) includes any services provided by the seller exclusively in connection with the digital goods, digital codes, or digital automated services, whether or not a separate charge is made for such services.

For purposes of this subsection, permanent means perpetual or for an indefinite or unspecified length of time. A right of permanent use is presumed to have been granted unless the agreement between the seller and the purchaser specifies or the circumstances surrounding the transaction suggest or indicate that the right to use terminates on the occurrence of a condition subsequent.

12. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include the installing, repairing, altering, or improving of digital goods for consumers.

FF. Sale at wholesale or wholesale sale means any sale of tangible personal property, digital goods, digital codes, digital automated services, prewritten computer software, or services described in subsection (EE)(5)(b)(i) of this section which is not a retail sale, and any charge made for labor and services rendered for persons who are not consumers, in respect to real or personal property and retail services, if such charge is expressly defined as a retail sale or retail service when rendered to or for consumers. Sale at wholesale also includes the sale of telephone business to another telecommunications company as defined in RCW 80.04.010 for the purpose of resale, as contemplated by RCW 35.21.715.

GG. Services includes those activities that do not fall within one of the other tax classifications used by the city.

HH. Software, prewritten software, custom software, customization of canned software, master copies, retained rights.

1. Prewritten software or canned software means computer software, including prewritten upgrades, that is not designed and developed by the author or other creator to the specifications of a specific purchaser. The combining of two or more prewritten computer software programs or prewritten portions thereof does not cause the combination to be other than prewritten computer software. Prewritten computer software includes software designed and developed by the author or other creator to the specifications of a specific purchaser when it is sold to a person other than such purchaser. Where a person modifies or enhances computer software of which such person is not the author or creator, the person shall be deemed to be the author or creator only of the person’s modifications or enhancements. Prewritten computer software or a prewritten portion thereof that is modified or enhanced to any degree, where such modification or enhancement is designed and developed to the specifications of a specific purchaser, remains prewritten computer software; however, where there is a reasonable, separately stated charge or an invoice or other statement of the price given to the purchaser for the modification or enhancement, the modification or enhancement shall not constitute prewritten computer software.

2. Custom software means software created for a single person.

3. Customization of canned software means any alteration, modification, or development of applications using or incorporating canned software to specific individualized requirements of a single person. Customization of canned software includes individualized configuration of software to work with other software and computer hardware but does not include routine installation. Customization of canned software does not change the underlying character or taxability of the original canned software.

4. Master copies of software means copies of software from which a software developer, author, inventor, publisher, licensor, sublicensor, or distributor makes copies for sale or license. The software encoded on a master copy and the media upon which the software resides are both ingredients of the master copy.

5. Retained rights means any and all rights, including intellectual property rights such as those rights arising from copyrights, patents, and trade secret laws, that are owned or are held under contract or license by a software developer, author, inventor, publisher, licensor, sublicensor, or distributor.

6. Software means any information, program, or routine, or any set of one or more programs, routines, or collections of information, used, or intended for use, to convey information that causes one or more computers or pieces of computer-related peripheral equipment, or any combination thereof, to perform a task or set of tasks. “Software” includes the associated documentation, materials, or ingredients, regardless of the media upon which that documentation is provided, that describe the code and its use, operation, and maintenance and that typically are delivered with the code to the consumer. All software is classified as either canned or custom.

II. Taxpayer means any “person,” as herein defined, required to have a business license under this chapter or liable for the collection of any tax or fee under this chapter, or who engages in any business or who performs any act for which a tax or fee is imposed by this chapter.

JJ. Tuition fee includes library, laboratory, health service, and other special fees, and amounts charged for room and board by an educational institution when the property or service for which such charges are made is furnished exclusively to the students or faculty of such institution. Educational institution, as used in this section, means only those institutions created or generally accredited as such by the state and includes educational programs that such educational institution cosponsors with a nonprofit organization, as defined by the Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3), as hereafter amended, if such educational institution grants college credit for coursework successfully completed through the educational program, or an approved branch campus of a foreign degree-granting institution in compliance with Chapter 28B.90 RCW, and in accordance with RCW 82.04.4332 or defined as a degree-granting institution under RCW 28B.85.010(3) and accredited by an accrediting association recognized by the United States Secretary of Education, and offering to students an educational program of a general academic nature or those institutions which are not operated for profit and which are privately endowed under a deed of trust to offer instruction in trade, industry, and agriculture, but not including specialty schools, business colleges, other trade schools, or similar institutions.

KK. Value proceeding or accruing means the consideration, whether money, credits, rights, or other property expressed in terms of money, a person is entitled to receive or which is actually received or accrued. The term shall be applied, in each case, on a cash receipts or accrual basis according to which method of accounting is regularly employed in keeping the books of the taxpayer. 

LL. Value of products.

1. The value of products, including byproducts, extracted or manufactured, shall be determined by the gross proceeds derived from the sale thereof whether such sale is at wholesale or at retail, to which shall be added all subsidies and bonuses received from the purchaser or from any other person with respect to the extraction, manufacture, or sale of such products or byproducts by the seller.

2. Where such products, including byproducts, are extracted or manufactured for commercial or industrial use; and where such products, including byproducts, are shipped, transported or transferred out of the city, or to another person, without prior sale or are sold under circumstances such that the gross proceeds from the sale are not indicative of the true value of the subject matter of the sale; the value shall correspond as nearly as possible to the gross proceeds from sales in this state of similar products of like quality and character, and in similar quantities by other taxpayers, plus the amount of subsidies or bonuses ordinarily payable by the purchaser or by any third person with respect to the extraction, manufacture, or sale of such products. In the absence of sales of similar products as a guide to value, such value may be determined upon a cost basis. In such cases, there shall be included every item of cost attributable to the particular article or article extracted or manufactured, including direct and indirect overhead costs. The director may prescribe rules for the purpose of ascertaining such values. 

3. Notwithstanding subsection (LL)(2) of this section, the value of a product manufactured or produced for purposes of serving as a prototype for the development of a new or improved product shall correspond to:

a. The retail selling price of such new or improved product when first offered for sale; or 

b. The value of materials incorporated into the prototype in cases in which the new or improved product is not offered for sale.

MM. Wholesaling means engaging in the activity of making sales at wholesale, and is reported under the wholesaling classification.

(Ord. No. 4054, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4106, § 1, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 4342, § 4, 11-19-19)


3.28.040 Agency – Sales and services by agent, consignee, bailee, factor, or auctioneer. Revised 1/20

A. Sales in own name – Sales or purchases as agent. Every person, including agents, consignees, bailees, factors, or auctioneers, having either actual or constructive possession of tangible personal property or having possession of the documents of title thereto, with power to sell such tangible personal property in the person’s own name and actually so selling, shall be deemed the seller of such tangible personal property within the meaning of this chapter. 

The burden shall be upon the taxpayer in every case to establish the fact that such taxpayer is not engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property but is acting merely as broker or agent in promoting sales or making purchases for a principal. Such claim will be recognized only when the contract or agreement between such persons clearly establishes the relationship of principal and agent and when the following conditions are complied with:

1. The books and records of the broker or agent show the transactions were made in the name and for the account of the principal, and show the name of the actual owner of the property for whom the sale was made, or the actual buyer for whom the purchase was made. 

2. The books and records show the amount of the principal’s gross sales, the amount of commissions, and any other incidental income derived by the broker or agent from such sales. The principal’s gross sales must not be reflected as the agent’s income on any of the agent’s books and records. Commissions must be computed according to a set percentage or amount, which is agreed upon in the agency agreement.

3. No ownership rights may be conferred to the agent unless the principal refuses to pay, or refuses to abide by the agency agreement. Sales or purchases of any goods by a person who has any ownership rights in such goods shall be taxed as retail or wholesale sales.

4. Bulk goods sold or purchased on behalf of a principal must not be co-mingled with goods belonging to another principal or lose their identity as belonging to the particular principal. Sales or purchases of any goods which have been co-mingled or lost their identity as belonging to the principal shall be taxed as retail or wholesale sales.

B. If the above requirements are not met the consignor, bailor, principal, or other shall be deemed a seller of such property to the agent, consignee, bailee, factor, or auctioneer.

C. Services in own name – Procuring services as agent. For purposes of this subsection, an agent is a person who acts under the direction and control of the principal in procuring services on behalf of the principal that the person could not itself render or supply. Amounts received by an agent for the account of its principal as advances or reimbursements are exempted from the measure of the tax only when the agent is not primarily or secondarily liable to pay for the services procured. 

Any person who claims to be acting merely as agent in obtaining services for a principal will have such claim recognized only when the contract or agreement between such persons clearly establishes the relationship of principal and agent and when the following conditions are complied with:

1. The books and records of the agent show that the services were obtained in the name and for the account of the principal, and show the actual principal for whom the purchase was made.

2. The books and records show the amount of the service that was obtained for the principal, the amount of commissions, and any other income derived by the agent for acting as such. Amounts received from the principal as advances and reimbursements must not be reflected as the agent’s income on any of the agent’s books and records. Commissions must be computed according to a set percentage or amount, which is agreed upon in the agency agreement.

(Ord. No. 4054, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 4, 11-19-19)


3.28.050 Imposition of the tax – Tax or fee levied. Revised 1/20

Except as provided in subsection (C) of this section, there is hereby levied upon and shall be collected from every person a tax for the act or privilege of engaging in business activities within the city, whether the person’s office or place of business be within or without the city. The tax shall be in amounts to be determined by application of rates against the gross proceeds of sale, gross income of business, or value of products, including byproducts, and by application of rates against the square footage of business office or facility space within the city, as the case may be, as follows:

A. Gross receipts tax.

1. Upon every person engaging within the city in business as an extractor; as to such persons the amount of the tax with respect to such business shall be equal to the value of the products, including byproducts, extracted within the city for sale or for commercial or industrial use, multiplied by the rate of 0.152 hundredths of one percent (0.00152) through December 31, 2021, and multiplied by the rate of 0.200 hundredths of one percent (0.002) effective January 1, 2022. The measure of the tax is the value of the products, including byproducts, so extracted, regardless of the place of sale or the fact that deliveries may be made to points outside the city.

2. Upon every person engaging within the city in business as a manufacturer, as to such persons, the amount of the tax with respect to such business shall be equal to the value of the products, including byproducts, manufactured within the city, multiplied by the rate of 0.046 hundredths of one percent (0.00046) through December 31, 2021, and multiplied by the rate of 0.100 hundredths of one percent (0.001) effective January 1, 2022. The measure of the tax is the value of the products, including byproducts, so manufactured, regardless of the place of sale or the fact that deliveries may be made to points outside the city.

3. Upon every person engaging within the city in the business of making sales at wholesale, as to such persons, the amount of tax with respect to such business shall be equal to the gross proceeds of such sales of the business without regard to the place of delivery of articles, commodities or merchandise sold, multiplied by the rate of 0.152 hundredths of one percent (0.00152) through December 31, 2019, and multiplied by the rate of 0.200 hundredths of one percent (0.002) effective January 1, 2020.

4. Upon every person engaging within the city in the business of making sales at retail, as to such persons, the amount of tax with respect to such business shall be equal to the gross proceeds of such sales of the business, without regard to the place of delivery of articles, commodities or merchandise sold, multiplied by the rate of 0.046 hundredths of one percent (0.00046) through December 31, 2021, and multiplied by the rate of 0.100 hundredths of one percent (0.001) effective January 1, 2022.

5. Upon every person engaging within the city in the business of (a) printing, (b) both printing and publishing newspapers, magazines, periodicals, books, music, and other printed items, (c) publishing newspapers, magazines and periodicals, (d) extracting for hire, and (e) processing for hire; as to such persons, the amount of tax on such business shall be equal to the gross income of the business multiplied by the rate of 0.046 hundredths of one percent (0.00046) through December 31, 2021, and multiplied by the rate of 0.100 hundredths of one percent (0.001) effective January 1, 2022.

6. Upon every person engaging within the city in the business of making sales of retail services; as to such persons, the amount of tax with respect to such business shall be equal to the gross proceeds of sales multiplied by the rate of 0.152 hundredths of one percent (0.00152) through December 31, 2021, and multiplied by the rate of 0.200 hundredths of one percent (0.002) effective January 1, 2022.

7. Upon every other person engaging within the city in any business activity other than or in addition to those enumerated in the above subsections; as to such persons, the amount of tax on account of such activities shall be equal to the gross income of the business multiplied by the rate of 0.152 hundredths of one percent (0.00152) through December 31, 2021, and multiplied by the rate of 0.200 hundredths of one percent (0.002) effective January 1, 2022. This subsection includes, among others, and without limiting the scope hereof (whether or not title to material used in the performance of such business passes to another by accession, merger, or other than by outright sale), persons engaged in the business of developing or producing custom software or of customizing canned software, producing royalties or commissions, and persons engaged in the business of rendering any type of service which does not constitute a sale at retail, a sale at wholesale, or a retail service.

B. Square footage tax. Upon every person who leases, owns, occupies, or otherwise maintains an office, warehouse, or other place of business within the city for purposes of engaging in business activities in the city, the tax shall be measured by the number of square feet of warehouse business floor space or other business floor space for each office, warehouse, or other place of business leased, owned, occupied, or otherwise maintained within the city during the reporting period, calculated to the nearest square foot.

1. Subject to the reductions established in subsection (B)(6) of this section, the amount of the tax due shall be equal to the sum of the number of square feet of business warehouse floor space for each business warehouse leased, owned, occupied, or otherwise maintained within the city multiplied by the rate for each calendar year listed below, and the number of square feet of other business floor space for each office or other place of business leased, owned, occupied, or otherwise maintained within the city multiplied by the rate for each calendar year listed below.

	Effective Date	Business Warehouse Floor Space	Other Business Floor Space

	1/1/2019	0.06 quarterly rate

0.24 annual rate	0.02 quarterly rate

0.08 annual rate

	1/1/2020	0.09 quarterly rate

0.36 annual rate	0.02 quarterly rate

0.08 annual rate

	1/1/2025	0.12 quarterly rate

0.48 annual rate	0.02 quarterly rate

0.08 annual rate

	1/1/2028	0.15 quarterly rate

0.60 annual rate	0.03 quarterly rate

0.12 annual rate

2. For purposes of this section, business warehouse means a building or structure, or any part thereof, in which goods, wares, merchandise, or commodities are received or stored, whether or not for compensation, in furtherance of engaging in business.

3. For purposes of this section, other business floor space means the floor space of an office or place of business, other than a business warehouse.

4. For purposes of this section, the square footage shall be computed by measuring to the inside finish of permanent outer building walls and shall include space used by columns and projections necessary to the building. Square footage shall not include stairs, elevator shafts, flues, pipe shafts, vertical ducts, heating or ventilation shafts, janitor closets, and electrical or utility closets.

5. Persons with more than one office, warehouse, or other place of business within the city must include all business warehouse floor space and other business floor space for all locations within the city. When a person rents space to another person, the person occupying the rental space is responsible for the square footage business tax on that rental space only if the renter has exclusive right of possession in the space as against the landlord. Space rented for the storage of goods in a warehouse where no walls separate the goods, and where the exclusive right of possession in the space is not held by the person to whom the space is rented, shall be included in the warehouse business floor space of the person that operates the warehouse business, and not by the person renting the warehouse space.

6. If the square footage tax imposed in this subsection (B) is less than or equal to the gross receipts tax imposed in subsection (A) of this section, no square footage tax will be due; if the square footage tax imposed in this subsection (B) exceeds the gross receipts tax imposed in subsection (A) of this section, the taxpayer shall also remit the excess over the gross receipts tax payable under subsection (A) of this section.

C. Gross receipts and square footage threshold.

1. Gross receipts threshold. The gross receipts tax imposed in subsection (A) of this section shall not apply to any person engaging in any one or more business activities which are otherwise taxable pursuant to this section, whose value of products, including byproducts, gross proceeds of sales, and gross income of the business, as the case may be, from all activities conducted within the city during any calendar year does not exceed the threshold amount of $250,000.

2. Square footage threshold. The square footage tax imposed in subsection (B) of this section shall not apply to any person unless that person’s total floor area of business space within the city exceeds the following threshold:

a. Four thousand taxable square feet of business warehouse space; or

b. Twelve thousand taxable square feet of other business floor space.

If the square footage tax applies, it applies to all business space leased, owned, occupied, or otherwise maintained by the taxpayer during the applicable reporting period.

D. Gross receipts maximum – Retailing activities. Effective January 1, 2022, the gross receipts tax imposed in subsection (A) of this section shall not apply to retailing activities exceeding $20,000,000 in any calendar year which are otherwise taxable pursuant to this section.

E. Rules. The director may promulgate rules and regulations regarding the manner, means, and method of calculating any tax imposed under this section.

(Ord. No. 4054, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4106, § 2, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 4242, § 1, 5-2-17; Ord. No. 4260, § 1, 11-21-17; Ord. No. 4295, § 1, 11-20-18; Ord. No. 4342, § 4, 11-19-19)


3.28.070 Multiple activities credit when activities take place in one or more cities with eligible gross receipt taxes. Revised 1/20

A. Persons who engage in business activities that are within the purview of two or more subsections of KCC 3.28.050 shall be taxable under each applicable subsection. 

B. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, if imposition of the city’s tax would place an undue burden upon interstate commerce or violate constitutional requirements, a taxpayer shall be allowed a credit to the extent necessary to preserve the validity of the city’s tax, and still apply the city tax to as much of the taxpayer’s activities as may be subject to the city’s taxing authority.

C. To take the credit authorized by this section, a taxpayer must be able to document that the amount of tax sought to be credited was paid upon the same gross receipts used in computing the tax against which the credit is applied and that the taxpayer paid the amount of tax sought to be credited. 

D. Credit for persons that sell in the city products that they extract or manufacture. Persons taxable under the retailing or wholesaling classification with respect to selling products in this city shall be allowed a credit against those taxes for any eligible gross receipts taxes paid (1) with respect to the manufacturing of the products sold in the city, and (2) with respect to the extracting of the products, or the ingredients used in the products, sold in the city. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the tax liability arising under this chapter with respect to the sale of those products.

E. Credit for persons that manufacture products in the city using ingredients they extract. Persons taxable under the manufacturing classification with respect to manufacturing products in this city shall be allowed a credit against those taxes for any eligible gross receipts tax paid with respect to extracting the ingredients of the products manufactured in the city. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the tax liability arising under this chapter with respect to the manufacturing of those products.

F. Credit for persons that sell within the city products that they print, or publish and print. Persons taxable under the retailing or wholesaling classification with respect to selling products in this city shall be allowed a credit against those taxes for any eligible gross receipts taxes paid with respect to the printing, or the printing and publishing, of the products sold within the city. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the tax liability arising under this chapter with respect to the sale of those products.

(Ord. No. 4054, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 4, 11-19-19)


3.28.071 Tax credit. Revised 1/20

Persons with taxable gross receipts in excess of $62,500 who engage in business activities that are within the subsections of KCC 3.28.050(A) shall be taxable under each applicable subsection during a quarter in the city and shall be allowed a credit against the gross receipts taxes paid to the city on $62,500 under this chapter during the quarter. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the gross receipts tax liability arising under this chapter.

(Ord. No. 4242, § 7, 5-2-17; Ord. No. 4342, § 4, 11-19-19)


3.28.075 Deductions to prevent multiple taxation of certain manufacturing activities involving more than one city with an eligible gross receipts tax. Revised 1/20

A person manufacturing products within the city using products manufactured by the same person outside the city may deduct from the measure of the manufacturing tax the value of products manufactured outside the city and included in the measure of an eligible gross receipts tax paid to the other jurisdiction with respect to manufacturing such products. 

(Ord. No. 4054, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 4, 11-19-19)


3.28.076 Assignment of gross income derived from intangibles. Revised 1/20

Gross income derived from the sale of intangibles such as royalties, trademarks, patents, or goodwill shall be assigned to the jurisdiction where the person is domiciled (its headquarters is located).

(Ord. No. 4054, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 4, 11-19-19)


3.28.077 Allocation and apportionment of income when activities take place in more than one jurisdiction. Revised 1/20

Gross income, other than for persons subject to the provisions of Chapter 82.14A RCW, shall be allocated and apportioned as follows:

A. Gross income derived from all activities other than those taxed as service or royalties under KCC 3.28.050(A)(7) shall be allocated to the location where the activity takes place.

B. In the case of sales of tangible personal property, the activity takes place where delivery to the buyer occurs.

C. In the case of sales of digital products, the activity takes place where delivery to the buyer occurs. The delivery of digital products will be deemed to occur at:

1. The seller’s place of business if the purchaser receives the digital product at the seller’s place of business;

2. If not received at the seller’s place of business, the location where the purchaser or the purchaser’s donee, designated as such by the purchaser, receives the digital product, including the location indicated by instructions for delivery to the purchaser or donee, known to the seller;

3. If the location where the purchaser or the purchaser’s donee receives the digital product is not known, the purchaser’s address maintained in the ordinary course of the seller’s business when use of this address does not constitute bad faith;

4. If no address for the purchaser is maintained in the ordinary course of the seller’s business, the purchaser’s address obtained during the consummation of the sale, including the address of a purchaser’s payment instrument, if no other address is available, when use of this address does not constitute bad faith; and

5. If no address for the purchaser is obtained during the consummation of the sale, the address where the digital good or digital code is first made available for transmission by the seller or the address from which the digital automated service or service described in RCW 82.04.050(2)(g) or (6)(b) was provided, disregarding for these purposes any location that merely provided the digital transfer of the product sold.

D. If none of the methods in subsection (C) of this section for determining where the delivery of digital products occurs are available after a good faith effort by the taxpayer to apply the methods provided in subsections (C)(1) through (5) of this section, then the city and the taxpayer may mutually agree to employ any other method to effectuate an equitable allocation of income from the sale of digital products. The taxpayer will be responsible for petitioning the city to use an alternative method under this subsection. The city may employ an alternative method for allocating the income from the sale of digital products if the methods provided in subsections (C)(1) through (5) of this section are not available and the taxpayer and the city are unable to mutually agree on an alternative method to effectuate an equitable allocation of income from the sale of digital products.

E. For purposes of subsections (C)(1) through (5) of this section, the following definitions apply:

1. Digital automated services, digital codes, and digital goods have the same meaning as in RCW 82.04.192;

2. Digital products means digital goods, digital codes, digital automated services, and the services described in RCW 282.04.050(2)(g) and (6)(c); and

3. Receive has the same meaning as in RCW 82.32.730.

F. Effective January 1, 2020, gross income derived from activities taxed as services and other activities taxed under KCC 3.28.050(A)(7) shall be apportioned to the city by multiplying apportionable income by a fraction, the numerator of which is the payroll factor plus the service income factor and the denominator of which is two.

1. The payroll factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the total amount paid in the city during the tax period by the taxpayer for compensation and the denominator of which is the total compensation paid everywhere during the tax period. Compensation is paid in the city if:

a. The individual is primarily assigned within the city;

b. The individual is not primarily assigned to any place of business for the tax period and the employee performs 50 percent or more of his or her service for the tax period in the city; or

c. The individual is not primarily assigned to any place of business for the tax period, the individual does not perform 50 percent or more of his or her service in any city, and the employee resides in the city.

2. The service income factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the total service income of the taxpayer in the city during the tax period, and the denominator of which is the total service income of the taxpayer everywhere during the tax period. Service income is in the city if the customer location is in the city.

3. Gross income of the business from engaging in an apportionable activity must be excluded from the denominator of the service income factor if, in respect to such activity, at least some of the activity is performed in the city, and the gross income is attributable under subsection (F)(2) of this section to a city or unincorporated area of a county within the United States or to a foreign country in which the taxpayer is not taxable. For purposes of this subsection (F)(3), not taxable means that the taxpayer is not subject to a business activities tax by that city or county within the United States or by that foreign country, except that a taxpayer is taxable in a city or county within the United States or in a foreign country in which it would be deemed to have a substantial nexus with the city or county within the United States or with the foreign country under the standards in RCW 35.102.050 regardless of whether that city or county within the United States or that foreign country imposes such a tax.

4. If the allocation and apportionment provisions of this subsection do not fairly represent the extent of the taxpayer’s business activity in the city, the taxpayer may petition for or the tax administrator may require, in respect to all or any part of the taxpayer’s business activity, if reasonable:

a. Separate accounting;

b. The exclusion of any one or more factors;

c. The inclusion of one or more additional factors that will fairly represent the taxpayer’s business activity in the city; or

d. The employment of any other method to effectuate an equitable allocation and apportionment of the taxpayer’s income.

5. The party petitioning for, or the tax administrator requiring, the use of any method to effectuate an equitable allocation and apportionment of the taxpayer’s income pursuant to subsection (F)(4) of this section must prove by a preponderance of the evidence:

a. That the allocation and apportionment provisions of this subsection (F) do not fairly represent the extent of the taxpayer’s business activity in the city; and

b. That the alternative to such provisions is reasonable.

The same burden of proof shall apply whether the taxpayer is petitioning for, or the tax administrator is requiring, the use of an alternative, reasonable method to effectuate an equitable allocation and apportionment of the taxpayer’s income.

6. If the tax administrator requires any method to effectuate an equitable allocation and apportionment of the taxpayer’s income, the tax administrator cannot impose any civil or criminal penalty with reference to the tax due that is attributable to the taxpayer’s reasonable reliance solely on the allocation and apportionment provisions of this subsection (F).

7. A taxpayer that has received written permission from the tax administrator to use a reasonable method to effectuate an equitable allocation and apportionment of the taxpayer’s income shall not have that permission revoked with respect to transactions and activities that have already occurred unless there has been a material change in, or a material misrepresentation of, the facts provided by the taxpayer upon which the tax administrator reasonably relied in approving a reasonable alternative method.

G. The definitions in this subsection apply throughout this section.

1. Apportionable income means the gross income of the business taxable under the service classifications of a city’s gross receipts tax, including income received from activities outside the city if the income would be taxable under the service classification if received from activities within the city, less any exemptions or deductions available.

2. Business activities tax means a tax measured by the amount of, or economic results of, business activity conducted in a city or county within the United States or within a foreign country. The term includes taxes measured in whole or in part on net income or gross income or receipts. Business activities tax does not include a sales tax, use tax, or a similar transaction tax, imposed on the sale or acquisition of goods or services, whether or not denominated a gross receipts tax or a tax imposed on the privilege of doing business.

3. Compensation means wages, salaries, commissions, and any other form of remuneration paid to individuals for personal services that are or would be included in the individual’s gross income under the federal Internal Revenue Code.

4. Customer means a person or entity to whom the taxpayer makes a sale or renders services or from whom the taxpayer otherwise receives gross income on the business.

5. Customer location means the following:

a. For a customer not engaged in business, if the service requires the customer to be physically present, where the service is performed.

b. For a customer not engaged in business, if the service does not require the customer to be physically present:

i. The customer’s residence; or

ii. If the customer’s residence is not known, the customer’s billing/mailing address.

c. For a customer engaged in business:

i. Where the services are ordered from;

ii. At the customer’s billing/mailing address if the location from which the services are ordered is not known; or

iii. At the customer’s commercial domicile if none of the above are known.

6. Individual means any individual who, under the usual common law rules applicable in determining the employer-employee relationship, has the status of an employee of that taxpayer.

7. Primarily assigned means the business location of the taxpayer where the individual performs his or her duties.

8. Service-taxable income or service income means gross income of the business subject to tax under either the service or royalty classification.

9. Tax period means the calendar year during which tax liability is accrued. If taxes are reported by a taxpayer on a basis more frequent than once per year, taxpayers shall calculate the factors for the previous calendar year for reporting in the current calendar year and correct the reporting for the previous year when the factors are calculated for that year, but not later than the end of the first quarter of the following year.

H. Assignment or apportionment of revenue under this section shall be made in accordance with and in full compliance with the provisions of the interstate commerce clause of the United States Constitution where applicable.

(Ord. No. 4054, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 4, 11-19-19)


3.28.078 Allocation and apportionment of printing and publishing income when activities take place in more than one jurisdiction. Revised 1/20

Notwithstanding RCW 35.102.130, gross income from the activities of printing, and of publishing newspapers, periodicals, or magazines, shall be allocated to the principal place in this state from which the taxpayer’s business is directed or managed. As used in this section, the activities of printing, and of publishing newspapers, periodicals, or magazines, have the same meanings as attributed to those terms in RCW 82.04.280(1) by the Department of Revenue.

(Ord. No. 4054, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 4, 11-19-19)


3.28.090 Exemptions. Revised 1/20

A. Nonprofit corporations or nonprofit organizations. This chapter shall not apply to nonprofit organizations exempt from federal income tax under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as hereafter amended, except with respect to retail sales of such persons. 

B. Certain fraternal and beneficiary organizations. This chapter shall not apply to fraternal benefit societies or fraternal fire insurance associations, as described in RCW Title 48; nor to beneficiary corporations or societies organized under and existing by virtue of RCW Title 24, if such beneficiary corporations or societies provide in their bylaws for the payment of death benefits. This exemption is limited, however, to gross income from premiums, fees, assessments, dues, or other charges directly attributable to the insurance or death benefits provided by such societies, associations, or corporations.

C. Certain corporations furnishing aid and relief. This chapter shall not apply to the gross sales or the gross income received by corporations which have been incorporated under any act of the congress of the United States of America and whose principal purposes are to furnish volunteer aid to members of the armed forces of the United States and also to carry on a system of national and international relief and to apply the same in mitigating the sufferings caused by pestilence, famine, fire, floods, and other national calamities and to devise and carry on measures for preventing the same.

D. Operation of sheltered workshops. This chapter shall not apply to income received from the Department of Social and Health Services for the cost of care, maintenance, support, and training of persons with developmental disabilities at nonprofit group training homes as defined by Chapter 71A.22 RCW or to the business activities of nonprofit organizations from the operation of sheltered workshops. For the purposes of this subsection, “the operation of sheltered workshops” means performance of business activities of any kind on or off the premises of such nonprofit organizations which are performed for the primary purpose of:

1. Providing gainful employment or rehabilitation services to the handicapped as an interim step in the rehabilitation process for those who cannot be readily absorbed in the competitive labor market or during such time as employment opportunities for them in the competitive labor market do not exist; or

2. Providing evaluation and work adjustment services for handicapped individuals.

E. Credit unions. This chapter shall not apply to the gross income of credit unions organized under the laws of the state, any other state, or the United States.

F. Health maintenance organization, health care service contractor, certified health plan. This chapter does not apply to any health maintenance organization, health care service contractor, or certified health plan in respect to premiums or prepayments that are taxable under RCW 48.14.0201.

G. Public utilities. This chapter shall not apply to any person in respect to a business activity with respect to which tax liability is specifically imposed under the utility tax provisions of Chapter 3.18 KCC.

H. Investments – Dividends from subsidiary corporations. This chapter shall not apply to amounts derived by persons, other than those engaging in banking, loan, security, or other financial businesses, from investments or the use of money as such, and also amounts derived as dividends by a parent from its subsidiary corporations.

I. International banking facilities. This chapter shall not apply to the gross receipts of an international banking facility. As used in this subsection, an international banking facility means a facility represented by a set of asset and liability accounts segregated on the books and records of a commercial bank, the principal office of which is located in this state, and which is incorporated and doing business under the laws of the United States or of this state, a United States branch or agency of a foreign bank, an Edge corporation organized under Section 25(a) of the Federal Reserve Act, 12 U.S.C. Sections 611 through 631, or an Agreement corporation having an agreement or undertaking with the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System under Section 25 of the Federal Reserve Act, 12 U.S.C. Sections 601 through 604(a), that includes only international banking facility time deposits (as defined in subsection (a)(2) of Section 204.8 of Regulation D (12 CFR Part 204), as promulgated by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System), and international banking facility extensions of credit (as defined in subsection (a)(3) of Section 204.8 of Regulation D).

J. Insurance business. This chapter shall not apply to amounts received by any person who is an insurer, or their appointed insurance producer, upon which a tax based on gross premiums is paid to the state pursuant to RCW 48.14.020; and provided further, that the provisions of this subsection shall not exempt any bonding company from tax with respect to gross income derived from the completion of any contract as to which it is a surety, or as to any liability as successor to the liability of the defaulting contractor.

K. Farmers – Agriculture. This chapter shall not apply to any farmer in respect to amounts received from selling fruits, vegetables, berries, butter, eggs, fish, milk, poultry, meats, or any other agricultural product that is raised, caught, produced, or manufactured by such persons.

L. Athletic exhibitions. This chapter shall not apply to any person in respect to the business of conducting boxing contests and sparring or wrestling matches and exhibitions for the conduct of which a license must be secured from the State Boxing Commission.

M. Racing. This chapter shall not apply to any person in respect to the business of conducting race meets for the conduct of which a license must be secured from the Washington State Horse Racing Commission.

N. Ride sharing. This chapter does not apply to any funds received in the course of commuter ride sharing or ride sharing for persons with special transportation needs in accordance with RCW 46.74.010.

O. Employees.

1. This chapter shall not apply to any person in respect to the person’s employment in the capacity as an employee or servant as distinguished from that of an independent contractor. For the purposes of this subsection, the definition of “employee” shall include those persons that are defined in the Internal Revenue Code, as hereafter amended.

2. A booth renter is an independent contractor for purposes of this chapter.

P. Amounts derived from sale of real estate. This chapter shall not apply to gross proceeds derived from the sale of real estate. This, however, shall not be construed to allow an exemption of amounts received as commissions from the sale of real estate, nor as fees, handling charges, discounts, interest, or similar financial charges resulting from, or relating to, real estate transactions. This chapter shall also not apply to amounts received for the rental of real estate if the rental income is derived from a contract to rent for a continuous period of 30 days or longer.

Q. Mortgage brokers’ third-party provider services trust accounts. This chapter shall not apply to amounts received from trust accounts to mortgage brokers for the payment of third-party costs if the accounts are operated in a manner consistent with RCW 19.146.050 and any rules adopted by the director of financial institutions.

R. Amounts derived from manufacturing, selling, or distributing motor vehicle fuel. This chapter shall not apply to the manufacturing, selling, or distributing motor vehicle fuel, as the term “motor vehicle fuel” is defined in RCW 82.38.010 and exempt under RCW 82.38.280; provided, that any fuel not subjected to the state fuel excise tax, or any other applicable deduction or exemption, will be taxable under this chapter.

S. Amounts derived from liquor, and the sale or distribution of liquor. This chapter shall not apply to liquor as defined in RCW 66.04.010 and exempt in RCW 66.08.120.

T. Casual and isolated sales. This chapter shall not apply to the gross proceeds derived from casual or isolated sales.

U. Accommodation sales. This chapter shall not apply to sales for resale by persons regularly engaged in the business of making retail sales of the type of property so sold to other persons similarly engaged in the business of selling such property where (1) the amount paid by the buyer does not exceed the amount paid by the seller to the vendor in the acquisition of the article and (2) the sale is made as an accommodation to the buyer to enable the buyer to fill a bona fide existing order of a customer or is made within 14 days to reimburse in kind a previous accommodation sale by the buyer to the seller. 

V. Taxes collected as trust funds. This chapter shall not apply to amounts collected by the taxpayer from third parties to satisfy third-party obligations to pay taxes such as the retail sales tax, use tax, and admission tax.

W. United States, Washington State governmental entities. This chapter shall not apply to gross income received by the United States or any instrumentality thereof and by the state of Washington or any municipal subdivision thereof.

X. Research and development under federal contracts. This chapter shall not apply to amounts received for research and development activities performed on behalf of, under contract to, or in partnership with the United States government. For purposes of this section, research and development activities means activities performed to discover technological information, and technical and nonroutine activities concerned with translating technological information into new or improved products, processes, techniques, formulas, inventions, or software, the application of which is intended to be useful in the development of a new or improved federal project or component thereof.

(Ord. No. 4054, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4106, § 3, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 4342, § 4, 11-19-19)


3.28.100 Deductions. Revised 1/20

In computing the license fee or tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax the following items:

A. Membership fees and certain service fees by nonprofit youth organization. For purposes of this subsection, “nonprofit youth organization” means a nonprofit organization engaged in character building of youth which is exempt from property tax under RCW 84.36.030. In computing tax due under this chapter, there may be deducted from the measure of tax all amounts received by a nonprofit youth organization:

1. As membership fees or dues, irrespective of the fact that the payment of the membership fees or dues to the organization may entitle its members, in addition to other rights or privileges, to receive services from the organization or to use the organization’s facilities; or

2. From members of the organization for camping and recreational services provided by the organization or for the use of the organization’s camping and recreational facilities.

B. Initiation fees, dues, and certain charges received by nonprofit organization. In computing tax, a nonprofit organization may deduct from the measure of tax amounts derived from bona fide:

1. Initiation fees;

2. Dues;

3. Contributions;

4. Donations;

5. Tuition fees;

6. Charges made by a nonprofit trade or professional organization for attending or occupying space at a trade show, convention, or educational seminar sponsored by the nonprofit trade or professional organization, which trade show, convention, or educational seminar is not open to the general public;

7. Charges made for operation of nonprofit kindergartens; and 

8. Endowment funds.

This subsection shall not be construed to exempt any person, association, or society from tax liability upon selling tangible personal property or upon providing facilities or services for which a special charge is made to members or others. If dues are in exchange for any significant amount of goods or services rendered by the recipient thereof to members without any additional charge to the member, or if the dues are graduated upon the amount of goods or services rendered, the value of such goods or services shall not be considered as a deduction under this subsection.

C. Artistic and cultural organizations – Income from business activities. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax those amounts received by artistic or cultural organizations, as defined in this chapter, which represent:

1. Income derived from business activities conducted by the organization; provided, that this deduction does not apply to retail sales made by artistic and cultural organizations;

2. Amounts received from the United States or any instrumentality thereof or from the state of Washington or any municipal corporation or subdivision thereof as compensation for, or to support, artistic or cultural exhibitions, performances, or programs provided by an artistic or cultural organization for attendance or viewing by the general public; or

3. Amounts received as tuition charges collected for the privilege of attending artistic or cultural education programs.

D. Artistic or cultural organization – Deduction for tax under the manufacturing classification – Value of articles for use in displaying art objects or presenting artistic or cultural exhibitions, performances, or programs. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax by persons subject to payment of the tax under the manufacturing classification the value of articles to the extent manufacturing activities are undertaken by an artistic or cultural organization, as defined in this chapter, solely for the purpose of manufacturing articles for use by the organization in displaying art objects or presenting artistic or cultural exhibitions, performances, or programs for attendance or viewing by the general public.

E. Day care activities. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax amounts derived from day care activities by any organization organized and operated for charitable, educational, or other purposes which is exempt from taxation pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as hereafter amended; provided, however, that amounts derived from selling, altering, or repairing tangible personal property shall not be deductible.

F. Compensation from public entities for health or social welfare services – Exception. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax amounts received from the United States or any instrumentality thereof or from the state of Washington or any municipal corporation or political subdivision thereof as compensation for, or to support, health or social welfare services rendered by a health or social welfare organization (as defined in RCW 82.04.431) or by a municipal corporation or political subdivision, except deductions are not allowed under this subsection for amounts that are received under an employee benefit plan. For purposes of this subsection, “employee benefit plan” includes the military benefits program authorized in 10 U.S.C. Section 1071 et seq., as amended, or amounts payable pursuant thereto.

G. Interest on investments or loans secured by mortgages or deeds of trust. In computing tax, to the extent permitted by Chapter 82.14A RCW, there may be deducted from the measure of tax by those engaged in banking, loan, security, or other financial businesses amounts derived from interest received on investments or loans primarily secured by first mortgages or trust deeds on nontransient residential properties.

H. Interest on obligations of the state, its political subdivisions, and municipal corporations. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax by those engaged in banking, loan, security, or other financial businesses amounts derived from interest paid on all obligations of the state of Washington, its political subdivisions, and municipal corporations organized pursuant to the laws thereof.

I. Interest on loans to farmers and ranchers, producers or harvesters of aquatic products, or their cooperatives. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax amounts derived as interest on loans to bona fide farmers and ranchers, producers or harvesters of aquatic products, or their cooperatives by a lending institution which is owned exclusively by its borrowers or members and which is engaged solely in the business of making loans and providing finance-related services to bona fide farmers and ranchers, producers or harvesters of aquatic products, their cooperatives, rural residents for housing, or persons engaged in furnishing farm-related or aquatic-related services to these individuals or entities.

J. Receipts from tangible personal property delivered outside the state. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax under retailing or wholesaling amounts derived from the sale of tangible personal property that is delivered by the seller to the buyer or the buyer’s representative at a location outside the state of Washington.

K. Cash discount taken by purchaser. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax the cash discount amounts actually taken by the purchaser. This deduction is not allowed in arriving at the taxable amount under the extracting or manufacturing classifications with respect to articles produced or manufactured, the reported values of which, for the purposes of this tax, have been computed according to the “value of product” provisions.

L. Credit losses of accrual basis taxpayers. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax the amount of credit losses actually sustained by taxpayers whose regular books of account are kept upon an accrual basis.

M. Repair, maintenance, replacement, etc., of residential structures and commonly held property – Eligible organizations.

1. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax amounts used solely for repair, maintenance, replacement, management, or improvement of the residential structures and commonly held property, but excluding property where fees or charges are made for use by the public who are not guests accompanied by a member, which are derived by:

a. A cooperative housing association, corporation, or partnership from a person who resides in a structure owned by the cooperative housing association, corporation, or partnership;

b. An association of owners of property as defined in RCW 64.32.010, as now or hereafter amended, from a person who is an apartment owner as defined in RCW 64.32.010; or 

c. An association of owners of residential property from a person who is a member of the association. “Association of owners of residential property” means any organization of all the owners of residential property in a defined area who all hold the same property in common within the area.

2. For the purposes of this subsection “commonly held property” includes areas required for common access such as reception areas, halls, stairways, parking, etc., and may include recreation rooms, swimming pools, and small parks or recreation areas; but is not intended to include more grounds than are normally required in a residential area, or to include such extensive areas as required for golf courses, campgrounds, hiking and riding areas, boating areas, etc.

3. To qualify for the deductions under this subsection:

a. The salary or compensation paid to officers, managers, or employees must be only for actual services rendered and at levels comparable to the salary or compensation of like positions within the country wherein the property is located;

b. Dues, fees, or assessments in excess of amounts needed for the purposes for which the deduction is allowed must be rebated to the members of the association;

c. Assets of the association or organization must be distributable to all members and must not inure to the benefit of any single member or group of members.

N. Radio and television broadcasting – Advertising agency fees – National, regional, and network advertising – Interstate allocations. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax by radio and television broadcasters amounts representing the following:

1. Advertising agencies’ fees when such fees or allowances are shown as discount or price reduction in the billing or that the billing is on a net basis, i.e., less the discount;

2. Actual gross receipts from national network, and regional advertising or a “standard deduction” as provided by RCW 82.04.280; and 

3. Local advertising revenue that represents advertising which is intended to reach potential customers of the advertiser who are located outside the state of Washington. The director may issue a rule that provides detailed guidance as to how these deductions are to be calculated.

O. Constitutional prohibitions. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of the tax amounts derived from business which the city is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution of the state of Washington or the Constitution of the United States.

P. Receipts from the sale of tangible personal property and retail services delivered outside the city but within Washington. Amounts included in the gross receipts reported on the tax return derived from the sale of tangible personal property delivered to the buyer or the buyer’s representative outside the city but within the state of Washington may be deducted from the measure of tax under the retailing, retail services, or wholesaling classification. 

Q. Professional employer services. In computing the tax, a professional employer organization may deduct from the calculation of gross income the gross income of the business derived from performing professional employer services that is equal to the portion of the fee charged to a client that represents the actual cost of wages and salaries, benefits, workers’ compensation, payroll taxes, withholding, or other assessments paid to or on behalf of a covered employee by the professional employer organization under a professional employer agreement. 

(Ord. No. 4054, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4106, § 4, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 4342, § 4, 11-19-19)


3.28.120 Tax part of overhead. Revised 1/20

It is not the intention of this chapter that the taxes or fees herein levied upon persons engaging in business be construed as taxes or fees upon the purchasers or customer, but that such taxes or fees shall be levied upon, and collectible from, the person engaging in the business activities herein designated and that such taxes or fees shall constitute a part of the cost of doing business of such persons.

(Ord. No. 4054, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 4, 11-19-19)


3.28.130 Limitation of revenue received. Revised 1/20

Revenue received from the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be dedicated to the general operations of the city subject to the following two exceptions: 

A. Revenues equivalent to the original gross receipts and square footage rates in effect from 2013 through 2018 shall first be applied to the actual cost to staff and operate the tax division, but not to exceed the amount budgeted for that division by the city council. Remaining revenue shall be allocated to the design, construction, maintenance, improvement, operation, and repair of the city’s transportation infrastructure and appurtenant improvements including, without limitation, streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, bicycle and pedestrian lanes and paths, street trees, drainage, lighting, and signalization.

B. Square footage revenues equivalent to 0.03 quarterly on business warehouse floor space and 0.01 quarterly on other business floor space shall be allocated to the city’s capital resource fund.

(Ord. No. 4054, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4136, § 1, 12-16-14; Ord. No. 4147, § 1, 5-5-15; Ord. No. 4260, § 2, 11-21-17; Ord. No. 4295, § 2, 11-20-18; Ord. No. 4342, § 4, 11-19-19)


3.28.140 Severability clause. Revised 1/20

If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected.

(Ord. No. 4054, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 4, 11-19-19)


Chapter 3.29 TAX – ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS Revised 1/20

Sections:

3.29.010    Purpose. Revised 1/20

3.29.015    Application of chapter stated. Revised 1/20

3.29.020    Definitions. Revised 1/20

3.29.021    Definitions – References to Chapter 82.32 RCW. Revised 1/20

3.29.025    Registration requirements. Revised 1/20

3.29.030    Registration certificates. Revised 1/20

3.29.040    When due and payable – Reporting periods – Monthly, quarterly, and annual returns – Threshold provisions or relief from filing requirements – Computing time periods – Failure to file returns. Revised 1/20

3.29.050    Payment methods – Mailing returns or remittances – Time extension – Deposits – Recording payments – Payment must accompany return – NSF checks. Revised 1/20

3.29.060    Records to be preserved – Examination – Estoppel to question assessment. Revised 1/20

3.29.070    Accounting methods. Revised 1/20

3.29.080    Public work contracts – Payment of fee and tax before final payment for work. Revised 1/20

3.29.090    Underpayment of tax, interest, or penalty – Interest. Revised 1/20

3.29.095    Time in which assessment may be made. Revised 1/20

3.29.100    Overpayment of tax, penalty, or interest – Credit or refund – Interest rate – Statute of limitations. Revised 1/20

3.29.110    Late payment – Disregard of written instructions – Evasion – Penalties. Revised 1/20

3.29.120    Cancellation of penalties. Revised 1/20

3.29.125    Voluntary disclosure program. Revised 1/20

3.29.130    Taxpayer quitting business – Liability of successor. Revised 1/20

3.29.140    Administrative appeal. Revised 1/20

3.29.150    Judicial review of director’s determination. Revised 1/20

3.29.160    Director to make rules. Revised 1/20

3.29.170    Ancillary allocation authority of director. Revised 1/20

3.29.180    Mailing of notices. Revised 1/20

3.29.190    Tax declared additional. Revised 1/20

3.29.200    Public disclosure – Confidentiality – Information sharing. Revised 1/20

3.29.210    Tax constitutes debt. Revised 1/20

3.29.220    Unlawful actions – Violation – Penalties. Revised 1/20

3.29.230    Suspension or revocation of registration certificate. Revised 1/20

3.29.240    Closing agreement provisions. Revised 1/20

3.29.250    Charge-off of uncollectible taxes. Revised 1/20


3.29.010 Purpose. Revised 1/20

The purpose of this chapter is to provide administrative guidelines and provisions to implement, administer, and enforce the city’s tax codes.

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.015 Application of chapter stated. Revised 1/20

The provisions of this chapter shall apply with respect to the taxes imposed under Chapter 3.18 KCC, Utility Tax; Chapter 3.21 KCC, Gambling Tax; Chapter 3.26 KCC, Admissions Tax; and Chapter 3.28 KCC, Business and Occupation Tax and under other titles, chapters, and sections in such manner and to such extent as expressly indicated in each such title, chapter, or section.

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.020 Definitions. Revised 1/20

For purposes of this chapter, the definitions contained in Chapter 3.18 KCC, Utility Tax; Chapter 3.21 KCC, Gambling Tax; Chapter 3.26 KCC, Admissions Tax; and Chapter 3.28 KCC, Business and Occupation Tax shall apply equally to the provisions of this chapter unless the term is defined otherwise in this chapter. In addition, the following definitions will apply:

A. Reporting period means:

1. A one-month period beginning the first day of each calendar month (monthly); or

2. A three-month period beginning the first day of January, April, July, or October of each year (quarterly); or

3. A 12-month period beginning the first day of January of each year (annual). 

B. Return means any document a person is required by the city to file to satisfy or establish a tax or fee obligation that is administered or collected by the city and that has a statutorily defined due date.

C. Successor means any person to whom a taxpayer quitting, selling out, exchanging, or disposing of a business sells or otherwise conveys, directly or indirectly, in bulk and not in the ordinary course of the taxpayer’s business, any part of the materials, supplies, merchandise, inventory, fixtures, or equipment of the taxpayer. Any person obligated to fulfill the terms of a contract shall be deemed a successor to any contractor defaulting in the performance of any contract as to which such person is a surety or guarantor.

D. Tax year or taxable year means the calendar year.

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.021 Definitions – References to Chapter 82.32 RCW. Revised 1/20

Where provisions of Chapter 82.32 RCW are incorporated in KCC 3.29.090, “department” as used in the RCW shall refer to the “director” as defined in KCC 3.28.030 and “warrant” as used in the RCW shall mean “citation or criminal complaint.”

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.025 Registration requirements. Revised 1/20

A. Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, any person who engages in any business or performs any act that is subject to the provisions of KCC Title 5 or Chapter 3.18 KCC, relating to utility taxes, Chapter 3.20 KCC, relating to natural or manufactured gas line use taxes, Chapter 3.21 KCC, relating to gambling taxes, Chapter 3.23 KCC, relating to lodging taxes, Chapter 3.26 KCC, relating to admissions taxes, and Chapter 3.28 KCC, relating to business and occupation taxes, even if that person is not subject to any tax imposed thereby, shall apply under the rules and regulations as the department may prescribe and, upon approval, receive from the department a registration certificate applicable to all such business engaged in or activity performed.

Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, no person shall engage in any business without being registered in compliance with the provisions of this section, and any person who is so registered must also comply with Chapter 5.01 KCC.

B. Nonregistration status. Any person whose worldwide gross proceeds of sale, gross income of business, or value of products, including byproducts, as the case may be, from all activities during any calendar year are $12,000 or less and the number of square feet of warehouse business floor space or other business floor space for each office, warehouse, or other place of business leased, owned, occupied, or otherwise maintained within the city during the reporting period, calculated to the nearest foot, is less than 550 square feet is not required to obtain a registration certificate. 

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4242, § 2, 5-2-17; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.030 Registration certificates. Revised 1/20

The city will issue a registration certificate, free of charge, acknowledging registration. The registration certificate shall be personal and nontransferable and shall be valid as long as the taxpayer continues in that business and pays any tax imposed by the city.

In the event business is transacted at two or more separate places by one taxpayer, a separate registration certificate for each place at which business is transacted shall be required. These additional certificates shall be issued at no additional fee. Where a taxpayer changes the nature of business conducted or conducts additional activities upon which a tax is imposed by KCC Title 5 or Chapter 3.18 KCC, relating to utility business taxes, Chapter 3.20 KCC, relating to natural or manufactured gas line use taxes, Chapter 3.21 KCC, relating to gambling taxes, Chapter 3.23 KCC, relating to lodging taxes, Chapter 3.26 KCC, relating to admissions taxes, and Chapter 3.28 KCC, relating to business and occupation taxes, that taxpayer shall apply for and receive a new registration certificate at no additional fee.

Each registration certificate shall be numbered and shall show the name, business location, mailing address, and any other information that the director deems necessary. The certificate of registration shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the place of business for which it is issued.

Where a place of business of the taxpayer is changed, the taxpayer shall notify the department and, upon approval, the department will issue a new certificate at no additional fee.

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.040 When due and payable – Reporting periods – Monthly, quarterly, and annual returns – Threshold provisions or relief from filing requirements – Computing time periods – Failure to file returns. Revised 1/20

A. The tax imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable in quarterly installments. At the director’s discretion, businesses may be assigned to a monthly, annual or nonreporting period depending on the tax amount owing or type of tax. Until December 31, 2020, tax payments are due on or before the last day of the next month following the end of the assigned reporting period covered by the return. Effective January 1, 2021, tax payments are due on or before the time as provided in RCW 82.32.045(1), (2), and (3).

B. Taxes shall be paid as provided in this chapter and accompanied by a return on forms as prescribed by the director. The return shall be signed by the taxpayer personally or by a responsible officer or agent of the taxpayer. The individual signing the return shall swear or affirm that the information in the return is complete and true.

C. Tax returns must be filed and returned by the due date whether or not any tax is owed, unless the taxpayer is in active nonreporting status.

D. Nonreporting status.

1. Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, the director may relieve any person of the requirement to file returns if the person meets exemption criteria under subsection (D)(2) of this section. 

2. For purposes of the tax imposed by Chapter 3.28 KCC, any person whose annual worldwide value of products, gross proceeds of sales, or gross income of the business, subject to tax after all allowable deductions, is more than $12,000 but less than or equal to $250,000 and whose combined taxable business warehouse square footage within the city is 4,000 square feet or less, and whose combined taxable other business floor space is 12,000 square feet or less, need not file and submit a return to the director. Persons whose value of products, gross proceeds of sales, or gross income of the business, subject to tax after all allowable deductions, is greater than the above thresholds shall file and submit a return to the director. The gross receipts and deduction amounts shall be entered on the tax return even though no tax may be due.

E. A taxpayer that commences to engage in business activity shall file a return and pay the tax or fee for the portion of the reporting period during which the taxpayer is engaged in business activity subject to the conditions set forth in subsection (D) of this section.

F. Except as otherwise specifically provided by any other provision of this chapter, in computing any period of days prescribed by this chapter the day of the act or event from which the designated period of time runs shall not be included. The last day of the period shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or city or federal legal holiday, in which case the last day of such period shall be the next succeeding day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday, nor city or federal legal holiday.

G. If any taxpayer fails, neglects, or refuses to make a return as and when required in this chapter, the director is authorized to determine the amount of the tax or fees payable by obtaining facts and information upon which to base the director’s estimate of the tax or fees due. Such assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct and shall be the amount of tax owed to the city by the taxpayer. The director shall notify the taxpayer by mail of the amount of tax so determined, together with any penalty, interest, and fees due; the total of such amounts shall thereupon become immediately due and payable.

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4242, § 3, 5-2-17; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.050 Payment methods – Mailing returns or remittances – Time extension – Deposits – Recording payments – Payment must accompany return – NSF checks. Revised 1/20

A. Taxes shall be paid to the director in United States currency by bank draft, certified check, cashier’s check, personal check, money order, cash, or by wire transfer or electronic payment if such wire transfer or electronic payment is authorized by the director. If payment so received is not paid by the bank on which it is drawn, the taxpayer, by whom such payment is tendered, shall remain liable for payment of the tax and for all legal penalties, the same as if such payment had not been tendered. Acceptance of any sum by the director shall not discharge the tax or fee due unless the amount paid is the full amount due.

B. A return or remittance that is transmitted to the city by United States mail shall be deemed filed or received on the date shown by the cancellation mark stamped by the Post Office upon the envelope containing it. The director may allow electronic filing of returns or remittances from any taxpayer. A return or remittance which is transmitted to the city electronically shall be deemed filed or received according to procedures set forth by the director.

C. If a written request is received prior to the due date, the director, for good cause, may grant, in writing, additional time within which to make and file returns.

D. The director shall keep full and accurate records of all funds received or refunded. The director shall apply payments first against all penalties and interest owing, and then upon the tax, without regard to any direction of the taxpayer.

E. For any return not accompanied by a remittance of the tax shown to be due thereon, the taxpayer shall be deemed to have failed or refused to file a return and shall be subject to the penalties and interest provided in this chapter.

F. Any payment made that is returned for lack of sufficient funds or for any other reason will not be considered received until payment by certified check, money order, or cash of the original amount due, plus a “nonsufficient funds” (NSF) charge of $25, is received by the director. 

G. The director is authorized, but not required, to mail tax return forms to taxpayers, but failure of the taxpayer to receive any such forms shall not excuse the taxpayer from filing returns and making payment of the taxes or fees, when and as due under this chapter.

H. For gambling tax, in addition to the tax return, a copy of the taxpayer’s quarterly report to the Washington State Gambling Commission required by Chapter 230-08 WAC for the period in which the tax accrued shall accompany remittance of the tax amount due.

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.060 Records to be preserved – Examination – Estoppel to question assessment. Revised 1/20

Every person liable for any fee or tax imposed by this chapter shall keep and preserve, for a period of five years after filing a tax return, such records as may be necessary to determine the amount of any fee or tax for which the person may be liable, which records shall include copies of all federal income tax and state tax returns and reports made by the person. All books, records, papers, invoices, vendor lists, inventories, stocks of merchandise, and other data including federal income tax and state tax returns and reports shall be open for examination at any time by the director or its duly authorized agent. Every person’s business premises shall be open for inspection or examination by the director or a duly authorized agent.

A. If a person does not keep the necessary books and records within the city, it shall be sufficient if such person (1) produces within the city such books and records as may be required by the director, or (2) bears the cost of examination by the director’s agent at the place where such books and records are kept; provided, that the person electing to bear such cost shall pay in advance to the director the estimated amount thereof including round-trip fare, lodging, meals, and incidental expenses, subject to adjustment upon completion of the examination.

B. If national security clearance status or federal regulation bars access to certain documents, facilities, or other necessary information, the auditor can implement alternative audit methods that determine, as accurately as possible and with the least possible expenditure of time, the amount of tax due.

C. Any person who fails, or refuses a department request, to provide or make available records, or to allow inspection or examination of the business premises, shall be forever barred from questioning in any court action the correctness of any assessment of taxes made by the city for any period for which such records have not been provided, made available, or kept and preserved, or in respect of which inspection or examination of the business premises has been denied. The director is authorized to determine the amount of the tax or fees payable by obtaining facts and information upon which to base the estimate of the tax or fees due. Such fee or tax assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct and shall be the amount of tax owing the city by the taxpayer. The director shall notify the taxpayer by mail the amount of tax so determined, together with any penalty, interest, and fees due; the total of such amounts shall thereupon become immediately due and payable.

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.070 Accounting methods. Revised 1/20

A. A taxpayer may file tax returns in each reporting period with amounts based upon cash receipts only if the taxpayer’s books of account are kept on a cash receipts basis. A taxpayer that does not regularly keep books of account on a cash receipts basis must file returns with amounts based on the accrual method.

B. The taxes imposed and the returns required hereunder shall be upon a calendar year basis.

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.080 Public work contracts – Payment of fee and tax before final payment for work. Revised 1/20

The director may, before issuing any final payment to any person performing any public work contract for the city, require such person to pay in full all license fees or taxes due under this title from such person on account of such contract or otherwise, and may require such taxpayer to file with the director a verified list of all subcontractors supplying labor and/or materials to the person in connection with said public work.

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.090 Underpayment of tax, interest, or penalty – Interest. Revised 1/20

A. If, upon examination of any returns, or from other information obtained by the director, it appears that a tax or penalty less than that properly due has been paid, the director shall assess the additional amount found to be due and shall add thereto interest on the tax only. The director shall notify the person by mail of the additional amount, which shall become due and shall be paid within 30 days from the date of the notice, or within such time as the director may provide in writing.

B.1. The director shall compute interest in accordance with RCW 82.32.050 as it now exists or as it may be amended. 

2. If subsection (B)(1) of this section is held to be invalid, then the provisions of RCW 82.32.050 existing at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall apply.

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.095 Time in which assessment may be made. Revised 1/20

The director shall not assess, or correct an assessment for, additional taxes, penalties, or interest due more than four years after the close of the calendar year in which they were incurred, except that the director may issue an assessment:

A. Against a person who is not currently registered or licensed or has not filed a tax return as required by this chapter for taxes due within the period commencing 10 years prior to the close of the calendar year in which the person was contacted in writing by the director;

B. Against a person that has committed fraud or who misrepresented a material fact; or

C. Against a person that has executed a written waiver of such limitations.

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.100 Overpayment of tax, penalty, or interest – Credit or refund – Interest rate – Statute of limitations. Revised 1/20

A. If, upon receipt of an application for a refund, or during an audit or examination of the taxpayer’s records and tax returns, the director determines that the amount of tax, penalty, or interest paid is in excess of that properly due, the excess amount shall be credited to the taxpayer’s account or shall be refunded to the taxpayer. Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, no refund or credit shall be made for taxes, penalties, or interest paid more than four years prior to the beginning of the calendar year in which the refund application is made or examination of records is completed.

B. The execution of a written waiver shall extend the time for applying for or making a refund or credit of any taxes paid during, or attributable to, the years covered by the waiver if, prior to the expiration of the waiver period, an application for refund of such taxes is made by the taxpayer or the director discovers that a refund or credit is due.

C. Refunds shall be made by means of vouchers approved by the director and by the issuance of a city check or warrants drawn upon and payable from such funds as the city may provide.

D. Any final judgment for which a recovery is granted by any court of competent jurisdiction for tax, penalties, interest, or costs paid by any person shall be paid in the same manner, as provided in subsection (C) of this section, upon the filing with the director a certified copy of the order or judgment of the court.

E.1. The director shall compute interest on refunds or credits of amounts paid or other recovery allowed a taxpayer in accordance with RCW 82.32.060 as it now exists or as it may be amended.

2. If subsection (E)(1) of this section is held to be invalid, then the provisions of RCW 82.32.060 existing at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall apply.

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.110 Late payment – Disregard of written instructions – Evasion – Penalties.  Revised 1/20

A. If payment of any tax due on a return to be filed by a taxpayer is not received by the director by the due date, the director shall add a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(1), as it now exists or as it may be amended.

B. If the director determines that any tax has been substantially underpaid as defined in RCW 82.32.090(2), there shall be added a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(2), as it now exists or as it may be amended.

C. If a citation or criminal complaint is issued by the director for the collection of taxes, fees, assessments, interest, or penalties, there shall be added thereto a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(3), as it now exists or as it may be amended. 

D. If the director finds that a person has engaged in any business or performed any act upon which a tax is imposed under this title and that person has not obtained from the director a registration certificate as required by KCC 3.29.025 and 3.29.030, the director shall impose a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(4), as it now exists or as it may be amended. No penalty shall be imposed under this subsection (D) if the person who has engaged in business without a registration certificate obtains a registration certificate prior to being notified by the director of the need to be registered.

E. If the director determines that all or any part of a deficiency resulted from the taxpayer’s failure to follow specific written tax reporting instructions, there shall be assessed a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(5), as it now exists or as it may be amended. 

F. If the director finds that all or any part of the deficiency resulted from an intent to evade the tax payable, the director shall assess a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(6), as it now exists or as it may be amended. 

G. The penalties imposed under subsections (A) through (E) of this section can each be imposed on the same tax found to be due. This subsection does not prohibit or restrict the application of other penalties authorized by law.

H. The director shall not impose both the evasion penalty and the penalty for disregarding specific written instructions on the same tax found to be due. 

I. For the purposes of this section, return means any document a person is required by the city to file to satisfy or establish a tax or fee obligation that is administered or collected by the city, and that has a statutorily defined due date.

J. If incorporation into the Kent City Code of future changes to RCW 82.32.090 is deemed invalid, then the provisions of RCW 82.32.090 existing at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter is effective shall apply.

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.120 Cancellation of penalties.  Revised 1/20

A. The director may cancel any penalties imposed under KCC 3.29.110(A) if the taxpayer shows that its failure to timely file or pay the tax was due to reasonable cause and not willful neglect. Willful neglect is presumed unless the taxpayer shows that it exercised ordinary business care and prudence in making arrangements to file the return and pay the tax but was, nevertheless, due to circumstances beyond the taxpayer’s control, unable to file or pay by the due date. The director has no authority to cancel any other penalties or to cancel penalties for any other reason except as provided in subsection (C) of this section. 

B. A request for cancellation of penalties must be received by the director within 30 days after the date the department mails the notice that the penalties are due. The request must be in writing and contain competent proof of all pertinent facts supporting a reasonable cause determination. In all cases the burden of proving the facts rests upon the taxpayer. 

C. The director may cancel the penalties in KCC 3.29.110(A) one time if a person:

1. Is not currently registered and filing returns;

2. Was unaware of its responsibility to file and pay tax; and

3. Obtained a registration certificate and any applicable business licenses and filed past due tax returns within 30 days after being notified by the department.

D. The director shall not cancel any interest charged upon amounts due.

E. The director may cancel the penalties imposed under KCC 3.29.110(A) one time for a person:

1. If payment of any tax due on a return to be filed by a taxpayer was received by the director by the due date for the previous 24 months; or

2. If payment of any tax due on a return to be filed by a taxpayer was received by the director by the due date for all previous months, if the person has not been required to file a return for the previous 24 months.

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4242, § 4, 5-2-17; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.125 Voluntary disclosure program. Revised 1/20

A person that has not obtained from the director a registration certificate as required by KCC 3.29.025 and 3.29.030 that voluntarily obtains a registration certificate prior to being notified by the department may have certain penalties waived under the voluntary disclosure program.

A. To be eligible for the program, the unregistered person:

1. Must not have been contacted by the city regarding registration; and

2. Must not have engaged in evasion or misrepresentation in reporting taxes properly due.

If the director determines that the person had been previously contacted in order to determine registration and reporting requirements or other enforcement issues, the person will not qualify for the voluntary disclosure program.

B. The director shall not assess for taxes due more than four years prior to the beginning of the calendar year of registration.

C. The director shall cancel the penalties in KCC 3.29.110(A), (B), and (D).

D. The director shall not cancel any interest charged upon amounts due.

E. Underpayment of tax. If a person has obtained from the director a registration certificate as required by KCC 3.29.025 and 3.29.030, but discovers that tax less than that properly due has been paid, then an amended return shall be filed. No penalty in accordance with KCC 3.29.110(B) shall be imposed for voluntarily correcting tax due on a filed return. The penalty imposed under KCC 3.29.110(B) shall not be waived during an audit or examination of the taxpayer’s records and tax returns.

(Ord. No. 4242, § 5, 5-2-17; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.130 Taxpayer quitting business – Liability of successor. Revised 1/20

A. Whenever any taxpayer quits business, sells out, exchanges, or otherwise disposes of his business or his stock of goods, any tax payable hereunder shall become immediately due and payable. Such taxpayer shall, within 10 days thereafter, make a return and pay the tax due. 

B. Any person who becomes a successor shall become liable for the full amount of any tax owing. The successor shall withhold from the purchase price a sum sufficient to pay any tax due to the city from the taxpayer until such time as: (1) the taxpayer shall produce a receipt from the city showing payment in full of any tax due or a certificate that no tax is due, or (2) more than six months has passed since the successor notified the director of the acquisition and the director has not issued and notified the successor of an assessment. 

C. Payment of the tax by the successor shall, to the extent thereof, be deemed a payment upon the purchase price. If such payment is greater in amount than the purchase price, the amount of the difference shall become a debt due such successor from the taxpayer. 

D. Notwithstanding the above, if a successor gives written notice to the director of the acquisition, and the director does not within six months of the date it received the notice issue an assessment against the taxpayer and mail a copy of that assessment to the successor, the successor shall not be liable for the tax.

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.140 Administrative appeal. Revised 1/20

A. Correction of tax. Any person, except one who has failed to comply with KCC 3.29.060, having been issued a notice of additional taxes, delinquent taxes, interest, or penalties assessed by the director may, within 30 days after the issuance of such notice or within the period covered by any extension of the due date granted by the director, request a correction of the amount of the assessment and a conference with the director for review of the assessment. Interest and penalties assessed shall continue to accrue during the director’s review of a request for a correction, except and to the extent that the director later determines that a tax assessment was too high or the delay in issuing a determination is due to unreasonable delays caused by the director. The director shall make a final determination regarding the assessment and shall notify the taxpayer of the director’s determination within 60 days after the conference, unless otherwise notified in writing by the director. Such determination shall be subject to appeal pursuant to subsection (B) of this section. If no request for correction is filed within the time period provided herein, the assessment covered by such notice shall become final and immediately due and payable, and no appeal to the hearing examiner shall be allowed.

B. Appeal to the hearing examiner. Any person aggrieved by the amount of any fee, tax, interest, or penalty determined by the director to be due under the provisions of this chapter or Chapter 3.18 KCC, Utility Tax; Chapter 3.21 KCC, Gambling Tax; Chapter 3.26 KCC, Admissions Tax; and Chapter 3.28 KCC, Business and Occupation Tax may, upon full payment of the amount assessed, appeal such determination pursuant to the following procedures:

1. Form of appeal. It must be in writing and must contain the following:

a. The name and address of the taxpayer;

b. A statement identifying the determination of the director from which the appeal is taken;

c. A statement setting forth the grounds upon which the appeal is taken and identifying specific errors the director is alleged to have made in making the determination; and

d. A statement identifying the requested relief from the determination being appealed.

2. Time and place to appeal. The appeal shall be filed with the office of the city clerk with a copy to the director no later than 30 days following the date on which the determination of the director was mailed to the taxpayer. A $250 filing fee shall be submitted with the appeal, which filing fee is required to process the appeal. If no appeal is filed within the time period provided herein, the assessment covered by such notice shall become final and immediately due and payable. No refund request may be made for the audit period covered in that assessment. Failure to follow the appeal procedures in this section shall preclude the taxpayer’s right to appeal.

3. Appeal hearing. The city’s hearing examiner shall, as soon as practical, fix a time and place for the hearing of such appeal, and shall cause a notice of the time and place thereof to be delivered or mailed to the parties. The hearing shall be conducted in accord with the provisions of Chapter 1.04 KCC and procedures developed by the hearing examiner, at which time the appellant taxpayer and the director shall have the opportunity to be heard and to introduce evidence relevant to the subject of the appeal.

4. Burden of proof. The appellant taxpayer shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the determination of the director is erroneous.

5. Hearing record. The hearing examiner shall make an electronic sound recording of each appeal unless the hearing is conducted solely in writing. The hearing examiner may, by subpoena, require the attendance of any person at the hearing, and may also require him or her to produce pertinent books and records. Any person served with such a subpoena shall appear at the time and place therein stated and produce the books and records required, if any, and shall testify truthfully under oath administered by the hearing examiner as to any matter required of him or her pertinent to the appeal; and it shall be unlawful for him or her to fail or refuse to do so. The city attorney shall seek enforcement of a hearing examiner subpoena in an appropriate court.

6. Decision of the hearing examiner. Following the hearing, the hearing examiner shall enter a decision on the appeal, supported by written findings and conclusions in support thereof. A copy of the findings, conclusions, and decision shall be mailed to the appellant taxpayer and to the director. The decision shall state the correct amount of the fee, tax, interest or penalty owing.

7. Interest accrual or payment. Interest and/or penalties shall continue to accrue on all unpaid amounts, in accordance with KCC 3.29.090 and 3.29.110, notwithstanding the fact that an appeal has been filed. If the hearing examiner determines that the taxpayer is owed a refund, such refund amount shall be paid to the taxpayer in accordance with KCC 3.29.100.

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4242, § 6, 5-2-17; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.150 Judicial review of director’s determination. Revised 1/20

Any person, except one who has failed to comply with KCC 3.29.060, having paid any tax as required and feeling aggrieved by the amount of the tax assessed, and after first exhausting the right of administrative appeal set forth in this chapter, may seek judicial review in the King County superior court within 21 days of the date of the decision of the hearing examiner. The taxpayer shall set forth the amount of the tax imposed upon the taxpayer that the taxpayer concedes to be the correct amount of tax and the reason why the tax imposed should be reduced or abated. The trial in the superior court shall be de novo in accordance with the laws of the state of Washington. The burden shall rest upon the taxpayer to prove that the tax paid by the taxpayer is incorrect, either in whole or in part, and to establish the correct amount of the tax.

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.160 Director to make rules. Revised 1/20

The director shall have the power, from time to time, to adopt, publish, and enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter and Chapter 3.18 KCC, Utility Tax; Chapter 3.21 KCC, Gambling Tax; Chapter 3.26 KCC, Admissions Tax; and Chapter 3.28 KCC, Business and Occupation Tax or with law for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter and for the administration of Chapters 3.18, 3.21, 3.26 and 3.28 KCC. It shall be unlawful to violate or fail to comply with any such rule or regulation.

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.170 Ancillary allocation authority of director. Revised 1/20

The director is authorized to enter into agreements with other Washington cities which impose an “eligible gross receipts tax”:

A. To conduct an audit or joint audit of a taxpayer by using an auditor employed by the city of Kent, another city, or a contract auditor; provided, that such contract auditor’s pay is not in any way based upon the amount of tax assessed;

B. To allocate or apportion in a manner that fairly reflects the gross receipts earned from activities conducted within the respective cities the gross proceeds of sales, gross receipts, or gross income of the business, or taxes due from any person that is required to pay an eligible gross receipts tax to more than one Washington city;

C. To apply the city’s tax prospectively where a taxpayer has no office or place of business within the city and has paid tax on all gross income to another Washington city where the taxpayer is located; provided, that the other city maintains an eligible gross receipts tax, and the income was not derived from contracts with the city.

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.180 Mailing of notices. Revised 1/20

Any notice required by this chapter to be mailed to any taxpayer, registrant, or licensee shall be sent by ordinary mail, addressed to the address of the taxpayer, registrant, or licensee as shown by the records of the director. Failure of the taxpayer, registrant, or licensee to receive any such mailed notice shall not release the taxpayer, registrant, or licensee from any tax, fee, interest, or any penalties thereon, nor shall such failure operate to extend any time limit set by the provisions of this chapter. It is the responsibility of the taxpayer to inform the director in writing about a change in the taxpayer’s address. 

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.190 Tax declared additional. Revised 1/20

The tax and any applicable fee herein levied shall be additional to any license fee or tax imposed or levied under any law or any other ordinance of the city of Kent except as herein otherwise expressly provided.

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.200 Public disclosure – Confidentiality – Information sharing.  Revised 1/20

A. For purposes of this section, defined terms shall be as set forth in KCC 3.29.020:

1. Disclose means to make known to any person in any manner whatever a return or tax information.

2. Tax information means:

a. A taxpayer’s identity;

b. The nature, source, or amount of the taxpayer’s income, payments, receipts, deductions, exemption, credits, assets, liability, net worth, tax liability deficiencies, over-assessments, or tax payments, whether taken from the taxpayer’s books and records or any other source;

c. Whether the taxpayer’s return was, is being, or will be examined or subject to other investigation or processing; or

d. Other data received by, recorded by, prepared by, or provided to the city with respect to the determination or the existence, or possible existence, of liability, or the amount thereof, of a person under Chapter 3.28 KCC for a tax, penalty, interest, fine, forfeiture, or other imposition, or offense. However, data, material, or documents that do not disclose information related to a specific or identifiable taxpayer do not constitute tax information under this section. Nothing in this chapter requires any person possessing data, material, or documents made confidential and privileged by this section to delete information from such data, material, or documents so as to permit its disclosure.

3. City agency means every city office, department, division, bureau, board, commission, or other city agency.

4. Taxpayer identity means the taxpayer’s name, address, telephone number, registration number, or any combination thereof, or any other information disclosing the identity of the taxpayer.

B. Returns and tax information are confidential and privileged, and except as authorized by this section, neither the director nor any other person may disclose any return or tax information. 

C. This section does not prohibit the director from: 

1. Disclosing such return or tax information in a civil or criminal judicial proceeding or an administrative proceeding: 

a. In respect of any tax imposed under Chapter 3.28 KCC if the taxpayer or its officer or other person liable under this title is a party in the proceeding; or 

b. In which the taxpayer about whom such return or tax information is sought and another state agency are adverse parties in the proceeding;

2. Disclosing, subject to such requirements and conditions as the director prescribes by rules adopted pursuant to KCC 3.29.160, such return or tax information regarding a taxpayer to such taxpayer or to such person or persons as that taxpayer may designate in a request for, or consent to, such disclosure, or to any other person, at the taxpayer’s request, to the extent necessary to comply with a request for information or assistance made by the taxpayer to such other person. However, tax information not received from the taxpayer must not be so disclosed if the director determines that such disclosure would compromise any investigation or litigation by any federal, state, or local government agency in connection with the civil or criminal liability of the taxpayer or another person, or that such disclosure would identify a confidential informant, or that such disclosure is contrary to any agreement entered into by the department that provides for the reciprocal exchange of information with other government agencies which agreement requires confidentiality with respect to such information unless such information is required to be disclosed to the taxpayer by the order of any court; 

3. Publishing statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular returns or reports or items thereof; 

4. Disclosing such return or tax information, for official purposes only, to the mayor or city attorney, or to any city agency, or to any member of the city council or their authorized designees dealing with matters of taxation, revenue, trade, commerce, the control of industry, or the professions; 

5. Permitting the city’s records to be audited and examined by the proper state officer, his or her agents, and employees; 

6. Disclosing any such return or tax information to a peace officer as defined in RCW 9A.04.110 or county prosecuting attorney, for official purposes. The disclosure may be made only in response to a search warrant, subpoena, or other court order, unless the disclosure is for the purpose of criminal tax enforcement. A peace officer or county prosecuting attorney who receives the return or tax information may disclose that return or tax information only for use in the investigation and a related court proceeding, or in the court proceeding for which the return or tax information originally was sought or where otherwise allowed to be disclosed under this section; 

7. Disclosing any such return or tax information to the proper officer of the Internal Revenue Service of the United States, the Canadian government or provincial governments of Canada, or to the proper officer of the tax department of any state or city or town or county, for official purposes, but only if the statutes of the United States, Canada or its provincial governments, or of such other state or city or town or county, as the case may be, grants substantially similar privileges to the proper officers of the city; 

8. Disclosing any such return or tax information to the United States Department of Justice, including the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, the Department of Defense, the Immigration and Customs Enforcement and the Customs and Border Protection Agencies of the United States Department of Homeland Security, the United States Coast Guard, the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau of the United States Department of Treasury, and the United States Department of Transportation, or any authorized representative of these federal agencies or their successors, for official purposes; 

9. Publishing or otherwise disclosing the text of a written determination designated by the director as a precedent pursuant to RCW 82.32.410; 

10. Disclosing, in a manner that is not associated with other tax information, the taxpayer name, entity type, business address, mailing address, revenue tax registration numbers and the active/closed status of such registrations, state or local business license registration identification and the active/closed status and effective dates of such licenses, reseller permit numbers and the expiration date and status of such permits, North American Industry Classification System or Standard Industrial Classification code of a taxpayer, and the dates of opening and closing of business. Except that this subsection may not be construed as giving authority to the city or any recipient to give, sell, or provide access to any list of taxpayers for any commercial purpose; 

11. Disclosing such return or tax information that is also maintained by another Washington State or local governmental agency as a public record available for inspection and copying under the provisions of Chapter 42.56 RCW or is a document maintained by a court of record and is not otherwise prohibited from disclosure; 

12. Disclosing such return or tax information to the United States Department of Agriculture, or successor department or agency, for the limited purpose of investigating food stamp fraud by retailers; 

13. Disclosing to a financial institution, escrow company, or title company, in connection with specific real property that is the subject of a real estate transaction, current amounts due the city for a filed tax warrant, judgment, or lien against the real property; 

14. Disclosing to a person against whom the director has asserted liability as a successor under KCC 3.29.130 return or tax information pertaining to the specific business of the taxpayer to which the person has succeeded; 

15. Disclosing real estate excise tax affidavit forms filed under Chapter 3.19 KCC in the possession of the city, including real estate excise tax affidavit forms for transactions exempt or otherwise not subject to tax;

16. Disclosing such return or tax information to the court or hearing examiner in respect to the city’s application for a subpoena if there is probable cause to believe that the records in possession of a third party will aid the director in connection with its official duties under this title or a civil or criminal investigation. 

D.1. The director may disclose return or taxpayer information to a person under investigation or during any court or administrative proceeding against a person under investigation as provided in this subsection (D). The disclosure must be in connection with the director’s official duties under KCC Title 3, or a civil or criminal investigation. The disclosure may occur only when the person under investigation and the person in possession of data, materials, or documents are parties to the return or tax information to be disclosed. The director may disclose return or tax information such as invoices, contracts, bills, statements, resale or exemption certificates, or checks. However, the director may not disclose general ledgers, sales or cash receipt journals, check registers, accounts receivable/payable ledgers, general journals, financial statements, expert’s workpapers, income tax returns, state tax returns, tax return workpapers, or other similar data, materials, or documents. 

2. Before disclosure of any tax return or tax information under this subsection (D), the director must, through written correspondence, inform the person in possession of the data, materials, or documents to be disclosed. The correspondence must clearly identify the data, materials, or documents to be disclosed. The director may not disclose any tax return or tax information under this subsection (D) until the time period allowed in subsection (D)(3) of this section has expired or until the court has ruled on any challenge brought under subsection (D)(3) of this section. 

3. The person in possession of the data, materials, or documents to be disclosed by the director has 20 days from the receipt of the written request required under subsection (D)(2) of this section to petition the superior court of the county in which the petitioner resides for injunctive relief. The court must limit or deny the request of the director if the court determines that: 

a. The data, materials, or documents sought for disclosure are cumulative or duplicative, or are obtainable from some other source that is more convenient, less burdensome, or less expensive; 

b. The production of the data, materials, or documents sought would be unduly burdensome or expensive, taking into account the needs of the director, the amount in controversy, limitations on the petitioner’s resources, and the importance of the issues at stake; or 

c. The data, materials, or documents sought for disclosure contain trade secret information that, if disclosed, could harm the petitioner. 

4. The director must reimburse reasonable expenses for the production of data, materials, or documents incurred by the person in possession of the data, materials, or documents to be disclosed. 

5. Requesting information under subsection (D)(2) of this section that may indicate that a taxpayer is under investigation does not constitute a disclosure of tax return or tax information under this section. 

E. Service of a subpoena issued by the court or by the hearing examiner pursuant to Chapter 2.32 KCC and the ancillary administrative rules does not constitute a disclosure of return or tax information under this section. Notwithstanding anything else to the contrary in this section, a person served with a subpoena issued by the court or by the hearing examiner may disclose the existence or content of the subpoena to that person’s legal counsel.

F. Any person acquiring knowledge of any return or tax information in the course of his or her employment with the city and any person acquiring knowledge of any return or tax information as provided under subsection (C)(4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (9), or (11) of this section, who discloses any such return or tax information to another person not entitled to knowledge of such return or tax information under the provisions of this section, is guilty of a misdemeanor. If the person guilty of such violation is an officer or employee of the state, such person must forfeit such office or employment and is incapable of holding any public office or employment in this city for a period of two years thereafter. 

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.210 Tax constitutes debt. Revised 1/20

Any applicable fee or tax due and unpaid under this chapter, and all interest and penalties thereon, shall constitute a debt to the city of Kent and may be collected in the same manner as any other debt in like amount, which remedy shall be in addition to all other existing remedies.

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.220 Unlawful actions – Violation – Penalties. Revised 1/20

A. It shall be unlawful for any person subject to the tax, fee, or registration provisions of this chapter:

1. To violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or any lawful rule or regulation adopted by the director;

2. To make any false statement on any license or registration application or tax return; 

3. To aid or abet any person in any attempt to evade payment of a license, or fee, or tax;

4. To fail to appear or testify in response to a subpoena;

5. To testify falsely in any investigation, audit, or proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter.

B. Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a gross misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter may be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000, imprisonment not to exceed one year, or both fine and imprisonment. Penalties or punishments provided in this chapter shall be in addition to all other penalties provided by law.

C. Any person, or officer of a corporation, convicted of continuing to engage in business after the revocation of a registration certificate shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine not to exceed $5,000, or imprisonment not to exceed one year, or both fine and imprisonment.

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.230 Suspension or revocation of registration certificate. Revised 1/20

A. The director, or designee, shall have the power and authority to suspend or revoke any registration certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter. The director, or designee, shall notify such registrant in writing by certified mail of the suspension or revocation of his or her registration certificate and the grounds therefor. Any registration certificate issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked based on one or more of the following grounds:

1. The registration certificate was procured by fraud or false representation of fact.

2. The registrant has failed to comply with any provisions of Chapter 3.28 KCC and this chapter.

3. The registrant has failed to comply with any provisions of the Kent City Code.

4. The registrant is in default in any payment of any license fee or tax under Chapter 3.28 KCC and this chapter.

5. The registrant or employee has been convicted of a crime involving the business.

B. Any registrant may, within 30 days from the date that the suspension or revocation notice was mailed to the registrant, appeal from such suspension or revocation by filing a written notice of appeal (“petition”) setting forth the grounds therefor with the director. A copy of the petition must be provided by the registrant to the director and the city attorney on or before the date the petition is filed with the city clerk. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures for hearing contested cases set out in KCC 3.29.140. The hearing examiner shall set a date for hearing said appeal and notify the registrant by mail of the time and place of the hearing. After the hearing thereon the hearing examiner shall, after appropriate findings of fact, and conclusions of law, affirm, modify, or overrule the suspension or revocation and reinstate the registration certificate, and may impose any terms upon the continuance of the registration certificate.

No suspension or revocation of a registration certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall take effect until 30 days after the mailing of the notice thereof by the director, and if appeal is taken as herein prescribed the suspension or revocation shall be stayed pending final action on the appeal. All registration certificates which are suspended or revoked shall be surrendered to the city on the effective date of such suspension or revocation.

The decision of the hearing examiner shall be final. The registrant and/or the director may seek review of the decision by the superior court of Washington in and for King County. If review is sought as herein prescribed the suspension or revocation shall be stayed pending final action by the superior court.

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.240 Closing agreement provisions. Revised 1/20

The director may enter into an agreement in writing with any person relating to the liability of such person in respect of any tax imposed by any of the chapters within this title and administered by this chapter for any taxable period(s). Upon approval of such agreement, evidenced by execution thereof by the director and the person so agreeing, the agreement shall be final and conclusive as to the tax liability or tax immunity covered thereby, and, except upon a showing of fraud or malfeasance, or misrepresentation of a material fact:

A. The case shall not be reopened as to the matters agreed upon, or the agreement modified, by the director or the taxpayer; and 

B. In any suit, action or proceeding, such agreement, or any determination, assessment, collection, payment, abatement, refund, or credit made in accordance therewith, shall not be annulled, modified, set aside, or disregarded.

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


3.29.250 Charge-off of uncollectible taxes. Revised 1/20

The director may charge off any tax, penalty, or interest that is owed by a taxpayer, if the director reasonably ascertains that the cost of collecting such amounts would be greater than the total amount that is owed or likely to be collected from the taxpayer.

(Ord. No. 4055, § 2, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 4342, § 5, 11-19-19)


Chapter 3.40 SPECIFIC FUNDS*

Sections:

Part 1. Generally 

3.40.010    Definition. 

3.40.020    General fund. 

3.40.040    Interfund loans. 

Part 2. Arterial Street Fund 

3.40.200    Established. 

3.40.210    Expenditures. 

Part 3. Environmental Mitigation Fund 

3.40.300    Environmental mitigation fund. 

3.40.310    Purpose. 

3.40.320    Administration. 

3.40.330    Disbursements. 

Part 4. Housing and Community Development Fund 

3.40.400    Created. 

3.40.420    Disbursements. 

Part 5. Local Improvement District Bond Guaranty Fund 

3.40.500    Created. 

3.40.510    Taxes levied. 

3.40.520    Payment from fund. 

Part 6. Equipment Rental Fund 

3.40.600    Created. 

3.40.610    Purpose. 

3.40.620    Revenue. 

3.40.630    Disbursements. 

3.40.640    Administration. 

3.40.650    Transfer of rolling stock. 

3.40.660    Recovery of funds. 

3.40.670    Rental rates. 

Part 7. Unemployment Trust Fund 

3.40.700    Created. 

3.40.710    Purpose. 

3.40.720    Transfers. 

3.40.730    Payments. 

Part 8. Worker’s Compensation Fund

3.40.800    Created. 

Part 9. Fireman’s Relief and Pension Fund

3.40.900    Funds. 

Part 10. Utilities Clearing Fund

3.40.1000    Created. 

Part 11. Cash Bond Fund

3.40.1100    Created. 

3.40.1110    Deposit and release. 

Part 12. Human Services Fund

3.40.1200    Human services account created. 

3.40.1210    Expenditures. 

Part 13. Boating Facility Fund

3.40.1300    Created. 

3.40.1310    Expenditures and disbursements. 

*Cross reference(s) – Art account created, § 4.04.020; deferred compensation plan fund, § 2.80.010.

PART 1. GENERALLY


3.40.010 Definition.

The city budgeting and accounting system is organized and operated on fund basis. A fund is defined as a fiscal and accounting entity with a self-balancing set of accounts recording cash and other financial resources together with all related liabilities and equities, and changes therein. Funds are segregated for the purposes of carrying on specific activities or attaining certain objectives in accordance with special regulations, restrictions, or limitations.


3.40.020 General fund.

A general fund is created. All general revenues of the city not otherwise accounted for shall be placed in the general funds and any general government expenditures not otherwise provided for shall be paid out of the general funds.

(Ord. No. 1921, §§ 1, 2. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 3.14.010, 3.14.020)


3.40.040 Interfund loans.

A. Authorization. The city council does hereby authorize the finance director, or his designee, to make interfund loans of those municipal monies which are otherwise legally available for investment purposes.

B. Procedures. The following procedures shall be used for the establishment and accounting of all interfund loans made pursuant to this section:

1. The finance director has the authority to approve short-term interfund loans for a period not to exceed three calendar months. The mayor has the authority to approve loans for a period not to exceed 12 calendar months. Interfund loans made for a period exceeding one year must be approved by the council through ordinance or resolution.

2. Interfund borrowing will bear interest based upon at least the prevailing local government investment pool rate. Interest will be charged in all cases unless:

a. The borrowing fund has no independent source of revenue other than the lending fund;

b. The borrowing fund is normally funded by the lending fund; or

c. The lending fund is the general fund, which, being unrestricted, can loan interest free, except to a proprietary fund.

3. The issuance of an interfund loan will be permissible only after the finance director has conducted an analysis of the loaning fund which indicates that excess funds are available and the use of the funds will not impact the loaning fund’s current operations or constitute a permanent diversion of funds.

4. Only that portion of a given fund which, in the prudent management of municipal finances as determined by the finance director, is clearly inactive or in excess of current needs may be loaned to other municipal funds or invested.

5. Appropriate accounting records shall be maintained to reflect the balances of loans payable and receivable in every fund affected by such transactions.

(Ord. No. 2884, § 2, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 4248, § 1, 6-20-17)

PART 2. ARTERIAL STREET FUND


3.40.200 Established.

There is established in the city a fund to be known as the arterial street fund created pursuant to RCW 47.24.040 into which all monies received in connection with the tax imposed pursuant to RCW 82.36.020 and apportioned pursuant to RCW 46.68.115 will be receipted for and from which all expenditures in connection with approved projects will be made.

(Ord. No. 1236, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.14.090)


3.40.210 Expenditures.

Monies in the arterial street fund shall only be expended for the purposes specified in RCW 47.24.040.

(Ord. No. 1236, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.14.100)

PART 3. ENVIRONMENTAL MITIGATION FUND


3.40.300 Environmental mitigation fund.

An environmental mitigation fund is established for the receipt of:

1. A portion of the solid waste utility tax to be used for general environmental mitigation and potential landfill clean up;

2. Receipt of all permit fees received for environmental review and mitigation of impacts resulting from cleanup of designated solid waste and hazardous waste sites by federal, state, or local governments, and the siting of a solid waste energy resource and recovery or incineration facility in the city. Such expenses shall be recovered as provided under Ch. 11.02 KCC.

(Ord. No. 2718, § 9. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.14.1070)

Cross reference(s) – Environmental review and community impact mitigation permit, ch. 11.02.


3.40.310 Purpose.

The purpose of the environmental mitigation fund is to establish an orderly method of providing for adequate funding of administrative costs resulting from a required or ordered government cleanup of solid waste or hazardous waste sites or siting of solid waste energy resource and recovery or incineration facilities in the city. Permit fees are intended to assist affected departments, to support adequate environmental review, intergovernmental coordination, long-term planning, processing of permit applications, environmental monitoring capability, inspection and review of plans resulting from the cleanup of sites and facilities and the hiring of expert consultants.

(Ord. No. 2718, § 9. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.14.1071)


3.40.320 Administration.

The environmental mitigation fund shall be administered by the public works department in consultation with the planning department and law department. The public works department shall be responsible for keeping and maintaining all records of transactions involving the fund.

(Ord. No. 2718, § 9. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.14.1073)


3.40.330 Disbursements.

Monies shall be dispersed from the environmental mitigation fund for expenses relating to departmental services, consultant fees, legal fees, equipment and supplies related to the annual environmental review and assessment of community impacts and related environmental expenses.

(Ord. No. 2718, § 9. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.14.1072)

PART 4. HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT FUND


3.40.400 Created.

The housing and community development fund is created for the purpose of holding the monies allocated to the city under the State Housing and Community Development Act of 1974.

(Ord. No. 1974, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.14.870)


3.40.420 Disbursements.

Disbursements from the housing and community development fund shall be made pursuant to the guidelines established by the city council for each program to be funded. These guidelines shall conform to the requirements of the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development and shall be sufficiently specific to accomplish the program goals.

(Ord. No. 1974, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.14.880)

PART 5. LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT BOND GUARANTY FUND


3.40.500 Created.

The city establishes and creates a fund for the purpose of guaranteeing, to the extent of such fund, bonds and warrants issued against local improvement districts in the city. This fund shall be known as the local improvement guaranty fund.

(Ord. No. 811, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.14.030)

Cross reference(s) – Local improvement districts, ch. 3.22.

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 35.51.040, 35.45.010 et seq.


3.40.510 Taxes levied.

There shall be levied, from time to time as other taxes are levied, such sums as may be necessary to meet the financial requirements of the local improvement guaranty fund created by this chapter. Whenever the city shall have paid out of the guaranty fund any sum on account of principal and/or interest on a local improvement bond or warrant hereunder guaranteed, the city as trustee for such fund, shall be subrogated to all of the rights of the holder of the bond or interest coupon or warrant so paid and the proceeds thereof shall become a part of local improvement guaranty fund.

(Ord. No. 811, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.14.040)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 35.51.040.


3.40.520 Payment from fund.

Whenever any interest coupon, bond or warrant guaranteed under the provisions of the laws of the state shall be in default, the finance director shall be and is hereby authorized and directed, upon the presentation and delivery of such defaulted bond, coupon or warrant, to execute, sign and deliver to the same person presenting the same, in the order of their presentation, and the city shall honor and pay a warrant on the local improvement guaranty fund in such amount as may be necessary to pay in full any such coupon, bond or warrant with any interest that may be due thereon. Any defaulted coupon, bond or warrant received by the finance director under the provisions of this chapter shall be held for the benefit of the local improvement guaranty fund.

(Ord. No. 811, § 3. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.14.050)

PART 6. EQUIPMENT RENTAL FUND


3.40.600 Created.

There is created a special fund of the city to be known as the equipment rental fund. 

(Ord. No. 1721, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.14.160)

State law reference(s) – Authority, RCW 35.21.088.


3.40.610 Purpose.

The purpose of the equipment rental fund is to establish an orderly method of providing for the availability of transportation and other type vehicles to various departments of the city. 

(Ord. No. 1721, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.14.170)


3.40.620 Revenue.

The equipment rental fund shall receive revenue from rental of equipment to various departments of the city and from the sale of gasoline to other governmental units. 

(Ord. No. 1721, § 3. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.14.180)


3.40.630 Disbursements.

Monies may be disbursed from the equipment rental fund for expenses of operating the equipment assigned to the fund and for the purchase of replacement equipment and supplies. 

(Ord. No. 1721, § 4. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.14.190)


3.40.640 Administration.

The equipment rental fund shall be administered by the public works department which shall be responsible for keeping all maintenance records. 

(Ord. No. 1721, § 5. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.14.200)


3.40.650 Transfer of rolling stock.

All rolling stock of the city except equipment which for economic or other reasons the city council determines should be assigned to a specific department shall be transferred to and maintained in the equipment rental fund. 

(Ord. No. 1721, § 6. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.14.210)


3.40.660 Recovery of funds.

Recovery of funds shall be on a revolving basis. The public works department shall bill monthly each department of the city for all equipment rented by the department in the preceding month and for gasoline or other services provided and special equipment not owned by the equipment rental fund.

(Ord. No. 1721, § 7. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.14.220)


3.40.670 Rental rates.

The city council shall annually determine the rental rates to be charged by the equipment rental fund based on projected costs. The city council shall not be precluded from adjusting rental rates at any time during any calendar year should this become necessary or desirable.

(Ord. No. 1721, § 9. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.14.240)

PART 7. UNEMPLOYMENT TRUST FUND


3.40.700 Created.

There is created in the city a fund to be known as the unemployment trust fund.

(Ord. No. 2158, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.14.960)

Cross reference(s) – Personnel, ch. 2.76 et seq.


3.40.710 Purpose.

The purpose of the unemployment trust fund is to receive periodic cash contributions from operating funds of the city to provide a source for payment of claims billed to the city by the State Employment Security Department.

(Ord. No. 2158, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.14.970)


3.40.720 Transfers.

Payment into the unemployment trust fund shall be made by means of transfers from the salary funds of each of the city’s departments which budget labor costs. Such transfers shall be in an amount which will provide a sufficient deposit into the fund to cover estimated unemployment claims against the city.

(Ord. No. 2158, § 3. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.14.980)


3.40.730 Payments.

Payments out of the unemployment trust fund shall be made upon the basis of billed claims from the State Employment Security Department.

(Ord. No. 2158, § 4. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.14.990)

PART 8. WORKER’S COMPENSATION FUND


3.40.800 Created.

There is created and established a special fund, to be designated and known as the worker’s compensation fund, into which monies shall be placed from time to time from available sources designated by the city administrator or provided for in the annual city budget. Monies placed in this fund may be used, and the appropriate administrative officials are authorized to expend such funds, for the following purposes:

1. Paying any liabilities of the city for compensation incurred as a self-insurer under this chapter;

2. Paying any premiums or other costs for reinsurance and surety bonds as may be authorized or required by Chapter 51.14 RCW;

3. Paying the city’s pro rata share of the state fund deficit as determined by the Director of the Department of Labor and Industries;

4. Maintaining a reserve for payment of compensation and assessments as required by Chapter 51.14 RCW;

5. Paying any other costs and expenses for the operation and maintenance of the self-insurance program established under this chapter.

(Ord. No. 2166, § 4. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.43.040)

PART 9. FIREMAN’S RELIEF AND PENSION FUND


3.40.900 Funds.

Working funds in the city which have been created under the authority of the Revised Code of Washington include the fireman’s relief and pension fund, RCW 41.16.050 and 41.18.010 et seq.

(Formerly Code 1986, § 3.14.1060)

Cross reference(s) – Fire department, ch. 2.24.

PART 10. UTILITIES CLEARING FUND


3.40.1000 Created.

The utilities clearing fund is created as the fund into which utilities receipts are placed until they can be accurately allocated into the respective utilities fund, i.e., solid waste, water, and sewer, from which the revenues are originated.

(Ord. No. 1912, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.14.690)

Cross reference(s) – Application for and billing of utility services, ch. 7.01; water services, ch. 7.02; solid waste, recyclable materials, and yard waste, ch. 7.03; sanitary sewers, ch. 7.04.

PART 11. CASH BOND FUND


3.40.1100 Created.

There is created and established in the city a fund designated as the cash bond fund.

(Ord. No. 1559, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.14.110)


3.40.1110 Deposit and release.

Except as otherwise provided by law, in all cases where monies are deposited with the city for such purposes as guaranteeing performance or compliance with city ordinances, or as surety to insure compliance with city ordinances, such funds shall be deposited in the cash bond fund and shall thereafter be held in such fund until their release is authorized pursuant to action of the city council at a regular meeting of the city council or pursuant to Ch. 3.43 KCC.

(Ord. No. 1559, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.14.120)

PART 12. HUMAN SERVICES FUND


3.40.1200 Human services account created.

There is established a human services account. Funding for the human services account shall be received as follows:

1. Dedicated amount based upon city population. The city shall dedicate to the human services account the funds set forth below, which shall be based upon the number of city residents per capita and which shall be allocated from the general fund or any other available accounts or resources. The number of city residents shall be based upon population data certified by the State Office of Financial Management.

a. For 2013, six dollars and ninety-six cents ($6.96) for each city resident shall be dedicated to the human services account.

b. The per capita rate will be increased over the 2013 rate by the applicable consumer price index for the greater Seattle metropolitan region. Provided, each annual increase shall not exceed three (3) percent or fall below zero (0) percent. Budgeted but unspent funds shall be maintained in the human services account and carried forward to the next budget year.

2. Gifts, donations, and grants. Private or public gifts, endowments, donations, bequests, or other grants dedicated to the human services account shall be deposited in the human services account.

3. Additional funding. Nothing in this chapter prohibits the city from dedicating additional amounts to the human services account, if the council determines to apply additional funds from any other source.

4. Nothing in this section shall limit the amount of money the city may expend for human services.

(Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 3-15-88; Ord. No. 4056, § 1, 12-11-12)

Cross reference(s) – Human services commission, ch. 2.53.


3.40.1210 Expenditures.

Expenditures from the human services fund only shall be for support of human service needs within the city. None of the per capita allocation shall be applied to staffing the city’s human services division. The designation of human services funding to nonprofit agencies shall be recommended by the human services commission and staff for final allocation and approval by the city council as part of the biennial budget process in accordance with the city of Kent human services master plan.

(Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 3-15-88; Ord. No. 4056, § 1, 12-11-12)

PART 13. BOATING FACILITY FUND


3.40.1300 Created.

There is hereby established a city boating facility fund for the receipt of:

1. Vessel and personal watercraft launch fees collected under KCC 4.06.200.

2. Private or public gifts, endowments, donations, bequests, or other grants.

3. Such other funding sources as may be available.

(Ord. No. 3886, § 1, 8-5-08)


3.40.1310 Expenditures and disbursements.

Expenditures and disbursements made from the boating facility fund shall support boating needs within the city. Authorized disbursements that may be made from the boating facility fund include expenses to operate, maintain, improve, and enforce boating activities and facilities and aquatic resources within the city; to acquire land to expand boating facilities; to purchase replacement equipment and supplies; to recover the cost to collect boat launch fees within the city; and to pay for the cost of such other expenditures and disbursements as may be recommended by the parks, recreation, and community services director and approved by the city council.

(Ord. No. 3886, § 1, 8-5-08)


Chapter 3.41 REVOLVING (IMPREST) FUNDS AND BANK ACCOUNT

Sections:

3.41.010    Personal cash advances prohibited.

3.41.020    Change fund.

3.41.030    Petty cash funds.

3.41.040    Police department investigation funds.

3.41.050    Valley narcotics enforcement team.

3.41.060    Worker’s compensation bank account.


3.41.010 Personal cash advances prohibited.

In no event shall any fund or account be used for personal cash advances secured by check or other I.O.U.

(Ord. No. 4243, § 1, 5-2-17)


3.41.020 Change fund.

A. Created. There is hereby established in the office of the finance director a special fund to be known as the change fund. The change fund is used in receipting operations when the amount tendered by the customer exceeds the amount due from the customer.

B. Amount and authorization. The amount of the change fund shall not exceed $10,000. The finance director or their designee is hereby authorized to establish and administer the fund.

(Ord. No. 4243, § 1, 5-2-17)


3.41.030 Petty cash funds.

A. Created. There is hereby established in the office of the finance director two special funds to be known as: (1) the petty cash fund, and (2) the emergency petty cash fund. The petty cash fund is used to reimburse city employees or other authorized persons for small purchases of goods or services not paid directly through usage of a city purchasing card or through the city’s accounting system. The emergency petty cash fund shall be used for emergency purposes as determined and approved by the mayor or their designee.

B. Amount and authorization. The amount of the petty cash fund shall not exceed $3,300, and the amount of the emergency petty cash fund shall not exceed $10,000. The finance director or their designee is hereby authorized to establish and administer these funds.

C. Replenishment. The finance director or their designee is authorized to issue checks by way of replenishment to the petty cash funds whenever necessary to keep the funds solvent. A replenishment voucher shall accompany each payment to the fund with receipts substantiating the expenditures attached thereto.

(Ord. No. 4243, § 1, 5-2-17)


3.41.040 Police department investigation funds.

A. Created. There is hereby established in the office of the finance director the following police department investigation funds: (1) investigative buy fund, (2) gambling buy fund, (3) controlled substance buy fund, and (4) flash money fund. These funds are to be used by the police department for investigative purposes during covert operations including, but not limited to, the purchase of controlled substances, firearms and other contraband. These funds can also be used for investigative purposes to make payments to confidential sources, display flash funds, participate in gambling, and purchase incidental items necessary for establishing and maintaining the cover of the investigating officer or confidential source.

B. Amount and authorization. The amount of each of these police department investigation funds shall not exceed limits established as follows: (1) investigative buy fund – $20,000, (2) gambling buy fund – $2,000, (3) controlled substance buy fund – $20,000, and (4) flash money fund – $100,000.

C. Replenishment. The finance director or their designee is authorized to issue checks by way of replenishment to the investigation funds whenever necessary to keep the funds solvent. A replenishment voucher shall accompany each payment to the fund with a form approved by appropriate police department personnel substantiating the expenditures attached thereto. The related receipts shall be retained by the police department.

D. Application for use. The investigation funds shall be used by the police department as follows: (1) investigative buy fund – investigative activities not immediately known to be narcotics or gambling related, the furtherance of which requires the expenditure of funds, (2) gambling buy fund – gambling enforcement activities, (3) controlled substance buy fund – controlled substance investigation activities, and (4) flash money fund – covert investigation activities. Application for the use of such funds shall be approved by the chief of police or their designee and submitted to the finance director or their designee.

(Ord. No. 4243, § 1, 5-2-17)


3.41.050 Valley narcotics enforcement team.

A. Created. There is hereby established in the office of the finance director the following valley narcotics enforcement team revolving funds: (1) petty cash fund, (2) flash money fund, and (3) investigative buy fund. The petty cash fund is used to reimburse VNET employees or other authorized persons for small purchases of goods or services not paid directly through usage of a VNET purchasing card or through VNET’s accounting system. The flash money fund and the investigative buy fund are used by VNET for investigative purposes during covert operations including, but not limited to, the purchase of controlled substances, firearms and other contraband. These funds can also be used for investigative purposes to make payments to confidential sources, display flash funds, and purchase incidental items necessary for establishing and maintaining the cover of the investigative officer or confidential source.

B. Amount and authorization. The amount of these valley narcotics enforcement team funds shall not exceed limits established as follows: (1) petty cash fund – $500, flash money fund – $35,000, and (3) investigative buy fund – $40,000.

C. Replenishment. The team supervisor or their designee of the VNET fiscal agent is authorized to issue checks by way of replenishment to the petty cash fund, the flash money fund, and the investigation buy fund whenever necessary to keep the funds solvent. A replenishment voucher shall accompany each payment to these funds and, with respect to the petty cash fund only, receipts substantiating the expenditures attached thereto. Replenishment vouchers for the flash money fund and the investigative buy fund shall be supported by a form approved by appropriate VNET personnel substantiating the expenditures attached thereto, and the related receipts shall be retained by VNET.

D. Application for use. The investigative funds shall be used by VNET as follows: (1) flash money fund – covert investigation activities, and (2) investigative buy fund – investigative activities not immediately known to be narcotics related, the furtherance of which requires the expenditure of funds. Application for the use of such funds shall be approved by the VNET team supervisor or their designee and submitted to the finance director or their designee of the VNET fiscal agent for reimbursement.

(Ord. No. 4243, § 1, 5-2-17)


3.41.060 Worker’s compensation bank account.

A. Created. There is hereby established in the office of the finance director a special account to be known as the worker’s compensation bank account with signatory authority by the chief administrative officer, finance director, and/or their designees.

B. Amount and authorization. The amount of the worker’s compensation bank account shall be $35,000. The finance director, or his or her designee, is hereby authorized to transfer funds from the worker’s compensation fund to the worker’s compensation bank account in amounts necessary to cover all approved payments for worker’s compensation claims.

C. Application for use. The funds of the worker’s compensation bank account shall be for the use of the city and/or the city’s authorized agent for payment of city worker’s compensation claims. Application for payment out of this account shall be approved by the employee service director, or designee, and submitted to the finance director, or designee, for payment.

(Ord. No. 4243, § 1, 5-2-17)


Chapter 3.43 RELEASE OF SURETY BONDS

Sections:

3.43.010    Authority granted. 


3.43.010 Authority granted.

The responsible department heads are granted the power to authorize the release of surety bonds imposed respectively by them when the conditions imposed in the approval of applications have been satisfied.

(Ord. No. 1814, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.12.010)

Cross reference(s) – Planning commission, § 2.30.020.


Chapter 3.45 TRANSFER OF FUNDS

Sections:

3.45.010    Authority to transfer funds. 


3.45.010 Authority to transfer funds.

The mayor shall be authorized to make transfers of funds between items within any fund. The mayor shall not increase any salary for any city employee above the amount provided therefor in the annual city budget, except as otherwise provided in RCW 35A.33.120.

(Ord. No. 1586, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 3.18.010)


Chapter 3.70 PUBLIC CONTRACTING AND PROCUREMENT Revised 2/20

Sections:

Part 1. Generally

3.70.010    Purpose.

3.70.020    Applicability.

3.70.030    Definitions.

3.70.040    Designee.

3.70.050    Contracts maintained by the city clerk’s office.

Part 2. Competitive Bidding

3.70.060    Applicability of competitive bidding provisions.

3.70.070    Architectural, landscape architectural, engineering, and land surveyor services.

3.70.080    Purchases of goods, materials, equipment, or services.

3.70.090    Procurements for the performance of public works. Revised 2/20

3.70.095    Acquisition of electronic data processing and telecommunications systems – Alternative.

3.70.100    Local business preference.

3.70.110    Exceptions to competitive bidding requirements. Revised 2/20

Part 3. Small Works Roster

3.70.120    Small works roster – Finding and authorization for establishment.

3.70.130    Contract cost of $350,000 or less. Revised 2/20

3.70.140    Number of rosters.

3.70.150    Contractors listed on small works roster.

3.70.160    Publication.

3.70.170    Electronic rosters.

3.70.180    Telephone or written quotations. Revised 2/20

3.70.190    Determining lowest responsible bidder.

3.70.200    Award.

Part 4. Contract Execution – Authorization

3.70.210    Contract required and approval necessary. Revised 2/20

3.70.220    Director approval. Revised 2/20

3.70.230    Mayor approval. Revised 2/20

3.70.240    Council approval. Revised 2/20

PART 1. GENERALLY 


3.70.010 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to outline the procedures for the purchase and acquisition of goods, materials, equipment, and services, and the performance of public works and improvement contracts in order to maintain an accountable public contracting and procurement process, and to provide other general contracting procedures. It is also the purpose of this chapter to allow for the flexible application of these procedures for more efficient and cost-effective procurement and contracting where strict application would not be in the city’s best interest. 

(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 5-19-15)


3.70.020 Applicability.

City procurements and contracts must be evaluated through a two (2) step process. The first step is to determine what competitive bidding requirements, if any, are required under either Part 2 or Part 3 of this chapter. The second step is to determine, under Part 4, who within the city has the appropriate authority to approve any procurement and to sign any contract on behalf of the city. Each procurement first must be evaluated under Part 2 or 3 and then under Part 4 separately. When an existing contract requires a change, either in product, scope, or time of completion, an amendment or change order to that contract must be in writing and evaluated under Part 4. 

(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 5-19-15)


3.70.030 Definitions.

The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

A. Contract shall mean a formal written contract, purchase order, lease, verbal agreement, or cash or credit purchase from a wholesaler, retailer, dealer, vendor, consultant, contractor, or other similar transaction. Grants, bequests, and other donations or gifts that generate revenue or that represent or are conditioned on the pledge, use, or other impairment of a city asset or dedication of city resources are also contracts and are subject to the specific provisions of this chapter. Purchases or work shall not be split into smaller, separate contracts to avoid either the competitive bidding or authorization requirements set forth in this chapter.

B. Director shall mean any director of a city of Kent department and shall include the position of chief administrative officer.

C. Public work shall have the same meaning as provided in RCW 39.04.010, as the same may later be amended. Generally, a public work is any work, construction, alteration, repair, or improvement to a public facility that is performed at the city’s expense, other than ordinary maintenance. This definition applies to all city departments, not just the city’s public works department. Ordinary maintenance when performed by contract, while not a public work, may be subject to prevailing wages.

D. Purchase refers to materials, supplies, equipment, or services procured by the city, either for ownership or lease, that will not be part of a public work. 

(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 5-19-15)


3.70.040 Designee.

When any city staff member is designated in this chapter by his or her title, including without limitation a “director” or the “mayor,” that reference is intended to refer to the employee who holds that title or his or her designee. 

(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 5-19-15)


3.70.050 Contracts maintained by the city clerk’s office.

Staff shall forward to the city clerk’s office an original, or a complete copy if an original cannot be obtained, of all contracts, change orders, or amendments entered into under this chapter, whether those contracts are signed by a director or the mayor, to be maintained in accordance with the records retention schedule applicable to the city and its records.

(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 5-19-15) 

PART 2. COMPETITIVE BIDDING 


3.70.060 Applicability of competitive bidding provisions.

Before the city purchases any goods, materials, equipment, or services, or arranges for the performance of any public work, the competitive bidding process established in this Part 2 must be reviewed and satisfied based upon the total cost of the goods, materials, equipment, or services to be purchased or any work performed, including any applicable sales tax.

A. When the total cost of the work or item is unknown because a definite term or unit amount cannot be reasonably determined, the procurement cost, for the purpose of establishing the appropriate competitive bidding procedure, is the estimated annual cost of the work or item, including any estimated sales tax.

B. In lieu of requesting bids for specific purchases, the city may solicit bids or proposals for products on an as-needed basis for a specified term, e.g., one (1) year, in those instances where the specific services or products are undetermined, such as for the ongoing purchase of office supplies or uniforms. 

(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 5-19-15)


3.70.070 Architectural, landscape architectural, engineering, and land surveyor services.

Chapter 39.80 RCW establishes a process through which governmental agencies are required to publicly announce their requirements for architectural and engineering services, including landscape architects and land surveyors. The Kent city council has adopted the following procedures to comply with these statutory requirements:

A. Applicability. This section shall apply to architects, landscape architects, engineers, and land surveyors performing activities within the scope of the general definition of professional practice in Chapter 18.08 RCW (architects), Chapter 18.43 RCW (engineers and land surveyors), or Chapter 18.96 RCW (landscape architects), as the same may later be amended.

B. Publication or public announcement of needed architectural, landscape architectural, engineering, and land surveying services.

1. The city must publish or otherwise announce to the general public the city’s requirement for architectural, landscape architectural, engineering, and land surveying services. City staff may comply with this requirement by:

a. Publishing notice for such architectural, engineering, or land surveying services for a specific project or projects; or

b. Annually announcing to the public generally the city’s projected requirements for any category or type of architectural, engineering, or land surveying services, and requesting that interested consultants submit statements of qualifications and performance data. At its discretion, the city may add architectural, engineering, or other consultants to its annual roster throughout the year so long as those consultants have submitted all required statements of qualifications and performance data.

2. The public notice the city provides under this subsection (B) must comply with Chapter 39.80 RCW and contain the following minimum information:

a. The general scope and nature of the project or work; and

b. An address of the city representative who can provide further details of the project or work.

3. In addition, the city may elect to contract with other agencies, including Municipal Research and Services Center (“MRSC”), and utilize rosters developed and maintained by them to carry out the requirements of this section and Chapter 39.80 RCW.

C. Contract negotiations. City staff must first determine which architect or engineer is most qualified, based on the city’s criteria, to provide the services needed. Once an architect or engineer is selected, city staff may negotiate the cost of those services at a price the city determines fair and reasonable. State law prohibits the city from discussing project cost with a prospective engineer or architect until the city has first selected an architect or engineer to perform the work. If the city and the selected architect or engineer are unable to agree on a price that the city believes is fair and reasonable, the city may terminate those negotiations, select a new architect or engineer, and commence negotiations with the new architect or engineer. 

(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 5-19-15) 


3.70.080 Purchases of goods, materials, equipment, or services.

This section establishes the competitive bidding procedures that apply to purchases of goods, materials, equipment, or services, not included within a public work.

A. Purchases of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) or less – Director discretion. For purchases where the estimated cost is twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) or less, the director shall determine what competitive bidding process the department will utilize, if any, with direct negotiation being an acceptable option. It is incumbent on the director to seek the best price available under the circumstances, acting not only under existing market conditions, but also as a cautious steward of city resources.

B. Purchases greater than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000), but thirty-five thousand dollars ($35,000) or less – Telephone bids or quotations. For purchases where the estimated cost is greater than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000), but thirty-five thousand dollars ($35,000) or less, the director shall attempt to solicit and document at least three (3) telephone bids or quotations for the purchase. Bids or quotations received by email, facsimile, regular mail, or personal delivery are also acceptable in lieu of telephone bids. For purchases made regularly and repeatedly, such as paper or other office supplies, a list of comparable bids or quotations may be maintained and updated at least annually, and purchases can be made from that list without soliciting bids or quotations for each purchase. The provisions of subsection (D) of this section for advertised bids, or subsection (E) of this section for requests for proposals, may be used in lieu of the provisions of this section.

C. Purchases greater than thirty-five thousand dollars ($35,000), but sixty-five thousand dollars ($65,000) or less – Written bids or quotations. For purchases where the estimated cost exceeds thirty-five thousand dollars ($35,000), but is sixty-five thousand dollars ($65,000) or less, the director shall attempt to solicit and document at least three (3) written bids or quotations for the purchase. Written bids or quotations received by email, facsimile, regular mail, or personal delivery are acceptable. For purchases made regularly and repeatedly, such as paper or other office supplies, a list of comparable bids or quotations may be maintained and updated at least annually, and purchases can be made from that list without soliciting bids or quotations for each purchase. The provisions of subsection (D) of this section for advertised bids, or subsection (E) of this section for requests for proposals, may be used in lieu of the provisions of this section.

D. Purchases greater than sixty-five thousand dollars ($65,000) – Advertised bids. For purchases where the estimated cost exceeds sixty-five thousand dollars ($65,000), the city shall publish notice calling for sealed bids at least one (1) time, and at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the last date upon which bids will be received, or such other reasonable time as the director may deem appropriate under the circumstances. Publication of this notice may be in any manner determined by the city most likely to provide notice to the contracting community that will result in the city’s receipt of responsive bids, including, without limitation, a newspaper of general circulation, a trade publication or website, a posting on the city’s website, or a posting on another agency or service provider’s website. The notice shall generally state the nature of the contemplated purchase, including a description or specifications, and it may require that the bids be sealed and filed with the city clerk within the time for submittal specified in the notice. The city shall, in its sole discretion, award the contract to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder, may waive any informalities in the bids received, and/or may reject any or all bids or proposals.

E. Purchases greater than sixty-five thousand dollars ($65,000) – Request for proposals. In lieu of advertised bids as may be required under subsection (D) of this section, the director, at his or her option, may choose to use a request for proposals, request for quotations, or other similar process to determine the availability of needed products or services. This decision may be utilized when the director deems it appropriate under those terms and conditions suitable to meet the needs and requirements of the particular process. 

(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 5-19-15) 


3.70.090 Procurements for the performance of public works. Revised 2/20

This section establishes the competitive bidding procedures that apply to procurements for the performance of public works and improvement projects when the small works roster provided for in Part 3 is not utilized. The thresholds provided in this section are to be evaluated based upon the complete public work, including the total cost for all materials, supplies, equipment, and labor. If the public work is for street signalization or street lighting, it is treated as a single craft or trade project for competitive bidding purposes. For the purposes of this section, RCW 35A.40.210 and 35.23.352 are hereby adopted by reference, as now enacted or hereafter amended, in order to establish the thresholds for required bids for public works. The amendment or recodification of RCW 35A.40.210 or 35.23.352 shall be given its full force and effect in the city upon the effective date of its amendment or recodification. As of December 2019, the bid threshold set forth in RCW 35.23.352 is $75,500 if the work involves only one craft or trade or the public works project is street signalization or street lighting, and $116,155 if the work involves more than one craft or trade.

A. Public work where the cost of the complete contract is estimated to be less than the bid threshold set forth in RCW 35A.40.210 and 35.23.352. For a public work where the cost of the complete project is estimated to be less than the bid threshold set forth in RCW 35A.40.210 and 35.23.352, the director shall determine what competitive process the department will utilize, if any, with direct negotiation being an acceptable option. It is incumbent on the director to seek the best price available under the circumstances, acting not only under existing market conditions, but also as a cautious steward of city resources.

B. Public work where the cost of the complete contract is estimated to be greater than the bid threshold set forth in RCW 35A.40.210 and 35.23.352.

1. Advertised bids. For a public work where the estimated cost of the complete project exceeds the bid threshold set forth in RCW 35A.40.210 and RCW 35.23.352, the city shall publish notice, at least one time, and at least 13 days prior to the last date upon which bids will be received, calling for sealed bids. Publication of this notice should be in either the city’s designated official newspaper or another newspaper of general circulation that the city determines is most likely to bring responsive bids. The notice shall: (a) generally state the nature of the contemplated public work, (b) state that a description, plans, and specifications will be on file with the city, and (c) state that the bids are required to be sealed and filed with the city clerk within the time for submittal specified in the notice. The city shall, in its sole discretion, award the contract to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder, may waive any informalities in the bids received, may reject any or all bids, and/or award the contract as otherwise provided for in this chapter.

2. Lowest responsible bidder determination. For bid awards on a public work subject to the provisions of Chapter 39.04 RCW, and subject to available funding, the city may award the bid to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder.

a. Supplemental responsibility criteria. In evaluating lowest responsible bidder qualifications, the city shall not only evaluate the responsibility requirements provided within RCW 39.04.350, as the same may be later amended, but also all other supplemental responsibility criteria that the originating department director may determine is applicable to a particular project and will help fulfill the city’s obligation to administer its budgets and complete its projects in a businesslike manner. In adopting supplemental responsibility criteria, examples of qualifications the director may seek include, without limitation, those that may indicate the bidder’s:

i. Ability, capacity, and skill to perform the work or provide the service required;

ii. Reputation, character, integrity, judgment, experience, and efficiency;

iii. Ability to perform the work within the time specified;

iv. Quality of performance of previous work or services;

v. Previous and existing compliance with laws relating to the work or services;

vi. Access to sufficient tools and equipment to perform the work, and the expertise to operate the tools and equipment;

vii. Total bonded capacity;

viii. Bidder’s conduct under previous contracts;

ix. Quality of work previously performed by bidder;

x. References from other public and private entities that have hired the bidder to perform work; or

xi. Other information as may be secured having a bearing on the decision to award the work.

All supplemental criteria that may be considered, including the basis for evaluation and the deadline for appealing a determination that a bidder is not responsible, must be provided by the originating department in the invitation to bid or in the bidding documents, and the director of the originating department is authorized to determine the specific responsibility criteria for each contract or public works project.

b. Option to choose the second lowest responsible bidder. Pursuant to RCW 35.23.352, if the city issues a written finding that the lowest responsible bidder has delivered a project to the city within the last three years which was late, over budget, or did not meet specifications, and the city does not find in writing that such bidder has shown how they would improve performance to be likely to meet project specifications, then the city may choose the second lowest responsible bidder whose bid is within five percent of the lowest bid and meets the same criteria as the lowest responsible bidder.

C. Public work performed by city staff. For a public work where the complete project, including goods, materials, or equipment procured for inclusion, is below the bid threshold provided in subsection (B) of this section, that work may be performed by city staff. A complete public work that will exceed the bid threshold provided in subsection (B) of this section is subject to competitive bids, either through the small works roster process provided for in Part 3 or formal advertised bids as provided in subsection (B) of this section.

(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 5-19-15; Ord. No. 4352, § 1, 12-10-19) 


3.70.095 Acquisition of electronic data processing and telecommunications systems – Alternative.

As an alternative to the competitive process provided for under KCC 3.70.080 and 3.70.090, electronic data processing or telecommunications systems, which systems may include equipment, software, or services, may be obtained as provided for in this section and RCW 39.04.270, as the same may be later amended.

A. Request for proposals. A request for proposals shall be prepared and submitted to an adequate number of qualified sources, as determined in the city’s discretion, to permit reasonable competition consistent with the requirements of the procurement. The request for proposals shall identify significant evaluation factors, including price, and their relative importance. Notice of the request for proposals must be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least thirteen (13) days before the last date on which the proposals will be received.

B. Procedures for evaluation. The city shall provide reasonable procedures for technical evaluation of the proposals received, identification of qualified sources, and selection for awarding the contract.

C. Award. The award shall be made to the qualified bidder whose proposal is most advantageous to the city with price and other factors considered. However, the city may reject any and all proposals for good cause and request new proposals.

(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 5-19-15) 


3.70.100 Local business preference.

A. Findings and intent. The city of Kent annually spends significant amounts on purchasing personal property, materials, and contractual services as part of its ongoing operation and management of the city and its infrastructure. The money used in making procurements of goods and services is derived, in large part, from taxes, fees, and utility revenues derived from local businesses and local residents, many of whom work for these local businesses. The city council finds that funds expended by the city should, to the extent possible and as allowed by law, be placed back in the city to support its local economy.

B. Local business defined. The term local business means any corporation, partnership, sole proprietor, limited liability company, or other business entity that has a city of Kent business license, maintains a physical business address within the city’s corporate limits in an area zoned or otherwise approved under the Kent City Code for the operation of that business, and has at least one (1) employee who reports to work at that address on a daily basis to operate or perform work at that business. Post office boxes shall not be used for the purpose of establishing a physical address of a local business.

C. Local preference in purchasing and contracting. When procuring contracts as provided for in this chapter, the city shall make every effort to purchase from or contract with local businesses. When other product models that meet the same specifications are locally available (i.e., GE one hundred (100) watt light bulb vs. Sylvania one hundred (100) watt light bulb), thoughtful consideration should be given to purchasing the model that is offered by a local business. When a local business offers functionally equivalent products for the goods or services sought by the city (i.e., one hundred (100) watt incandescent light bulb vs. a functionally equivalent fluorescent or LED light bulb), thoughtful consideration should be given to purchasing the product that is offered by a local business. When selecting a business in response to a request for proposal, or when selecting a business that provides consulting services or other services that provide unique expertise, thoughtful consideration should be given to selecting a local business that can provide those products or services. However, the preference established in this section shall not prohibit the ability to compare quality or fitness for use of supplies, materials, equipment, or services proposed for procurement and shall not prohibit the ability to select the best business when comparing the qualifications, character, responsibility, or fitness of the businesses under consideration.

D. Written record required when nonlocal business selected. Whenever city staff decide to procure goods or services valued at an amount greater than five thousand dollars ($5,000) from a nonlocal business when a local business also provides the same goods or services, the manager in charge of making that procurement shall provide an explanation in a suitable format, electronic or otherwise, which will be retained. This provision does not apply to those procurements that are exempt from competitive bidding under KCC 3.70.110.

E. Exceptions to local business preference. The procurement preference set forth in this section shall not apply to any of the following:

1. Goods, materials, equipment or services provided under a cooperative purchasing agreement or interlocal agreement.

2. Procurements or contracts that are funded, in whole or in part, by a separate governmental entity and the laws, regulations, or policies of that separate governmental entity prohibit application of this local business preference.

3. Procurements or contracts identified in KCC 3.70.110 for which competitive bidding does not apply.

4. Procurements or contracts made under emergency situations.

5. Procurements made by a third party under purchasing authority delegated to the third party by a contract approved by the city council. 

(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 5-19-15)


3.70.110 Exceptions to competitive bidding requirements. Revised 2/20

The competitive bidding requirements set forth in KCC 3.70.080 and 3.70.090 shall not apply to those instances set forth in this section. Nothing in this section can act to waive the authorization requirements established in Part 4 of this chapter, KCC 3.70.210 through 3.70.240.

A. Waiver for purchases. The mayor may waive the bidding requirements for the purchase of goods, materials, equipment, or services that are not part of a public work upon a finding that:

1. The purchase is clearly and legitimately limited to a single source of supply within the near vicinity; or

2. The purchase is subject to special market conditions, or involves special facilities or services; or

3. The bidding requirements would otherwise not be practicable or in the city’s best interests under the circumstances.

If a waiver is appropriate, the director shall prepare a memo to the mayor outlining the reasons for the requested waiver. If the mayor authorizes the waiver, the purchase may be completed by direct negotiation. The document evidencing the waiver granted by the mayor shall be maintained with the contract on file with the city clerk’s office in accordance with KCC 3.70.050.

B. Waiver in emergency. When any emergency, including a public work emergency, requires the immediate execution of any contract, or authorization of any purchase, work, or change order or amendment to an existing contract, the mayor shall have the power to waive competitive bidding requirements and award all contracts necessary to address the emergency situation. 

1. Emergency defined. An emergency, as that term is used in this section, shall have the same meaning as provided in RCW 39.04.280(3), as the same may be later amended.

2. Emergency declared. If the competitive bidding requirements of this chapter are waived due to an emergency, the mayor shall issue a written finding of the existence of an emergency. This written finding, along with the resulting contract, shall be on file with the city clerk’s office and available for public inspection no later than two weeks after the contract is awarded. If an emergency procurement or contract exceeds $65,000, the city council shall be subsequently notified, but formal council ratification is not required.

C. Professional and technical consultant contracts. Contracts entered into with professional or technical service consultants are not required to follow the competitive bidding requirements provided for in KCC 3.70.080, but may be entered into through direct negotiations. In contracting with professional or technical service consultants, it is incumbent on staff to seek the best price available under the circumstances, acting not only under existing market conditions, but also as a cautious steward of city resources. The following is a nonexclusive list of the type of professional or technical service consultants to which this subsection is intended to apply:

1. Licensed consultants. Consultants whose practice is certified or licensed by the state Department of Licensing, other state board, or similar agency, including, without limitation, real estate appraisers and brokers, attorneys, and accountants. This exception, however, does not apply to consultants who perform architectural, engineering, and land surveying services, which are subject to the provisions of KCC 3.70.070.

2. Health care and investment contracts. Contracts entered into by the city to provide employee health care insurance coverage, or to provide employee investment services.

3. Administration services for liability claims and workers’ compensation claims. Contracts entered into by the city for insurance brokerage services, third-party administrator services for liability claims, and third-party administrator services for workers’ compensation claims.

4. Professional training and employee recruitment. Contracts entered into by the city to provide professional development or other training to city employees, volunteers, or elected officials, or to recruit for high level or specialized employee positions.

D. Technology contracts. In consultation with the city’s technology department, purchases of hardware, software, maintenance, and associated technical support, training, and licensing, may be made without regard to the bidding requirements provided for in KCC 3.70.080 and 3.70.090 and may be entered into through direct negotiations. However, staff shall make reasonable efforts to obtain the best price available under the circumstances.

E. Cultural performances, events, and public art. The performers and artists selected by the cultural programs division of the city’s parks, recreation, and human services department to perform at various events, to create public art for the city, or the contractors and vendors hired to provide services and equipment related to those performances, events, and art are solicited based on artistic quality, balance of genres, prominence, marketability, technical requirements, and ability to coordinate those events with minimum city staff involvement. Given the unique nature of these performers and artists and the need for multiple individuals and contractors to work together to successfully coordinate and conduct each performance or event, contracts to retain performance or artistic services or to conduct a performance or other cultural event, including without limitation support services provided by sound technicians, caterers, or other similar trades, are not required to follow the competitive bidding requirements provided for in KCC 3.70.080, but may be entered into through direct negotiations with the city.

F. Interlocal agreements or cooperative purchase agreements. The bidding procedures for purchases established under this chapter need not apply to interlocal agreements or cooperative purchase agreements with another public agency or agencies for joint or cooperative action. Interlocal agreements should, however, include the minimum standards provided for in Chapter 39.34 RCW. While this exception waives any competitive bid process, the interlocal agreement or cooperative purchase agreement must still be authorized in accordance with Part 4 of this chapter, unless the city attorney is consulted and advises otherwise.

G. Use of another public agency’s bidding procedures. The competitive bidding procedures established in this chapter shall not apply to purchases made from a contractor or vendor who was awarded a contract using another public agency’s established procurement process for substantially the same purchase. The city’s reliance on the other public agency’s process shall constitute compliance with the bid requirements of this chapter.

1. Public works exclusion. Another public agency’s bidding process cannot be relied upon for public works projects above the bid threshold provided in KCC 3.70.090(B), including goods, materials, or equipment procured for inclusion in a public work.

2. Contract and authorization required. Once any competitive bid process is satisfied under this section, a contract between the city and the awarded contractor or vendor is required and must be authorized in accordance with Part 4 of this chapter, unless the city attorney is consulted and advises otherwise. 

H. Delegated purchasing authority.

1. Purchases. Purchases made by a third party under purchasing authority delegated to it through a contract approved by the city council are not required to follow the competitive bidding requirements provided for in KCC 3.70.080. As an example, this waiver would apply to an operator the city has entered into a contract with to operate and maintain a public facility. Under this waiver, if the operator’s contract provided the operator was to purchase all paper or catering supplies, that purchase would not be subject to the competitive bid process set forth in KCC 3.70.080.

2. Kent Special Events Center (ShoWare Center). Management and operation of the ShoWare Center is unique to city operations. Efficient management requires flexibility to move quickly to respond to market requirements for concerts, sporting events, and other offerings. The ShoWare Center operator, a national company that operates similar venues throughout the United States, also has access to special pricing and conditions that otherwise might not be available if the city operated as a stand-alone enterprise. Based on this unique venue and with the continuing obligation that the operator always obtain the best available pricing on all purchases of goods or services, the ShoWare Center operator is authorized to purchase goods or services as needed so long as the operator does not exceed the established budget and so long as purchases over $25,000 are first approved by the chief administrative officer. In addition to any contract obligation, the operator will also provide the mayor and council with a monthly audit report documenting financial activities at the ShoWare Center.

3. Public works. While council may delegate in a contract the authority for a third party to procure a public work, the third party shall comply with any required competitive bid process applicable to the city for the public work.

I. Pass-through grant agreements. Contracts the city enters into with community-based social and human service providers, including subrecipients of grant funds received from the Community Development and Block Grant (CDBG) Program, are not required to follow the competitive bidding requirements provided for in KCC 3.70.080 for purchases, but may be entered into through direct negotiations with the city, or in accordance with any competitive process required under federal or state law as a condition of the grant.

J. Pass-through fee contracts – No financial impact to city. Service contracts entered into at no or a nominal cost to the city, but result in any associated fee or charge being passed through to a party other than the city, including but not limited to an agreement with a collection company, need not comply with the competitive bidding requirements provided for in KCC 3.70.080 and may be entered into through direct negotiations with the city.

K. Community service organizations. The city may enter into contracts with community service organizations without regard to the bidding requirements provided for in KCC 3.70.080. If the community service organization will perform a public work or improvement project, the value of the community service organization’s contribution will not be included within the public work’s bidding threshold under KCC 3.70.090 only if the requirements of RCW 35.21.278, as the same may be later amended, are met, including:

1. The organization is a chamber of commerce; a service organization; a community, youth, or athletic association; or other similar association located and providing service in the immediate neighborhood;

2. The work the organization will perform involves drawing design plans, making improvements to a park or public square, installing equipment or artwork, or providing facility maintenance services as a community or neighborhood project;

3. The value of the benefit the city receives from the public work or improvement is at least equal to three times that of the city’s payment to the organization to reimburse the organization for its expenses; and

4. All payments made by the city to qualifying service organizations in any one year under this competitive bid exception do not exceed $2 per resident or $25,000, whichever amount is greater.

L. Auctions. The city may purchase supplies, equipment, or materials at auctions conducted by the United States government or any of its agencies, or by the state of Washington and any of its political subdivisions, without being subject to the bidding requirements of this chapter.

M. Recycled products. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city from preferentially purchasing products made from recycled materials or products that may be recycled or reused, pursuant to Chapter 3.80 KCC or Chapter 43.19A RCW.

N. Lodging tax grant awards. If the city is awarded a grant by city council through the lodging tax advisory committee process for the purchase of goods, materials, equipment, or services, not included within a public work, that purchase is not required to follow the competitive bidding requirements provided in KCC 3.70.080, and a contract for such purchase may be entered into through direct negotiations. The procurement of architectural, engineering, and land surveying services, however, remains subject to the requirements provided in KCC 3.70.070.

(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 5-19-15; Ord. No. 4277, § 1, 6-5-18; Ord. No. 4352, § 2, 12-10-19) 

PART 3. SMALL WORKS ROSTER 


3.70.120 Small works roster – Finding and authorization for establishment.

The city council finds that the small works roster provisions provided for in RCW 39.04.155 would provide an efficient process for the award and construction of small public works projects within the city of Kent. Toward that end, this Part 3 authorizes staff to establish a small works roster procedure for public works pursuant to RCW 35A.40.210, 35.23.352, and 39.04.155, as the same may be later amended. 

(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 5-19-15)


3.70.130 Contract cost of $350,000 or less. Revised 2/20

For those public works that would otherwise require advertised bids, but the estimated cost of the complete work, including any applicable sales tax, is $350,000 or less, or the current statutory limit provided for in RCW 39.04.155, the city need not comply with formal sealed bidding procedures for the construction, building, renovation, remodeling, alteration, repair, or improvement of real property. Instead, the city may use the small works roster procedure for public works as set forth in this Part 3. The splitting of any public work into units or accomplishing any public work by phases is prohibited if it is done for the purpose of avoiding the maximum dollar amount of a contract that may be let using the small works roster process. The small works roster process provided for in this Part 3 is an option available to city staff at the discretion of the director. For any qualified public work, advertised bids in accordance with KCC 3.70.090(B) may always be utilized. Similarly, the small works roster process may also be utilized, at the discretion of the director, in lieu of the process set forth in KCC 3.70.090(A) through (C).

(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 5-19-15; Ord. No. 4352, § 3, 12-10-19)


3.70.140 Number of rosters.

City staff may create a single general small works roster, or may create multiple small works rosters for different specialties or categories of anticipated work. Those small works rosters may make distinctions between contractors based upon different geographic areas served by the contractor. Should the city not contract with another entity to establish and maintain the rosters as provided for in KCC 3.70.170, city small works rosters will be maintained by the public works department’s contract specialist, or such other position as the city may administratively designate. 

(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 5-19-15)


3.70.150 Contractors listed on small works roster.

A small works roster shall consist of all responsible contractors who have requested to be on the roster and, where required by law, are properly licensed or registered to perform such work in this state. As may be requested by city staff, contractors desiring to be placed on a roster must keep current records of any applicable licenses, certifications, registrations, bonding, insurance, or other appropriate matters on file with the city as may be made a condition of being placed on a roster. 

(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 5-19-15)


3.70.160 Publication.

At least once a year, the city shall publish a notice of the existence of the roster and solicit the names of contractors for the roster. This solicitation shall be published in either the city’s designated official newspaper, or in another newspaper of general circulation that the city determines is most likely to result in contractor responses. Responsible contractors shall be added to the appropriate roster at any time that they submit a written request and any necessary records. The city may require master contracts to be signed that become effective when a specific award is made using a small works roster. 

(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 5-19-15) 


3.70.170 Electronic rosters.

In addition to paper and/or electronic rosters kept on file with the city, the city may also use the state-wide electronic small works roster database developed and maintained by MRSC, or the city may contract with another public agency to maintain a shared small works roster that conforms to the requirements of RCW 39.04.155. 

(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 5-19-15)


3.70.180 Telephone or written quotations. Revised 2/20

For those public works projects where the small works roster is utilized, the city shall obtain telephone, written, or electronic quotations for public works projects from contractors on the appropriate small works roster to assure that a competitive price is established and to award contracts to the lowest responsible bidder, as defined in RCW 39.04.010 and 39.04.350, as follows:

A. Content of invitation for bid/quote. Work awarded to a contractor from a small works roster need not be advertised. Invitations for quotations shall include an estimate of the scope and nature of the work to be performed as well as materials and equipment to be furnished. However, detailed plans and specifications need not be included in the invitation. This section does not eliminate other requirements for architectural, engineering, or land surveying approvals as to quality and compliance with building codes, or any statutory bonding, retainage, and prevailing wage provisions.

B. Number of required invitations.

1. All small works projects. If quotations are invited from less than all contractors on the appropriate small works roster, at least five contractors from the roster who have indicated the capability of performing the kind of work being contracted must be invited to submit a bid or quote in a manner that will equitably distribute the opportunity among the contractors on the appropriate roster. If there are less than five contractors on the appropriate small works roster, quotations must be invited from all contractors.

a. For purposes of the small works roster, equitably distribute means that the city may not favor certain contractors on the appropriate small works roster over other contractors on the appropriate small works roster who perform similar services. At the time bids are solicited, the city representative shall not inform a contractor of the terms or amount of any other contractor’s bid for the same project.

2. Small works projects from $250,000 to $350,000. In addition to the requirement of subsection (B)(1) of this section, if the estimated cost of the work is from $250,000 to $350,000 and the city invites bids or quotes from less than all contractors on the appropriate roster, the city must also notify the remaining contractors on the appropriate small works roster that quotations on the work are being sought. The city has the sole option of determining whether this notice is made to the remaining contractors by:

a. Publishing notice in a legal newspaper in general circulation in the area where the work is to be done;

b. Mailing a notice to these contractors; or

c. Sending a notice to these contractors by facsimile or other electronic means.

C. Response to invitation for bid/quote. Invited contractors who are interested in the solicited work should respond within the time and by the manner declared by the city in the invitation. Failure to timely or properly respond may result in the contractor’s bid being rejected.

D. Bid bond – Optional at director’s discretion. A contractor’s bid, solicited under the small works roster process provided for in this Part 3, need not include, at the discretion of the director, a bid bond as required by RCW 35.23.352. All other bonding, retainage, and prevailing wage provisions applicable to public works projects apply to contracts entered into under the small works roster process.

E. Written record. The city shall maintain a written record of each contractor’s bid on the project and of any conditions imposed on the bid. Immediately after an award is made, the bid quotations obtained shall be recorded, open to public inspection, and available by at least one of the following: telephone or electronic request. Nothing in this section is intended to supplant the city’s duties and obligations under the Public Records Act.

(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 5-19-15; Ord. No. 4352, § 4, 12-10-19) 


3.70.190 Determining lowest responsible bidder.

The city shall award the contract for the public works project to the lowest responsible bidder on the small works roster; provided, that whenever there is a reason to believe that the lowest acceptable bid is not the best price obtainable, all bids may be rejected and the city may call for new bids under the small works roster. A responsible bidder will be a contractor who meets the mandatory requirements of RCW 39.04.350(1) and any supplemental bidder responsibility criteria established for the project under RCW 39.04.350(2) and KCC 3.70.090(B)(2), as amended. 

(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 5-19-15)


3.70.200 Award.

The city shall collect all bids or quotations and consider them at the same time to determine the lowest responsible bidder and determine which contractor, if any, should be awarded the contract.

(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 5-19-15)

PART 4. CONTRACT EXECUTION – AUTHORIZATION 


3.70.210 Contract required and approval necessary. Revised 2/20

After complying with the competitive bidding process provided for within Part 2 or Part 3 of this chapter, all work or any purchase authorized with a particular vendor, consultant, or contractor that cumulatively is expected on a particular project to exceed an annual amount of $20,000 must be in writing, and approved according to the authority provided for within this Part 4. The thresholds provided in this section are to be evaluated based upon the total cost of the purchase or work, including applicable sales tax.

A. Contract log. The city clerk will maintain a log of all new contracts executed by the city and delivered to the city clerk’s office in accordance with KCC 3.70.050. Each department must confirm that all contracts are routed to the city clerk’s office. The operator of the Kent Special Events Center (ShoWare Center) will also maintain a record of all contracts entered into over $25,000 and report those contracts to the city clerk.

B. Exception to contract requirement. If sufficient funds exist in the approved budget, a written contract may not be required if: (1) another agency’s bid process was relied upon as authorized under KCC 3.70.110(G); (2) contracts bid or negotiated by another agency allow the city to receive under that contract on substantially the same terms; and (3) the city attorney has determined the contract between the bidding agency and the awarded contractor or vendor sufficiently protects the interests of the city.

C. Estimated procurement costs. When determining whether director, mayoral, or council approval is required for any contract, and the total cost of the contract is unknown because a definite term or unit amount cannot be reasonably determined, the procurement cost, for the purpose of establishing appropriate contract approval procedure, is the estimated annual cost of the procurement, including any estimated sales tax.

(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 5-19-15; Ord. No. 4277, § 2, 6-5-18; Ord. No. 4352, § 5, 12-10-19)


3.70.220 Director approval. Revised 2/20

Directors may approve work or purchases, and have signatory authority to execute any requisite contract, for the following:

A. Contracts – $20,000 or less. All purchases or work authorized by a director and valued at $20,000 or less should be memorialized in a written contract. Any contract or procurement in the amount of $20,000 or less, which can be paid from the originating department’s existing annual budget, may be approved and signed by the director.

B. Change orders or contract amendments. The director is authorized to approve and sign the following contract change orders or amendments:

1. Change orders or contract amendments that involve no increase in the contract amount, such as an extension of time for the contractor to perform.

2. Change orders or contract amendments that collectively do not exceed 10 percent or $65,000 of the original contract amount, including any applicable taxes, whichever amount is greater.

This change order approval authority may only be exercised if sufficient funds remain in the approved project or department budget to pay the change order or amendment amount.

C. Grant applications, award agreements, bequests, donations, or other gifts – $25,000 or less. The director may approve and sign all grant applications, unless the application itself requires otherwise. The director may also accept any grant, bequest, donation, or other gift in the total amount of $25,000 or less, and is authorized to approve and sign all documents necessary to receive the grant, bequest, donation, or other gift. In determining the total grant, bequest, donation, or gift amount for application of this section, the cost of any matching funds and the cost of fulfilling all conditions placed on the city’s acceptance of the grant, bequest, donation, or gift must be included in the calculation. In order for the director to have the authority granted by this section, any matching funds required to obtain the grant, bequest, donation, or gift must be available within the director’s existing budget. Upon the city’s receipt of the grant, bequest, donation, or gift funds in the total amount of $25,000 or less, the finance director is authorized to amend the department director’s budget and authorize expenditure of the funds. The finance director may then include these funds in the budget adjustment ordinance.

1. Grant reimbursement requests. Once a grant agreement is approved as provided for in this chapter, the director is authorized to sign any grant reimbursement request or voucher, annual or final fiscal report, or any certification statement that may be required by the federal, state, or other local agency awarding or administering the grant. This delegation of authority specifically includes without limitation the certification required by 2 CFR 200.415, as currently enacted or hereafter amended or recodified.

D. Collective bargaining agreements. Unless the terms of a collective bargaining agreement provide otherwise, the director of human resources is authorized to sign all agreements, or subsequent amendments to those agreements, with the city’s bargaining units if the financial impact of the agreement or amendment is valued at $65,000 or less, and sufficient funds remain in the budget to cover that financial impact.

E. Contracts for specialized attorney services. The city attorney, with approval of the mayor, shall have authority to retain attorneys and expert witnesses to assist with litigation or anticipated litigation, or help with areas in which specialized attorney services are necessary for the protection of the city’s legal interests; provided, the retention of attorneys pursuant to this subsection shall be within established budgets.

(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 5-19-15; Ord. No. 4235, § 1, 2-7-17; Ord. No. 4277, § 3, 6-5-18; Ord. No. 4352, § 6, 12-10-19) 


3.70.230 Mayor approval. Revised 2/20

The mayor has signatory authority and may approve the following:

A. Contracts – Over $20,000. All purchases or work valued at an amount in excess of $20,000 must be memorialized in a written contract and signed by the mayor. Any contract valued at an amount of $100,000 or less may be signed by the mayor without city council approval if funds are available within the existing budget to pay the associated contract costs.

B. Change orders or contract amendments. The mayor is authorized to approve and sign change orders or contract amendments that collectively are within 20 percent or $200,000 of the original contract amount, including any applicable taxes, whichever amount is greater, if sufficient funds remain within the existing project or city budget.

C. Grant acceptance, award agreements, bequests, donations, or other gifts. The mayor is authorized to approve and sign any application requesting grant funds for various city purposes if the grant application requires. The mayor may also accept any grant, bequest, donation, or other gift in the amount of $100,000 or less, and is authorized to sign all documents necessary to receive the grant, bequest, donation, or other gift. In determining the total grant, bequest, donation, or gift amount for application of this section, the cost of any matching funds and the cost of fulfilling all conditions placed on the city’s acceptance of the grant, bequest, donation, or gift must be included in the calculation. In order for the mayor to have the authority granted by this section, any matching funds required to obtain the grant, bequest, donation, or gift must be available within the existing budget. Upon the city’s receipt of the grant, bequest, donation, or other gift funds as provided in this section, the finance director is authorized to amend the budget and authorize expenditure of the funds. The finance director may then include these funds in the budget adjustment ordinance. All reimbursement requests, vouchers, reports, or certification statements are to be signed by the director in accordance with KCC 3.70.220(C)(1).

D. Interlocal agreements. The mayor may approve and sign any agreement between the city and another public agency, including those entered into under the Interlocal Cooperation Act, Chapter 39.34 RCW, without council approval, so long as any money that may be paid or received by the city under the terms of the agreement, or any resources dedicated by the city to the cooperative effort, does not exceed $100,000, and any payment or dedicated resource obligation under the agreement may be paid through the existing budget.

E. Real property interests. The mayor is specifically authorized to do the following:

1. To acquire and convey rights-of-way and other property interests by lease or purchase when the city council has dedicated sufficient funds for the lease or purchase within the existing annual budget or project budget.

2. To enter into any lease or other agreement conveying an interest in real property where the total annual amount paid or received under the agreement, or the total annual fair market value of the real property interest conferred, is $25,000 or less. However, no authority delegated under this section shall authorize approval of a lease or other agreement conveying an interest in real property for a term greater than two years, including all options to renew, without express approval of the city council.

3. To accept land, attachments, fixtures, improvements, appurtenances, and other real or personal property interests that are dedicated to the city as a condition of a private developer’s development permit or regulatory approval, or to release the same as part of such development approval, subject to prior review and approval by the city attorney.

F. Pass-through fee contracts. Service contracts entered into at no or a nominal cost to the city, but that result in any associated fee or charge being passed through to a party other than the city, such as an agreement with a collection company, may be approved and signed by the mayor, subject to prior review by the city attorney.

G. Emergency. If an emergency exists as provided for in KCC 3.70.110(B), the mayor may sign all documents and take all actions necessary to address the emergency. If council approval would have been required by KCC 3.70.240, the city council shall be subsequently notified, but formal ratification is not required.

H. Collective bargaining agreements. Unless the terms of a collective bargaining agreement provide otherwise, the mayor is authorized to sign all agreements, or subsequent amendments to those agreements, with the city’s bargaining units if the financial impact of the agreement or amendment is valued at $130,000 or less, and sufficient funds remain in the city’s budget to cover that financial impact. If the financial impact is greater than $130,000, or if sufficient funds do not exist within the budget to cover the financial impact, council authorization must first be obtained before the mayor is authorized to sign the agreement or amendment.

I. Contracts with temporary staffing firms. Temporary staff may be retained through staffing firms that provide temporary employees to work for the city. The mayor is authorized to sign contracts with staffing firms for temporary employees for technical, programming, and project support professionals, as well as architects, engineers, and other professionals when the contract term does not exceed 18 months and the contract value does not exceed $200,000. Funding for contracts approved by the mayor under this section shall be within the contracting department’s established budget. In the event a contract was signed by the mayor under this section, and it is later determined that the length or cost of the contract will exceed the time or amount provided in this section, the mayor’s change order or amendment authority shall not apply and the department director shall bring the matter before the city council for consideration of ratification. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of department directors or the mayor as provided in other sections of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 5-19-15; Ord. No. 4235, § 2, 2-7-17; Ord. No. 4277, § 4, 6-5-18; Ord. No. 4323, § 1, 5-21-19; Ord. No. 4352, § 7, 12-10-19) 


3.70.240 Council approval. Revised 2/20

Council authorization is required before the mayor is authorized to purchase or sign the items identified below. Upon council approval, all attachments and documents pertinent to the authorized act are impliedly approved even if they are not expressly stated or identified. Further, minor adjustments may be made to any documents or additional action taken if such changes are consistent with council’s approval and do not result in additional costs being paid by the city in excess of the amounts provided in KCC 3.70.230(B), if those additional costs are within established budgets.

A. Contracts – Over $100,000. All purchases or work valued at an amount in excess of $100,000 must be memorialized in a written contract. If a contract’s estimated cost is over $100,000, or if there are not sufficient funds in the existing budget to pay the full contract amount, the city council must first authorize the contract before the mayor may sign the contract to make it effective and binding upon the city.

1. When the city council has specifically considered and approved a project with a line item in the budget that identifies: (a) the contracting party, if known, (b) specific information as to the purchase or scope of the contract, (c) the estimated total cost of the purchase or contract, and (d) the term of the anticipated contract does not exceed two years, that budget line item allocation shall constitute council authorization for the purposes of this section if the actual cost does not exceed the amount budgeted for that expense.

2. The city council may delegate to a third-party procurement authority on the city’s behalf. If such a delegation is made, no further council approval is required. Any delegated procurement authority must be exercised in accordance with KCC 3.70.110(H).

B. Change orders or contract amendments. All change orders or amendments that exceed the mayor’s authority under KCC 3.70.230(B) must be authorized by the city council and signed by the mayor before becoming effective and binding upon the city. Once a change order or contract amendment is approved by council, the revised contract amount becomes the amount applicable for calculating future approval authority for subsequent change orders or amendments.

C. Agreements for receipt of grants, bequests, donations, or other gifts. If the city is awarded any grant, bequest, donation, or other gift in excess of $100,000, the city council first must authorize acceptance of the funds and the mayor’s execution of any resulting agreement. All reimbursement requests, vouchers, reports, or certification statements are to be signed by the director in accordance with KCC 3.70.220(C)(1).

D. Interlocal agreements. Any agreement between the city and another public agency that involves the payment or receipt of money, or the dedication of city resources, in excess of $100,000, including agreements entered into under the Interlocal Cooperation Act of Chapter 39.34 RCW, or that involves a payment obligation the city is unable to meet under the existing budget, must be authorized by the city council and signed by the mayor before becoming effective and binding upon the city.

E. Real property interests. Except for the limited authority codified in KCC 3.70.230(E), council approval is required for all real property leases, sales, or purchases that are not incidental to implementation of a prior project or program approved by council. Council approval is also required before the mayor may sign any lease or other agreement conveying an interest in real property where the total annual rental value of the lease or other real property interest conferred is more than $25,000 or for a term greater than two years, including all options to renew.

(Ord. No. 4150, § 2, 5-19-15; Ord. No. 4235, § 3, 2-7-17; Ord. No. 4277, § 5, 6-5-18; Ord. No. 4352, § 8, 12-10-19) 


Chapter 3.80 RECYCLED PRODUCT PROCUREMENT POLICY

Sections:

3.80.010    Definitions. 

3.80.020    Purpose. 

3.80.030    Designated recycled products. 

3.80.040    Policies. 

3.80.050    Paper and paper products. 

3.80.060    Responsibilities of the lead department. 

3.80.070    Responsibilities of city departments. 

3.80.080    Exemptions.


3.80.010 Definitions.

The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Compost products means mulch, soil amendments, ground cover, or other landscaping material derived from the biological or mechanical conversion of cellulose containing waste materials.

Designated recycled product means a product designated in this policy or designated by the purchasing agent of the city’s finance department, pursuant to this policy, that meets or surpasses the city’s minimum recycled content standards.

Lead department means the finance department of the city.

Minimum recycled content standards means those standards established by the lead department in accordance with Chapter 43.19A RCW that specify the minimum level of recycled material and/or post-consumer recycled material necessary for designated products to qualify as recycled products.

Practicable means sufficient in performance as determined solely by the appropriate city department.

Price preference means an extra percentage that the city is willing to pay for a recycled product.

Post-consumer recycled material means a material or product that has served its intended use and has been discarded for disposal or recovery by a final consumer.

Recycled material means waste material and byproducts that have been recovered or diverted from waste and that can be utilized in place of raw or virgin material in manufacturing a product and consist of materials derived from post-consumer waste, manufacturing waste, industrial scrap, agricultural wastes, and other items, all of which can be used in the manufacture of new or recycled products.

Recycled product means a product which, after its intended end use, can demonstrably be diverted from the city’s solid waste stream for use as raw material in the manufacture of another product.

(Ord. No. 3066, § 2, 9-1-92) 


3.80.020 Purpose.

This policy shall be known as the “City of Kent Recycled Product Procurement Policy.” Its purpose is to promote the development of markets for recycled products and recyclable products by establishing preferential purchase programs applicable to city departments and contractors, thereby diverting materials from the solid waste stream.

(Ord. No. 3066, § 1, 9-1-92)


3.80.030 Designated recycled products.

The following are designated recycled products for purposes of this chapter:

1. Paper and paper products;

2. Compost products;

3. Cement and asphalt concrete containing glass cullet, recycled fiber or plastic, tire rubber, or fly ash;

4. Recrushed cement concrete aggregate and asphalt;

5. Lubricating oil and hydraulic oil with refined oil content;

6. Antifreeze;

7. Outdoor-wood product substitutes made from recycled plastic;

8. Remanufactured tires and products made from recycled tire rubber;

9. Building insulation products;

10. Paint;

11. Remanufactured laser printer toner cartridges;

12. Other products as designated by the lead department.

(Ord. No. 3066, § 3, 9-1-92)


3.80.040 Policies.

A. All city departments shall use recycled products and recyclable products whenever practicable.

B. The lead department shall be responsible for coordinating the implementation of this policy.

C. In those instances, where the lead department first determines that it is consistent with the purpose and policies of this chapter to encourage the sale and use of a recycled or recyclable product, the lead department may establish a price preference for any designated recycled product when the performance of that product is sufficient and a price preference will significantly increase procurement of that product. This price preference shall at no time be greater than ten (10) percent.

D. The city shall require its contractors and consultants to use recycled products and recyclable products in fulfilling contractual obligations whenever practicable.

E. The city shall promote the use of recycled products and recyclable products by publicizing the procurement program.

(Ord. No. 3066, § 4, 9-1-92)


3.80.050 Paper and paper products.

A. In those instances where recycled paper is not specifically required by this policy (e.g., city letterhead paper) or by user departments (e.g., specific bid requirements), the city may offer a ten (10) percent price preference for recycled paper purchased for use by city departments.

B. The city’s recycled paper procurement goal, expressed as a percentage of the total value of paper purchased, shall be not less than forty (40) percent by 1993; not less than fifty (50) percent by 1994; and not less than sixty (60) percent by 1995.

C. All imprinted letterhead paper, envelopes and business cards purchased by city departments shall be recycled paper and shall bear an imprint identifying recycled content of the paper.

D. City departments shall ensure that all contracts for printing require the use of recycled paper and shall include the chasing-arrow symbol identifying the recycled content of the paper whenever practicable.

E. City departments shall ensure that the title page of each internal report printed or copied on recycled paper bears an imprint identifying the recycled content of the paper.

F. Requests for bids and proposals issued by the city shall encourage contractors and consultants to:

1. Use recycled paper for proposals and for any printed or photocopied material created pursuant to a contract with the city whenever practicable.

2. Use both sides of paper sheets for reports submitted to the city whenever practicable.

G. To reduce the volume of paper purchased, departments shall use both sides of paper sheets whenever practicable.

(Ord. No. 3066, § 5, 9-1-92)


3.80.060 Responsibilities of the lead department.

The lead department shall:

1. Designate recycled products that shall be purchased by departments wherever practicable. These designated recycled products shall include, but not be limited to, the products listed in KCC 3.80.030 of this policy.

2. Adopt minimum recycled content standards for designated recycled products to maximize recycled product availability, recycled content, and competition.

3. Inform departments of their responsibilities under this policy, communicate to departments the list of designated recycled products, provide departments with information about recycled product procurement opportunities, and from time to time, assemble a report on the status of implementation to the city council.

(Ord. No. 3066, § 6, 9-1-92)


3.80.070 Responsibilities of city departments.

Each city department shall:

1. Coordinate with the lead department to purchase recycled products and recyclable products whenever practicable;

2. Evaluate each designated recycled product to determine the extent to which the product may be practicably used by the department and its contractors;

3. Report annually to the lead department on the progress of policy implementation by the department, including the results of product evaluations conducted by the department, types of recycled products purchased by the department and its contractors, the status of departmental efforts to maximize recycled product procurement, and the total purchases of recycled products and nonrecycled products made by the department and its contractors;

4. Ensure that contracts issued by the department require recycled material content wherever practicable and that contractors provide certification of this content and report of amounts used.

(Ord. No. 3066, § 7, 9-1-92)


3.80.080 Exemptions.

A. Nothing contained in this policy shall preclude user departments from requiring recycled material content as a bid specification.

B. Nothing in this policy shall be construed as requiring a department or contractor to procure products that do not perform adequately for their intended use or are not available at a reasonable price in a reasonable period of time.

C. When any emergency requires the immediate procurement of any item that would typically be subject to the requirements of this chapter, the lead department shall have the authority to exempt that procurement purchase only after a written finding of the existence of such an emergency has been certified by the department head of the lead department.

D. These procurement requirements may be waived by the lead department upon filing a written finding that the purchase is clearly and legitimately limited to a single source or supply within the near vicinity, or that the materials, supplies or equipment are subject to special market conditions. The lead department’s finding must also recite why this situation exists.

(Ord. No. 3066, § 8, 9-1-92)


Title 4 RECREATION AND THE ARTS

Chapters:

4.01    Parks and Recreation

4.02    Repealed

4.03    Library Board

4.04    Art Program 

4.05    Outdoor Musical Entertainment and Rock Festivals

4.06    Recreational Vessel Regulations


Chapter 4.01 PARKS AND RECREATION*

Sections:

4.01.005    Definitions.

4.01.010    Prohibited activities – Generally.

4.01.015    Sex discrimination in community athletics programs – Prohibited.

4.01.020    Same – Damaging property. 

4.01.030    Same – Animals. 

4.01.040    Same – Discharging weapons, fireworks. 

4.01.050    Same – Soliciting. 

4.01.060    Same – Circuses, etc. 

4.01.070    Reserved. 

4.01.080    Prohibited activities – Speed limits, vehicles, and horses. 

4.01.090    Same – Camping. 

4.01.100    Same – Littering. 

4.01.110    Same – Competitions. 

4.01.120    Same – Fires. 

4.01.130    Same – Alcoholic beverages.

4.01.135    Smoking, vaping, or tobacco use in parks prohibited.

4.01.140    Same – Golf. 

4.01.150    Use of facilities. 

4.01.160    Hours. 

4.01.170    Permitted and scheduled activities – Rules. 

4.01.180    Repealed.

4.01.190    Sales of refreshments. 

4.01.200    Reserved. 

4.01.210    Traffic regulations. 

4.01.220    Penalties. 

*Cross reference(s) – Parks and community services department, ch. 2.26; subdivision requirements for parks and open space, ch. 12.04.


4.01.005 Definitions.

Park property or park facility shall mean and include all city-owned or controlled parks, public squares, public gardens, playgrounds, athletic complexes, community centers, museums, trails, and all drives, parkways, bodies of water, docks, piers, moorage floats, beaches, and parking lots or garages contained therein. Park property or park facility shall also include all other parks and recreational areas, developed or undeveloped, owned by the city of Kent or under the management and control of the city of Kent for park purposes.

(Ord. No. 4246, § 1, 6-6-17)


4.01.010 Prohibited activities – Generally.

No person shall use, place, or erect any signboard, billboard, bulletin board, post, pole, or device of any kind for advertising on any park properties. No person shall attach any notice, bill, poster, sign, wire, rod, or cord to any tree, shrub, railing, post, or structure within any park properties. No person shall without the written permission of the director of the parks and recreation department place or erect on any park property a structure of any kind.

(Ord. No. 2567, § 3; Ord. No. 2794, § 1(2.30.201), 8-16-88. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.30.201)


4.01.015 Sex discrimination in community athletics programs – Prohibited.

A. In accordance with RCW 35A.21.350, 49.60.500, and 49.60.505, as now enacted or later amended, it is the policy of the city of Kent that no community athletics program for youths or adults, either operated, conducted, or administered by the city or a third party who uses city facilities, may discriminate against any person on the basis of sex.

B. A community athletics program shall have the meaning ascribed to it by RCW 49.60.500, as now enacted or later amended.

C. Any questions regarding this policy shall be directed to the city’s recreational and cultural superintendent, 220 Fourth Avenue South, Kent, WA 98032, (253) 856-5100.

(Ord. No. 3943, § 1, 2-2-10)


4.01.020 Same – Damaging property.

No person shall remove, destroy, mutilate, or deface any structure, monument, statue, vase, fountain, wall, fence, railing, vehicle bench, shrub, tree, fern, plant, flower, lighting system, sprinkling system, or other property lawfully on any park property.

(Ord. No. 2567, § 3; Ord. No. 2794, § 1(2.30.202), 8-16-88. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.30.202)

Cross reference(s) – Rewards for information leading to arrest of persons damaging public property, ch. 9.03.


4.01.030 Same – Animals.

A. No person shall allow or permit any animal under that person’s exclusive control to run at large on any park properties, or enter any lake, pond, fountain, or stream therein.

B. No person shall, in any manner, tease, annoy, disturb, molest, catch, injure, kill, or throw any stone or missile of any kind at or strike with any stick or weapon any animal, bird, or fowl. No person shall fish on the park properties except at areas designated by the parks and recreation department. No person shall feed any fowl in the park except in designated areas.

(Ord. No. 2567, § 3; Ord. No. 2794, § 1(2.30.203, 2.30.205), 8-16-88. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 2.30.203, 2.30.205)

Cross reference(s) – Animal control, ch. 8.03.


4.01.040 Same – Discharging weapons, fireworks.

No person shall shoot, fire, or explode any fireworks, firecrackers, torpedo, or explosive of any kind, or carry any weapon, excluding firearms, or shoot, discharge, or fire any firearm, air gun, bow and arrow, BB guns, or use any slingshot or any other weapon on any park properties except a law enforcement officer in the line of duty.

(Ord. No. 2567, § 3; Ord. No. 2794, § 1(2.30.204), 8-16-88; Ord. No. 3318, § 1, 10-15-96. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.30.204)

Cross reference(s) – Displaying or exhibiting weapons, § 9.02.060; fireworks, ch. 13.05.


4.01.050 Same – Soliciting.

No person shall take up collections or act as or play the vocation of solicitor, agency, peddler, fakir, mendicant, beggar, strolling musician, organ grinder, exhorter, barker, showman, or bootblack; or operate or use any loudspeaker or other mechanical means of amplifying sound on any park properties without a written permit from the director of the parks and recreation department except for public address systems at sporting events.

(Ord. No. 2567, § 3; Ord. No. 2794, § 1(2.30.206), 8-16-88. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.30.206)

Cross reference(s) – Solicitors, ch. 5.07.


4.01.060 Same – Circuses, etc.

No person shall hold, operate, or conduct a circus, carnival, or traveling exhibition on any park property except such activities as may be a regular part of the parks and recreation program conducted by the parks and recreation department.

(Ord. No. 2567, § 3; Ord. No. 2794, § 1(2.30.207), 8-16-88. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.30.207)


4.01.070 Reserved.

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3247, § 1, adopted Nov. 7, 1995, repealed § 4.01.070, which pertained to watercraft.


4.01.080 Prohibited activities – Speed limits, vehicles, and horses.

A. No person shall ride or drive any bicycle, tricycle, motorcycle, motor vehicle, horse, or pony over or through any park at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour. Nor shall any person ride or drive any bicycle, tricycle, motorcycle, motor vehicle, horse, or pony over or through any park, except within, along, and upon the park drives, parkways, or park boulevards; however, a person may ride a bicycle or tricycle on park trails, unless the parks, recreation, and community services director prohibits bicycle or tricycle use and posts a sign advising of the prohibition.

B. No person shall stand or park any vehicle, except in designated areas or in accordance with signs, striping, or other methods which make clear the appropriate method or manner of parking. Improperly parked vehicles, including vehicles parked on sidewalks, vehicles left parked over twenty-four (24) hours, vehicles not associated with the use of the park, and unauthorized vehicles left in the park between dusk and dawn, are subject to the penalties provided for in KCC 4.01.220(A)(2) and may be towed away at the expense of the owner.

(Ord. No. 2567, § 3; Ord. No. 2794, § 1(2.30.211), 8-16-88; Ord. No. 3406, § 1, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 3886, § 2, 8-5-08. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.30.211)

Cross reference(s) – Traffic code, ch. 9.36.


4.01.090 Same – Camping.

No person shall camp on any park property except at places set aside for such purposes by the parks and recreation department and so designated by signs or as allowed by a permit from the director of the parks and recreation department.

(Ord. No. 2567, § 3; Ord. No. 2794, § 1(2.30.212), 8-16-88. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.30.212)


4.01.100 Same – Littering.

A. No person shall throw any refuse, litter, broken glass, crockery, nails, shrubbery, trimmings, junk, or advertising matter in or on any park properties or deposit any such material therein, except in designated receptacles.

B. No person shall deposit any refuse, not generated in parks, in any receptacle within any park or upon any park properties.

(Ord. No. 2567, § 3; Ord. No. 2794, § 1(2.30.214, 2.30.215), 8-16-88. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 2.30.214, 2.30.215)

Cross reference(s) – Litter control, ch. 8.04.


4.01.110 Same – Competitions.

No person shall engage in, conduct, or hold any trials or competitions for speed or endurance of hill climbing involving any vehicle, boat, aircraft, or animal in any park.

(Ord. No. 2567, § 3; Ord. No. 2794, § 1(2.30.216), 8-16-88. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.30.216)


4.01.120 Same – Fires.

No person shall build any fires in any park except in areas designated by the parks and recreation department.

(Ord. No. 2567, § 3; Ord. No. 2794, § 1(2.30.217), 8-16-88. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.30.217)

Cross reference(s) – Fire prevention codes, ch. 13.02.


4.01.130 Same – Alcoholic beverages.

No person shall bring into or consume in or on any park property or facility any alcoholic beverages without a written permit from the director of the parks and recreation department.

(Ord. No. 2567, § 3; Ord. No. 2794, § 1(2.30.218), 8-16-88. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.30.218)


4.01.135 Smoking, vaping, or tobacco use in parks prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to smoke, vape, or use tobacco products in or on any park property or park facility, excluding the Riverbend Golf Course facility. This prohibition includes both noncombustible products, like e-cigarettes or other vaping devices that produce smoke or vapor, and dipping tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff, or snus; and combustible products, like paper cigarettes, cigarillos, or cigars, pipes, and hookahs. If the product emits smoke, or vapor, or contains tobacco, it is prohibited.

(Ord. No. 4246, § 2, 6-6-17)


4.01.140 Same – Golf.

No person shall play golf except in areas designated by the parks and recreation department.

(Ord. No. 2567, § 3; Ord. No. 2794, § 1(2.30.219), 8-16-88. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.30.219)


4.01.150 Use of facilities.

Park facilities shall be used for their designed or intended purposes, and it shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to interfere with or prevent any person from using a park facility for its designed purposes.

(Ord. No. 2567, § 3; Ord. No. 2794, § 1(2.30.220), 8-16-88. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.30.220)


4.01.160 Hours.

It is unlawful to remain in any park between dusk and dawn, or during those hours as otherwise posted by the city, except for activities authorized by the parks and recreation department.

(Ord. No. 2567, § 3; Ord. No. 2794, § 1(2.30.221), 8-16-88; Ord. No. 3158, § 1, 3-1-94. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.30.221)


4.01.170 Permitted and scheduled activities – Rules.

Permits and schedules, officially issued or distributed by the director of the parks and recreation department, shall have priority over other activities. Participants shall yield to the holder of such permit or schedule. Participants with or without a permit or schedule shall abide by all rules and regulations and shall not unreasonably interfere with other persons’ use of or the city’s maintenance or operation of city park facilities. A copy of all rules and regulations are filed with the city clerk.

(Ord. No. 2567, § 3; Ord. No. 2794, § 1(2.30.213), 8-16-88; Ord. No. 3587, § 1, 1-15-02. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.30.213)


4.01.180 Meetings.

Repealed by Ord. No. 3587.

(Ord. No. 2567, § 3; Ord. No. 2794, § 1(2.30.209), 8-16-88. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.30.209)


4.01.190 Sales of refreshments.

No person shall sell refreshments or merchandise without the written permission of the director of the parks and recreation department or a concession contract with the parks and recreation department.

(Ord. No. 2567, § 3; Ord. No. 2794, § 1(2.30.208), 8-16-88. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.30.208)


4.01.200 Reserved.

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3247, § 1, adopted Nov. 7, 1995, repealed § 4.01.200, which pertained to a ban on motorboats on Lake Fenwick.


4.01.210 Traffic regulations.

A. At all times and at all locations within any park, pedestrians shall enjoy the right-of-way over any motorized or unmotorized vehicle, bicycle, tricycle, animal, skates, or skateboard.

B. No person shall ride, drive, or operate any bicycle, skates, or skateboard in any area within any park where such activity is prohibited by means of posted notice. The director of the parks and recreation department is authorized to place the appropriate notice or notices at such times, and/or within such areas of any park which shall make it unlawful to ride, drive, or operate any bicycle, skates, or skateboard within such designated areas, according to the posted notice.

(Ord. No. 2794, § 1(2.30.223), 8-16-88. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.30.223)

Cross reference(s) – Traffic code, ch. 9.36.


4.01.220 Penalties.

A. Civil infraction. 

1. Except as provided in subsections (A)(2) and (B) of this section, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a class 1 civil infraction in accordance with RCW 7.80.120(1)(a), as currently enacted or hereafter amended.

2. A violation of either KCC 4.01.080(B) or 4.01.135 shall constitute a class 3 civil infraction in accordance with RCW 7.80.120(1)(c), as currently enacted or hereafter amended.

3. Each separate day, or portion thereof, during which any violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.

B. Misdemeanor. Any person who violates KCC 4.01.020 or 4.01.040 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $5,000 or by imprisonment not to exceed one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate day or portion thereof during which such violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.

(Ord. No. 2567, § 3; Ord. No. 3247, § 2, 11-7-95; Ord. No. 3886, § 3, 8-5-08; Ord. No. 4246, § 3, 6-6-17. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.30.300)


Chapter 4.02 ARTS COMMISSION


(Repealed by Ord. No. 4274)


Chapter 4.02 ARTS COMMISSION


(Repealed by Ord. No. 4274)


Chapter 4.03 LIBRARY BOARD*

Sections:

4.03.010    Created. 

4.03.020    Residence of members and vacancies. 

4.03.030    Meetings and organization. 

4.03.040    Responsibilities.

4.03.050    Gifts. 

*Cross reference(s) – Boards and commissions, ch. 2.51 et seq.

State law reference(s) – Libraries, RCW 35A.27.010.


4.03.010 Created.

The library board is hereby created. The board shall consist of five (5) members. The members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the majority of the city council for terms of five (5) years. No member may serve more than two (2) full terms. Members shall serve without compensation for their services but may receive necessary expenses actually incurred in connection with their services to the library.

(Ord. No. 2416, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.36.010)


4.03.020 Residence of members and vacancies.

Only persons who are residents of the city or of a municipality which contracts with the city for library services shall be eligible for appointment to the library board. The position of a member shall become vacant upon such member’s ceasing to reside within the city or ceasing to reside within a municipality which contracts with the city for library services. The position of a member shall be forfeited and become vacant for failure to attend three (3) regular, consecutive meetings of the board, unless such absence is excused by a majority of the members of the board.

(Ord. No. 2416, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.36.020)


4.03.030 Meetings and organization.

The library board shall hold meetings at regular intervals as provided in bylaws adopted by the board and shall meet not less frequently than every ninety (90) days. The board shall select a chairperson from among the members and such other officers as they may deem necessary and may establish rules for the conduct of their meetings and business of the board.

(Ord. No. 2416, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.36.030)


4.03.040 Responsibilities.

A. The library board shall make reports and recommendations to the city council and mayor concerning the acquisition, care, maintenance, utilization, and disposition of library buildings, property, and equipment. The board shall serve as an advisory body to the city council and mayor in all matters pertaining to library buildings, equipment, and other property, and the library budget.

B. The library board shall review, advise, and make recommendations to the city council and mayor concerning the promulgation and enforcement of rules and regulations concerning the use of the library, its building and equipment and rules of conduct and behavior of persons using the library and frequenting the library building. The board shall advise and make recommendations relative to the scope and quality of library services provided or to be provided and shall review and advise on all matters pertaining to the administration and performance of the city’s contract with the King County Library District for library services.

(Ord. No. 2416, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.36.040)


4.03.050 Gifts.

The library board, in conjunction with the library district, may accept or reject all gifts of money or property made for the benefit of the library and its patrons. All equipment and other property donated for library purposes whether through the board or to the city directly, shall become the property of the city held in trust for library purposes and subject to the discretion of the legislative authority as to any subsequent sale or disposition of any such property or investment of any such money.

(Ord. No. 2416, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.36.060)


Chapter 4.04 ART PROGRAM

Sections:

4.04.010    Established. 

4.04.020    Art account created. 

4.04.030    Guidelines and procedures. 


4.04.010 Established.

A. The city art fund may be used for all costs for works of art, administrative costs of the city art program, and all costs of installation and maintenance.

B. The city arts commission shall recommend the amount to be made available for the purchase of art, in consultation with city staff. The designation of projects and sites, selection, contracting, purchase, commissioning, review of design, execution and placement, acceptance, maintenance, sale, exchange, or disposition of works of art shall be recommended by the arts commission and staff, for approval by the city council, in accordance with the city art program guidelines.

C. All works of art purchased and commissioned under the city art program shall become a part of a city art collection. The city art collection shall be developed, administered and operated by the arts commission with cooperation and support of the parks and recreation department staff.

D. The works of art may be placed on public lands, integrated with or attached to a public building or structure, detached within or outside a public building or structure, or part of a portable collection or exhibit.

E. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the amount of money the city may expend for art.

(Ord. No. 2552, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.35.020)


4.04.020 Art account created.

There is hereby established a city art account. Monies for the fund shall be received from:

1. Annual city budget. Two dollars ($2) per budget year for each city resident, based upon population data certified by the State Office of Financial Management. Budgeted, but unspent funds shall be maintained in the art fund, and carried forward at the end of each budget year.

2. Gifts, donations and grants. Private or public gifts, endowments, donations, bequests or other grants.

3. Other. Such other sources as may be available.

(Ord. No. 2552, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.35.010)

Cross reference(s) – Specific funds, ch. 3.40.


4.04.030 Guidelines and procedures.

A. Upon consultation with the city arts commission, guidelines and procedures shall be prepared by staff for the implementation of the city art program. Such guidelines and procedures shall be reviewed by the city arts commission annually, and recommendations shall be made to the city council for approval.

B. A city art plan including a schedule and budget for all city art program projects shall be prepared and updated annually by the city arts commission and city parks and recreation department staff. The city art plan shall be reviewed and approved annually by the city council.

(Ord. No. 2552, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.35.030)


Chapter 4.05 OUTDOOR MUSICAL ENTERTAINMENT AND ROCK FESTIVALS*

Sections:

4.05.010    Permit required. 

4.05.020    Permit application. 

4.05.030    Permit fee. 

4.05.040    Submission of plans for approval – Approving agencies. 

4.05.050    Conditions. 

4.05.060    Hours of operation. 

4.05.070    Failure to comply. 

4.05.080    Penalties. 

*Cross reference(s) – Business licenses, ch. 5.01 et seq.; noise control, ch. 8.05.

State law reference(s) – Outdoor music festivals, RCW 70.108.010 et seq.


4.05.010 Permit required.

It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, landowner, or lessor to allow, encourage, organize, promote, conduct, permit or cause to be advertised an entertainment, amusement, or assembly of persons wherein the primary purpose will be the presentation of outdoor, live or recorded musical entertainment which person, corporation, landowner or lessor believes or has reason to believe will attract two hundred fifty (250) or more persons and where a charge or contribution is required for admission unless a valid city permit has been obtained for the operation of such assembly. Such assembly may be advertised by the sponsors and/or organizers thereof after application for such permit has been made.

(Ord. No. 1618, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.24.010)


4.05.020 Permit application.

Written applications for outdoor musical amusements, entertainment or assembly permits shall be made to the city clerk forty (40) days or more prior to the date upon which such assembly is scheduled to be held. Written notice of approval or disapproval of such application shall be given to the applicants no less than fifteen (15) days after the application has been filed. Permits shall not be denied if the conditions enumerated in this chapter are met by the applicant. No permit may be granted to anyone who has been convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude. Each application shall be accompanied by the fingerprints and a three (3) inch by five (5) inch photograph of the applicant and every person having any proprietary interest in the activity. The city clerk shall be empowered to obtain adequate photographs of all persons having any proprietary interest.

(Ord. No. 1618, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.24.020)


4.05.030 Permit fee.

The basic fee required shall be one hundred dollars ($100) for each event. No permit shall be granted for a period of more than one (1) day expiring at midnight of that day. No permit shall be granted for consecutive days at the same location. The basic permit fee shall be retained by the city whether a permit is granted, denied or withdrawn.

(Ord. No. 1618, § 3. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.24.030)


4.05.040 Submission of plans for approval – Approving agencies.

Whenever approval by a governmental agency other than the city is required in this chapter, the applicant for such approval shall be required to cooperate fully with such agencies to insure that full review of the proposals may be accomplished by the agencies within fifteen (15) days time limit set out in this chapter. When any type of physical facility is required or subject to approval hereunder, preliminary approval may be granted based upon specific plans proposed and submitted by the applicant. All such facilities shall be in existence five (5) or more days before the event for which an application is submitted and shall be subject to inspection by the approving agencies or departments. Should the actual facility or construction fail to meet with the standards approved in the proposed plans, such preliminary approval may be withdrawn and any and all permits granted subject to such approval may be withdrawn.

(Ord. No. 1618, § 4. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.24.040)


4.05.050 Conditions.

A. Condition number 1. Location. No permit for an outdoor musical assembly shall be granted unless the assembly is to be held in those areas of the city which have been zoned for parks and recreational purposes. A permit may be granted for other areas if a zoning variance has been granted in advance by the city council for such location.

B. Condition number 2. Sanitary facilities. No permit shall be granted unless the applicants obtain the written approval of the health officer of the city, indicating that the applicants for the permit have complied with the health requirements of the city for like or similar facilities. The approval shall indicate the type and adequacy of water supply; toilet, waste collection and washing facilities to be provided. If there is to be food service on the premises, the type and adequacy of food preparation and food service facilities shall be provided.

C. Condition number 3. Fire prevention standards. No permit shall be granted unless the applicant has shown the fire chief approved fire protection devices and equipment available at such assembly. Fire prevention standards shall be as set out in KCC Title 13, relating to fire prevention and protection.

D. Condition number 4. Cash bond and indemnification. No permit shall be issued unless the applicant has on deposit with the city a cash bond in the amount as set out in subsections (D)(1) through (D)(4) below to save and protect the streets, pavements, bridges, road signs and other property in the city from any and all damage that may be caused by vehicles, employees, or participants in such outdoor musical assembly and to be used, if necessary, to restore the ground where such assembly is held to a sanitary condition and pay all charges and losses of the city for damages to the streets, pavements, bridges and other property. Any extraordinary law enforcement costs incurred by the city which are the result of such activity shall be met by such cash bond. The amount of such cash bond shall be determined as follows:

1. For gatherings of 0 to 10,000 persons, a cash bond of $5,000;

2. For gatherings of 10,000 to 20,000 persons, a cash bond of $7,500;

3. For gatherings of 20,000 to 30,000 persons, a cash bond of $10,000; and

4. For gatherings over thirty thousand (30,000), the cash bond shall be raised in increments of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) for each additional ten thousand (10,000) persons expected. 

The deposit or its balance is to be returned when the city clerk certifies that no damage has been done or that the cost of making the above-mentioned repairs was less than the cash bond amount and that the balance thereof should be returned. The sponsors shall be required to furnish evidence of a liability insurance policy, naming the city as an additional insured; providing for coverage in the amounts determined by the city risk manager which amounts shall not be less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) bodily injury coverage per person; three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000) bodily injury coverage per occurrence and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) property damage.

E. Condition number 5. Public safety. No permit shall be granted unless the applicant obtained the written approval of the police department indicating that the following conditions have been complied with by the applicant:

1. Adequate traffic control and crowd protection policing have been contracted for or otherwise provided by the applicant.

2. Traffic control and crowd control personnel shall be licensed merchant patrolmen or named persons meeting the police department’s requirements for becoming patrolmen.

3. There shall be one (1) traffic control person for each four hundred (400) persons expected or reasonably to be expected to be in attendance at any time during the event.

If at any time during the event the size of the crowd exceeds by twenty (20) percent the number of persons expected to be in attendance, the police department shall have the discretion to require the sponsor to limit further admissions. Any person with more than a ten (10) percent proprietary interest in the event shall be required to be in attendance at the activity and shall be responsible for insuring that no person shall be allowed to remain on the premises if such person is violating state or city laws. Any such person having a duty to remove law violators who willfully fails to do so shall be deemed to be an aider or abettor of such violation.

F. Condition number 6. Parking facilities. Application for a permit hereunder shall be accompanied by a scale drawing showing adequate parking facilities have been made available within or adjacent to the location for which the permit is requested. Such parking facilities shall provide parking space for one (1) vehicle for every four (4) persons expected or reasonably to be expected. Adequate ingress and egress shall be provided to or from such parking area to facilitate the movement of any vehicle at any time to or from the parking area. If any nonadjacent parking facilities are approved, buses shall be used to transport the public to the event on a no-charge basis.

(Ord. No. 1618, § 5. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.24.050)


4.05.060 Hours of operation.

No outdoor musical assembly shall be conducted in the city limits during the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. No permit shall be issued for more than one (1) twenty-four (24) hour period ending at midnight. The participants shall be required to have cleared the area and its immediate environs no later than 1:00 a.m. of the day following the event.

(Ord. No. 1618, § 6. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.24.060)


4.05.070 Failure to comply.

Compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter shall constitute the minimum health, sanitation, and safety provisions and failure to comply with the terms and conditions shall constitute a public nuisance and the sponsors of the event shall be subject to all criminal and civil remedies as such.

(Ord. No. 1618, § 8. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.24.080)


4.05.080 Penalties.

Any person who shall violate or fails to comply with any provision of this chapter, or who shall counsel, aid or abet such a violation or failure to comply, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.

(Ord. No. 1618, § 7. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.24.070)


Chapter 4.06 RECREATIONAL VESSEL REGULATIONS*

Sections:

4.06.010    Application of regulations. 

4.06.020    Revised Code of Washington provisions adopted by reference. 

4.06.030    Washington Administrative Code provisions adopted by reference. 

4.06.040    Definitions. 

4.06.050    Motor-powered vessels prohibited – Exception. 

4.06.060    Required distance from motor-powered vessels to swimmers and other vessels. 

4.06.070    Dumping trash in lakes prohibited. 

4.06.080    Floating objects adrift. 

4.06.090    Sunken vessels. 

4.06.100    Intoxication. 

4.06.110    Incapacity of operator. 

4.06.120    Accidents. 

4.06.130    Accident reports. 

4.06.140    Vessel operation within or bordering park property. 

4.06.150    Restricted areas. 

4.06.160    Swimming – Lake Meridian. 

4.06.170    Skin diving. 

4.06.180    Water skiing. 

4.06.190    Lake Fenwick – Motor-powered vessel prohibited – Exception. 

4.06.200    Lake Meridian – Motor-powered vessel restrictions – Water skiing and personal watercraft operation. 

4.06.210    Personal flotation devices, equipment, and navigation lights. 

4.06.220    Oil. 

4.06.230    Nuisances. 

4.06.240    Public health. 

4.06.250    Liability for damages. 

4.06.260    Authorized emergency and patrol vessels. 

4.06.270    Directing traffic, restricting vessel speed, suspending activities, emergency powers. 

4.06.280    Penalties. 

4.06.290    Authority of officers to board vessels. 

4.06.300    Interlocal cooperation. 

4.06.310    Enforcement. 

*Editor’s note – Ordinance No. 3342, § 1, adopted April 2, 1997, amended chapter 4.06 to read as herein set out. Formerly, such chapter pertained to boating regulations and derived from Ord. No. 3248, § 1, 11-7-95; Ord. No. 3280, § 1, 3-5-96; Ord. No. 3291, § 1, 4-18-96.


4.06.010 Application of regulations.

The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all recreational vessels and related uses in and upon all lakes within the geographical boundaries of the city of Kent. The provisions of this chapter shall be construed to supplement United States laws and state laws and regulations when not expressly inconsistent therewith.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97)


4.06.020 Revised Code of Washington provisions adopted by reference.

A. The following provisions of Chapter 88.02 RCW entitled “Vessel Registration,” as currently enacted or later amended, are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein:

RCW

88.02.020    Registration and display of registration number and decal prerequisite to ownership or operation of vessel – Exemptions.

88.02.025    Registration of vessels numbered under the Federal Boat Safety Act.

88.02.030    Exceptions from vessel registration – Use of excess document identification fee for boating safety programs – Rules.

88.02.090    Inspection of registration – Violation of chapter.

88.02.110    Penalties – Disposition of moneys collected – Enforcement authority.

B. The following provisions of Chapter 79A.60 RCW entitled “Regulation of Recreational Vessels,” as currently enacted or later amended, are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein:

RCW

79A.60.010    Definitions.

79A.60.020    Violations of chapter punishable as misdemeanor – Circumstances – Violations designated as civil infractions.

79A.60.030    Operation of vessel in a negligent manner – Penalty.

79A.60.040    Operation of vessel in a reckless manner – Operation of a vessel under the influence of intoxicating liquor – Penalty.

79A.60.080    Failure to stop for law enforcement officer.

79A.60.100    Enforcement – Chapter to supplement federal law.

79A.60.110    Equipment standards – Rules – Penalty.

79A.60.120    Tampering with vessel lights or signals – Exhibiting false lights or signals – Penalty.

79A.60.130    Muffler or underwater exhaust system required – Exemptions – Enforcement – Penalty.

79A.60.140    Personal flotation devices – Inspection and approval – Rules.

79A.60.150    Failure of vessel to contain required equipment – Liability of operator or owner – Penalty.

79A.60.160    Personal flotation devices required – Penalty.

79A.60.170    Water skiing safety – Requirements.

79A.60.180    Loading or powering vessel beyond safe operating ability – Penalties.

79A.60.190    Operation of personal watercraft – Prohibited activities – Penalties.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97; Ord. No. 3693, § 1, 6‑1-04)


4.06.030 Washington Administrative Code provisions adopted by reference.

The provisions of Chapter 352-60 WAC, as currently enacted or later amended, are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97; Ord. No. 3693, § 2, 6‑1-04)


4.06.040 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, in addition to the definitions set forth in RCW 79A.60.010 adopted in KCC 4.06.020, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed in this section:

Authorized emergency vessel means any authorized vessel of the city’s police or fire departments, the United States government, and state of Washington authorized patrol boats or vessels.

Boat basin means the submerged waters surrounding the boat launch ramp and boarding float through which boats travel for the purpose of entering and exiting lake waters.

City means the city of Kent.

Obstruction means any matter which may in any way blockade, interfere with, or endanger any vessel or impede navigation including but not limited to rafts, log booms, trees, lumber, and other similar material or objects.

Oil means any oil or liquid, whether of animal, vegetable, or mineral origin, or a mixture, compound, or distillation thereof.

Person, when necessary, means and includes natural persons, associations, co-partnerships, and corporations, whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent, or employee; the singular number, when necessary, means the plural, and the masculine pronoun includes the feminine.

Pier means any pier, wharf, dock, float, gridiron, or other structure to promote the convenient loading or unloading or other discharge of a vessel, or the moorage of a vessel.

Police or police department means the police department of the city of Kent.

Restricted area means an area that has been marked in accordance with and as authorized by the law or regulations of the city, to be used for certain designated purposes such as swimming and aquatic events or otherwise closed to use by vessels, the method of marking and designation of which shall have been made by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

Skin diving means any free swimming person and/or any person who uses an artificial or mechanical means to replace his or her air, including self-contained underwater breathing apparatus (SCUBA diving), snorkel tube equipment, and free diving gear.

Vessel includes, but is not limited to, rowboat, sailboat, sailboard, canoe, kayak, powerboat, ski boat, personal watercraft, and other similar watercraft.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97; Ord. No. 3693, § 3, 6‑1-04; Ord. No. 3886, § 4, 8-5-08)


4.06.050 Motor-powered vessels prohibited – Exception.

Except on lakes otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, no motor-powered vessels shall be operated on any lake within the city.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97)


4.06.060 Required distance from motor-powered vessels to swimmers and other vessels.

Except as provided in KCC 4.06.200(A)(3), it is unlawful for any motor-powered vessel to be operated while the propeller is engaged within fifty (50) feet of any swimmer or any row boat, canoe, or other vessels.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97)


4.06.070 Dumping trash in lakes prohibited.

The dumping, depositing, placing, or leaving of any garbage, ashes, debris, brush, or other material into any lake, is prohibited.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97)


4.06.080 Floating objects adrift.

All vessels, or any other articles of value found adrift in any lake in the city, may be taken into possession and removed by the police or other authorized city official or agent and shall be subject to reclamation by the owner thereof, on payment by him or her to the city of any expenses incurred by the city and in case of failure to reclaim may be sold or disposed of according to law.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97)


4.06.090 Sunken vessels.

When any vessel or obstruction has been sunk or grounded, or has been delayed in such manner as to stop or seriously interfere with or endanger navigation, the police may order the same immediately removed and if the owner, or other person in charge thereof, after being so ordered, does not proceed immediately with such removal, the police or other authorized city official or agent may take immediate possession thereof and remove the same, using such methods as in his or her judgment will prevent unnecessary damage to such watercraft or obstruction, and the expense incurred by the city in such removal shall be paid by the owner or other person in charge of such vessel or obstruction; and in case of failure to pay the same, the city may maintain an action for the recovery thereof.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97)


4.06.100 Intoxication.

A. It is unlawful for the owner of any vessel or any person having charge or control of such to authorize or knowingly permit the same to be operated by any person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs.

B. Whenever it appears reasonably certain to any police officer that any person under the influence of, or affected by the use of, intoxicating liquor or of any drug is about to operate a vessel in violation of subsection (A) above, said officer may take reasonable measures to prevent any such person from so doing.

C. A violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor as defined in this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97)


4.06.110 Incapacity of operator.

It is unlawful for the owner of any vessel or any person having charge or control of such to authorize or knowingly permit the same to be operated by any person who by reason of physical or mental disability is incapable of operating such vessel under the prevailing circumstances.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97)


4.06.120 Accidents.

The operator of any vessel involved in an accident resulting in injury or death to any person or in damage to property shall immediately stop such vessel at the scene of such accident and shall give his or her name, address, and the name and/or number of his or her vessel, and the name and address of the owner, to the person struck or the operator or occupants of the vessel collided with or property damaged, and shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97)


4.06.130 Accident reports.

The owner or operator of any watercraft shall file a written report within forty-eight (48) hours with the police department of any accident involving death or personal injury requiring medical treatment or property damage in excess of two hundred dollars ($200) in which such watercraft shall have been involved on any lake of the city.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97)


4.06.140 Vessel operation within or bordering park property.

No person shall have, keep, or operate any boat, float, raft, or vessel in or upon any lake, within the limits of any park property, or launch the same at any point upon the shores thereof bordering upon any park property, except at places set apart for such purposes by the parks and recreation department and so designated by signs.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97)


4.06.150 Restricted areas.

In the interests of safe navigation, life safety, and the protection of property, the city may designate restricted areas and the purpose for which same shall be used on any lake authorized for vessel use. No person shall operate a watercraft within a restricted area; provided, that this section shall not apply to vessels engaged in or accompanying the activity to which the area is restricted, nor to patrol or rescue craft or in the case of an emergency.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97)


4.06.160 Swimming – Lake Meridian.

A. Swimming in Lake Meridian shall be confined to:

1. Restricted swimming areas; or

2. Within a distance of fifty (50) feet from the shore, or a pier, or an occupied vessel accompanying the swimmer in the water; or

3. Those areas as may be identified by the city as the course for competitive swimming training or events; or

4. Those waters of the lake that are a distance of one hundred (100) feet away from the boat basin, the boat launch, the boarding float, and the temporary moorage associated with the boat launch.

B. Use of inflatable flotation or similar devices, not propelled by instruments such as oars and paddles, including, but not limited to, tubes, boards, and inflatable rafts, are only allowed within a distance of fifty (50) feet from shore in nondesignated swimming areas.

C. No person shall cause to be tied to any marker buoy, any watercraft, boat, or similar craft or flotation device such as a tube, board, or inflatable raft.

D. No person shall give or transmit a false signal or false alarm of drowning in any manner.

E. The parks, recreation, and community services director may establish the hours for lifeguard supervised swimming and may establish rules and regulations for use within or adjacent to designated swim areas.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97; Ord. No. 3886, § 5, 8-5-08)


4.06.170 Skin diving.

Skin diving shall be prohibited in all lakes in the city except as necessary for public employees and their agents or other authorized personnel to perform their duties or in the case of an emergency.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97)


4.06.180 Water skiing.

Water skiing is prohibited on all lakes within the city except for Lake Meridian which shall be regulated as set forth in KCC 4.06.200.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97)


4.06.190 Lake Fenwick – Motor-powered vessel prohibited – Exception.

It is unlawful to use or operate any vessel with motor power on Lake Fenwick, except electric fishing trolling motors, and except as necessary for public employees and their agents or construction company employees to perform their authorized duties or in case of an emergency.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97)


4.06.200 Lake Meridian – Motor-powered vessel restrictions – Water skiing and personal watercraft operation.

A. Generally. The following rules and regulations are adopted for the use of motor-powered vessels on Lake Meridian:

1. It is unlawful to use or operate any vessel powered by motor power on Lake Meridian, except that vessels with the following engines will be permitted:

a. Water-cooled outboard engines of stock manufacture or stock manufactured inboard engines with outboard drive units (inboard/outboards) which vent all exhaust gases through the lower drive unit in conjunction with cooling water and/or vent at a point on the drive unit which is under water at all times; or water-cooled direct drive inboard engines equipped with a muffler or silencer of sufficient size and capacity to effectively muffle and reduce noise similar to that of outboards and inboard/outboards. This includes both propeller and jet propulsion watercraft.

b. Air-cooled outboard or inboard engines of stock manufacture rated by the manufacturer at ten (10) horsepower or less.

c. Electric fishing trolling motors.

2. No vessel shall operate in excess of eight (8) miles per hour after 6:00 p.m. until the hour of 9:00 a.m. and not in excess of thirty-five (35) miles per hour from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.

3. Vessels exceeding speeds of eight (8) miles per hour shall remain at least two hundred (200) feet from the shoreline and one hundred (100) feet from other vessels and swimmers and shall proceed around the lake in a counterclockwise direction.

4. All vessels operating on Lake Meridian shall carry United States Coast Guard approved personal flotation devices in good condition for each person in the vessel.

5. Motor-powered vessels operating after sundown shall be equipped with and have lit proper running lights.

6. The anchorage or moorage of unoccupied vessels is prohibited except when tied to a pier or dock with the permission of the owner of the pier or dock. However, an unoccupied vessel may only be anchored or moored to a city pier or dock while the vessel’s trailer is being parked or retrieved.

7. No remote controlled vessels powered by internal combustion engines shall operate before 9:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. Additionally, such remote controlled vessels may only be operated in those areas as may be designated by the parks, recreation, and community services director, and shall not be operated within one hundred (100) feet of any fishing pier, designated swimming area, or boat launch ramp and dock.

8. Skin diving is prohibited except as necessary for public employees and their agents or other authorized personnel to perform their duties or in the case of an emergency.

9. No person shall launch a vessel or personal watercraft off a trailer and into Lake Meridian from the city-operated boat launch at Lake Meridian Park without first paying a launch fee in the amount of five dollars ($5) per launch, or an annual launch fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50), and displaying the receipt or annual permit on the dashboard of the vehicle from which the vessel or personal watercraft was launched.

B. Water skiing. The following regulations apply to all water skiing activities as defined in RCW 79A.60.010 including, but not limited to, being towed behind a vessel on skis, an aquaplane, kneeboard, tube, or similar device:

1. Water skiing on the lake at speeds up to and including eight (8) miles per hour is permitted any time between dawn and dusk.

2. Water skiing on the lake at speeds over eight (8) miles per hour shall be limited to the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.

3. It is unlawful to water ski within three hundred (300) feet of shore except as follows:

a. From privately owned shoreline, water skiers may start at and return to shore by means of the most expeditious route;

b. From city-owned shoreline, water skiers may start or return (deep water start) from a distance of two hundred (200) feet or greater from shore but are prohibited from starting or stopping within two hundred (200) feet of shore. For purposes of this provision, city-owned shoreline includes the swimming beach and boat launching areas of the park. For purposes of starting at and returning to shore as authorized herein, water skiers may temporarily exceed the speed limit to eight (8) miles per hour.

4. All persons in vessels towing persons on water skis, tubes, surfboards, or similar contrivance shall remain seated at all times.

5. All operators of vessels having in tow or otherwise assisting a person on water skis, tubes, surfboards, or similar contrivance shall comply with KCC 4.06.060.

6. Regulations stated in this subsection shall not apply to vessels used in water ski tournaments, competitions, expositions, or trials therefor, which have been duly authorized by the city.

C. Personal watercraft. In addition to RCW 79A.60.190 adopted in KCC 4.06.020, the following regulations shall apply to personal watercraft:

1. Personal watercraft may be operated on the lake at speeds up to and including eight (8) miles per hour any day except during hours of darkness.

2. Personal watercraft may be operated on the lake at speeds in excess of eight (8) miles per hour only as follows:

a. Between the hours of 12:00 noon and 6:00 p.m.;

b. On even-numbered days of the calendar; and

c. From and including May 16 through and including September 15 of any year.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97; Ord. No. 3348, § 2, 5‑7-97; Ord. No. 3693, § 4, 6‑1-04; Ord. No. 3886, § 6, 8-5-08)


4.06.210 Personal flotation devices, equipment, and navigation lights.

All vessels operating on navigable waters in the city shall be equipped as required pursuant to the following provisions:

WAC

352-60-030    Personal flotation devices required

352-60-040    Visual distress signals

352-60-050    Ventilation

352-60-060    Navigation lights and shapes

352-60-080    Fire extinguisher required

352-60-090    Backfire flame control

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97)


4.06.220 Oil.

No owner, operator, or other person in charge of any vessel, and no person along or upon the shore of the waters of the city, shall spill, throw, pump, or otherwise cause oil of any description to be or float upon the waters of the city. Any person causing oil to be upon the waters of the city as aforesaid shall remove the same and upon his or her failure to do so, the same may be removed by the city or other appropriate agency and the expense thereof shall be paid by and recoverable from the person causing said oil to be upon the water. The payment of such sum or the maintenance of an action therefor, shall not be deemed to exempt such person from prosecution for causing such oil spillage. Any willful violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor as defined in this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97)


4.06.230 Nuisances.

Sunken vessels, refuse of all kinds, structures, or pieces of any structure, timber, logs, piles, boom sticks, lumber, boxes, empty containers, and oil of any kind floating uncontrolled on the water, and all other substances or articles of a similar nature, are hereby declared to be public nuisances and it is unlawful for any person to throw or place in, or cause or permit to be thrown or placed, any of the above named articles or substances in any lake in the city, or upon the shores thereof or in such position that same may or can be washed into said lakes of the city, either by storms, floods, or otherwise. Any person causing or permitting said nuisances to be placed as aforesaid shall remove the same and upon his or her failure to do so, the same may be removed by the city or other appropriate agency and the expense thereof shall be paid by and recoverable from the person creating said nuisance. In all cases such nuisances may be abated in the manner provided by law. The abatement of any such public nuisances shall not excuse the person responsible therefore from prosecution hereunder. A violation of this section shall constitute a civil violation under Ch. 1.04 KCC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required as provided therein. In addition to or as an alternative to enforcement under Ch. 1.04 KCC, any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as provided in this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97)


4.06.240 Public health.

All vessels entering or in any lake in the city shall comply with the applicable public health laws and regulations of the United States, the state of Washington and its political subdivisions.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97)


4.06.250 Liability for damages.

Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to release any person owning or controlling any vessel, pier, obstruction, or other structure, from any liability for damages, and the safeguards to life and property required in this chapter shall not be construed as relieving any person from installing and maintaining all other safeguards that may be required by law.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97)


4.06.260 Authorized emergency and patrol vessels.

The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to the operation of any and all vessels on any lake in the city except that they shall not apply to any emergency and patrol watercraft performing the authorized duties for which such emergency and patrol vessels were established.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97)


4.06.270 Directing traffic, restricting vessel speed, suspending activities, emergency powers.

A. The police are hereby authorized to direct all vessel traffic on Lake Meridian either in person or by means of visible or audible signal in conformance with the provisions of this chapter; provided, that where necessary to expedite vessel traffic, or to prevent or eliminate congestion or to safeguard persons or property, such officers, and other authorized officers of appropriate governmental agencies or authorities, may direct vessel traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter.

B. The parks director, or his or her designee, may restrict vessel speed or suspend any or all vessel activities on Lake Meridian due to conditions on the lake such as flooding, high water, or other events, conditions, or occurrences when, in the discretion of the parks director, such is deemed necessary to protect persons or property from injury or damage.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97)


4.06.280 Penalties.

The following penalties shall apply for violations of this chapter:

A. Civil infraction. Except as provided in subsections (B) and (C) of this section, a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a class 3 civil infraction in accordance with RCW 7.80.120(1)(c), as currently enacted or hereafter amended. Pursuant to Chapter 7.84 RCW, any violation of the provisions of Chapter 79A.60 RCW adopted herein which constitutes an infraction shall be assessed a monetary penalty as established in the penalty schedule currently set forth and as hereinafter amended in Court Rule IRLJ 6.2 adopted herein by reference. Each separate day, or portion thereof, during which any violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.

B. Misdemeanor. Any violation of any provision established in this chapter which constitutes a misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000) or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate day or portion thereof during which such violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.

C. Gross misdemeanor. Any violation of any provision established in this chapter which constitutes a gross misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000) or by imprisonment not to exceed one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate day or portion thereof during which such violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97; Ord. No. 3693, § 5, 6‑1-04; Ord. No. 3886, § 7, 8-5-08)


4.06.290 Authority of officers to board vessels.

Commissioned officers of the city are hereby given the authority to board any vessel found underway on any lake of the city for the purpose of inspection and enforcement of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97)


4.06.300 Interlocal cooperation.

Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the city from entering into interlocal agreements with cities and towns for the administration and enforcement of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97)


4.06.310 Enforcement.

It shall be the duty of the police department or other city department or official as authorized by the mayor to enforce all sections of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3342, § 1, 4-2-97)


Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS

Chapters:

5.01    General Business Licenses

5.02    Amusements

5.03    Taxicabs, Vehicles for Hire, and Transportation Network Companies

5.04    Gun Clubs Amended Ord. 4355

5.05    Pawnbrokers

5.06    Going Out of Business Sales

5.07    Solicitors

5.08    Amusement Devices 

5.09    Model Studios and Body Painting Establishments 

5.10    Adult Entertainment 

5.11    Ambulances

5.12    Public Dances and Dance Halls

5.14    Rental Housing Safety


Chapter 5.01 GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSES* Revised 2/20

Sections:

5.01.010    Title. 

5.01.020    Definitions. 

5.01.030    Administration and enforcement. 

5.01.040    General business license required.

5.01.045    Threshold exemption.

5.01.050    Separate business license required. 

5.01.060    License not transferable. 

5.01.070    License to be posted. 

5.01.080    Disclaimer of city liability. 

5.01.090    Application procedure, license fee. 

5.01.100    License does not indicate legality of business.

5.01.110    Relicensing. 

5.01.120    Overpayment or refund of license fee. 

5.01.130    Grounds for denial or revocation of license.

5.01.135    Massage or reflexology businesses – Violations related to prostitution or fraud – Violation of Chapter 9.04 KCC – Denial or revocation of business license. Revised 2/20

5.01.140    Denial or revocation of license – Notice and opportunity to be heard. 

5.01.150    Notice of license denial or revocation and scheduling of hearing.

5.01.160    Hearing to deny or revoke business license.

5.01.170    Authority of hearing examiner – Order – Appeal.

5.01.180    Corrective action prior to hearing. 

5.01.190    Violations and enforcement – Penalties. 

*Cross reference(s) – Police department, ch. 2.22; sales and use taxes, ch. 3.16; outdoor musical entertainment, rock festivals, ch. 4.05; recreational vehicle park licenses, § 12.06.210.

State law reference(s) – Authority to license, RCW 35A.82.020; alcoholic beverages share in proceeds, RCW 35A.66.020; license and tax on alcoholic beverages prohibited, RCW 66.08.120; authority to enforce state regulations on food, RCW 35A.69.010; food inspections, RCW 16.49A.010 et seq.; transient accommodations, RCW 70.62.200 et seq.


5.01.010 Title.

This chapter shall constitute the general business license code of the city and may be cited as such.

(Ord. No. 4001, § 2, 8‑2‑11)


5.01.020 Definitions.

Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter.

A. Business means all activities, occupations, pursuits, or professions located and/or engaged in within the city, with the object of gain, benefit or advantage to the person engaging in the same, or to any other person or class, directly or indirectly, and includes nonprofit enterprises. The term business shall also mean apartment and residential rental properties of two or more units, as well as rental housing and rental property as those terms are defined in Chapter 5.14 KCC, but shall not mean governmental agencies.

B. Business enterprise means each location at which business is conducted within the city. A business may have more than one business enterprise within the city.

C. Director means the finance director of the city or his or her designee.

D. Department means the finance department of the city.

E. Engaging in business.

1. The term engaging in business means commencing, conducting, or continuing in business, and also the exercise of corporate or franchise powers, as well as liquidating a business when the liquidators thereof hold themselves out to the public as conducting such business.

2. This section sets forth examples of activities that constitute engaging in business in the city, and establishes safe harbors for certain of those activities so that a person who meets the criteria may engage in de minimis business activities in the city without having to register and obtain a business license or pay city business and occupation taxes. The activities listed in this section are illustrative only and are not intended to narrow the definition of engaging in business in subsection (E)(1) of this section. If an activity is not listed, whether it constitutes engaging in business in the city shall be determined by considering all the facts and circumstances and applicable law.

3. Without being all inclusive, any one of the following activities conducted within the city by a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker or another acting on its behalf, constitutes engaging in business and requires a person to register and obtain a business license:

a. Owning, renting, leasing, maintaining, or having the right to use, or using, tangible personal property, intangible personal property, or real property permanently or temporarily located in the city.

b. Owning, renting, leasing, using, or maintaining an office, place of business, or other establishment in the city.

c. Soliciting sales.

d. Making repairs or providing maintenance or service to real or tangible personal property, including warranty work and property maintenance.

e. Providing technical assistance or service, including quality control, product inspections, warranty work, or similar services on or in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf.

f. Installing, constructing, or supervising installation or construction of real or tangible personal property.

g. Soliciting, negotiating, or approving franchise, license, or other similar agreements.

h. Collecting current or delinquent accounts.

i. Picking up and transporting tangible personal property, solid waste, construction debris, or excavated materials.

j. Providing disinfecting and pest control services, employment and labor pool services, home nursing care, janitorial services, appraising, landscape architectural services, security system services, surveying, and real estate services including the listing of homes and managing real property.

k. Rendering professional services such as those provided by accountants, architects, attorneys, auctioneers, consultants, engineers, professional athletes, barbers, baseball clubs and other sports organizations, chemists, psychologists, court reporters, dentists, doctors, detectives, laboratory operators, teachers, veterinarians.

l. Meeting with customers or potential customers, even when no sales or orders are solicited at the meetings.

m. Training or recruiting agents, representatives, independent contractors, brokers or others, domiciled or operating on a job in the city, acting on its behalf, or for customers or potential customers.

n. Investigating, resolving, or otherwise assisting in resolving customer complaints.

o. In-store stocking or manipulating products or goods, sold to and owned by a customer, regardless of where sale and delivery of the goods took place.

p. Delivering goods in vehicles owned, rented, leased, used, or maintained by the person or another acting on its behalf.

q. Accepting or executing a contract with the city, irrespective of whether goods or services are delivered within or without the city, or whether the person’s office or place of business is within or without the city.

4. If a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker or another acting on the person’s behalf, engages in no other activities in or with the city but the following, it need not register and obtain a business license and pay tax:

a. Meeting with suppliers of goods and services as a customer.

b. Meeting with government representatives in their official capacity, other than those performing contracting or purchasing functions.

c. Attending meetings, such as board meetings, retreats, seminars, and conferences, or other meetings wherein the person does not provide training in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf. This provision does not apply to any board of director member or attendee engaging in business, such as a member of a board of directors who attends a board meeting.

d. Renting tangible or intangible property as a customer when the property is not used in the city.

e. Attending but not participating in a “trade show” or “multiple vendor events.” Persons participating at a trade show shall review the city’s trade show or multiple vendor event ordinances.

f. Conducting advertising through the mail.

g. Soliciting sales by phone from a location outside the city.

5. A seller located outside the city merely delivering goods into the city by means of common carrier is not required to register and obtain a business license; provided, that it engages in no other business activities in the city. Such activities do not include those in subsection (E)(4) of this section.

6. The city expressly intends that engaging in business includes any activity sufficient to establish nexus for purposes of applying the license fee under the law and the Constitutions of the United States and the state of Washington. Nexus is presumed to continue as long as the licensee benefits from the activity that constituted the original nexus generating contact or subsequent contacts.

F. Licensee means any business or business enterprise that applies for or is granted a business license. The term licensee shall also mean the person who submits a business license for approval, the owner or operator of a business or business enterprise, and any corporation, partnership, nonprofit, or organization which owns or operates the business or business enterprise.

(Ord. No. 4001, § 2, 8‑2‑11; Ord. No. 4069, § 1, 2‑19‑13; Ord. No. 4220, § 1, 11‑15‑16; Ord. No. 4287, § 1, 11-6-18)


5.01.030 Administration and enforcement.

A. The director shall have general charge of, and supervision over, the administration and enforcement of this chapter.

B. The director may call upon other city departments to aid in the enforcement of this chapter.

C. The licensee shall, upon reasonable request, provide or allow the director to inspect relevant documentation for verification of the information provided by the licensee on the business license application.

(Ord. No. 4001, § 2, 8‑2‑11)


5.01.040 General business license required.

Except as provided in KCC 5.01.045, it is unlawful for any business to operate in the city without having first obtained a general business license for the current calendar year or unexpired portion thereof and paid the fees prescribed in this chapter; provided, that a business solely owned and operated by a person under the age of 18 years shall not be required to have a business license. A business with premises, primary places of business, or main offices outside the city limits must be licensed before conducting business within the city limits.

(Ord. No. 4001, § 2, 8‑2‑11; Ord. No. 4287, § 2, 11-6-18)


5.01.045 Threshold exemption.

To the extent set forth in this section, the following persons and businesses shall be exempt from the registration, license and/or license fee requirements as outlined in this chapter:

A. Any person or business whose annual value of products, gross proceeds of sales, or gross income of the business in the city is equal to or less than $2,000 and who does not maintain a place of business within the city shall be exempt from the general business license requirements in this chapter. The exemption does not apply to regulatory license requirements or activities that require a specialized permit.

(Ord. No. 4287, § 3, 11-6-18)


5.01.050 Separate business license required.

A separate license shall be obtained for each business enterprise within the city and each license shall authorize the licensee to carry on, pursue, or conduct business only at that business enterprise. A separate license shall not be required for a facility determined by the director to be an accessory facility to a business for which a license is issued. When the location of a business changes, the licensee shall return the license to the department and a new license shall be issued for the new place of business free of charge so long as no grounds exist for denial or revocation of the license as set forth in KCC 5.01.130.

(Ord. No. 4001, § 2, 8‑2‑11)


5.01.060 License not transferable.

No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable or assignable. In the event that ownership of a business changes, the license shall be returned to the department and a new license shall be applied for.

(Ord. No. 4001, § 2, 8‑2‑11)


5.01.070 License to be posted.

All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be posted in a conspicuous place at each business enterprise. 

(Ord. No. 4001, § 2, 8‑2‑11)


5.01.080 Disclaimer of city liability.

Issuance of a license pursuant to this chapter does not constitute the creation of a duty by the city to indemnify the licensee for any wrongful acts against the public or any individual, or to guarantee the quality of goods, services, or expertise of a licensee. The issuance of a license does not shift responsibility from the licensee to the city for proper training, conduct, or equipment of the licensee or his agents, employees, or representatives.

(Ord. No. 4001, § 2, 8‑2‑11)


5.01.090 Application procedure, license fee.

A. The city council shall, by resolution, establish the fees to be assessed to implement and operate the regulations adopted in this chapter. In the event of any conflict or ambiguity regarding any fees established by council resolution, the director is authorized to interpret the fee schedule(s) to resolve the conflict or ambiguity.

B. All businesses operated not for profit or a qualifying participant in the STAR program established in Chapter 5.14 KCC shall be required to be licensed but shall be exempt from paying a business license fee upon satisfactory proof to the director of their not-for-profit or STAR qualified status.

C. The licensee shall make application for any business license required under this chapter to the director on a form prepared by the department, which application shall be accompanied by a receipt from the department showing payment of the required fee. A new business license shall be required annually. If the application for a new license is made within six months of the date fixed for expiration, the fee shall be one-half the annual fee.

(Ord. No. 4001, § 2, 8‑2‑11; Ord. No. 4019, § 4, 12‑13‑11; Ord. No. 4064, § 2, 12‑11‑12; Ord. No. 4220, § 2, 11‑15‑16)


5.01.100 License does not indicate legality of business.

The issuance of a license pursuant to this chapter shall not be evidence of the legality of a business or that such business is conducted in conformity with any laws or regulations of the city of Kent, the state of Washington, or the United States. The issuance of a business license shall not prevent the city, the state of Washington, or the United States from taking any action relating to the conduct of the business or the licensee, including but not limited to action to revoke the license or deny an application for a future license, an action to cause the cessation of the business, or any action set forth in KCC 5.01.190.

(Ord. No. 4001, § 2, 8‑2‑11)


5.01.110 Relicensing. 

A. A business license shall expire at the end of the calendar year for which it is issued.

B. The director may mail the forms for application for a new business license to business enterprises in the city to the last address provided to the director by the licensee. Failure of the business to receive any such form shall not excuse the business from securing the required license or from paying the license fee when due.

C. Failure to obtain a new business license for each subsequent calendar year shall subject the licensee to the penalties set forth in KCC 5.01.190, in addition to the required license fee.

D. Business licenses shall be obtained by January 1st of each subsequent calendar year that the person or business continues to engage in business within the city.

(Ord. No. 4001, § 2, 8‑2‑11; Ord. No. 4220, § 3, 11‑15‑16)


5.01.120 Overpayment or refund of license fee.

Whenever a business makes an overpayment, and within two (2) years after the date of such overpayment makes an application for a refund or credit for the overpayment, the claim shall be considered by the director and, if approved, shall be repaid by the city.

(Ord. No. 4001, § 2, 8‑2‑11) 


5.01.130 Grounds for denial or revocation of license.

A. In addition to other actions or penalties provided by law, the city may deny or revoke any license applied for or issued pursuant to this chapter for any of the following reasons:

1. The license application contains an omission or misrepresentation of material fact;

2. The license was procured by fraud;

3. The license is used, or is intended to be used, for a business materially different from that applied for;

4. The licensee or business fails to pay the licensing fee applicable to such license;

5. The licensee or business violates any of the requirements of this chapter;

6. The business engages in, or the licensee seeks a license to engage in, an unlawful business or activity;

7. The business operates in a manner that constitutes a nuisance pursuant to common law or the ordinances, codes, and statutes of the city of Kent or the state of Washington;

8. The licensee is not eighteen (18) years of age or older at the time the license is applied for;

9. The licensee or the business is delinquent in the payment of any fees, taxes, assessments, or fines owed to the city, including but not limited to permit fees, utility fees, gambling taxes, local improvement district assessments, and civil fines; or

10. The licensee or business has had a similar license denied or revoked and has not corrected the basis for the denial or revocation.

B. The issuance of a license that could have been denied pursuant to subsection (A) of this section shall not prohibit the city from taking action to revoke the license at a later date, and it shall at all times remain the exclusive responsibility of the licensee to ensure that the business complies with the requirements of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 4001, § 2, 8‑2‑11)


5.01.135 Massage or reflexology businesses – Violations related to prostitution or fraud – Violation of Chapter 9.04 KCC – Denial or revocation of business license. Revised 2/20

A. No person who has violated a section of Chapter 9A.88 RCW or a similar law of another state, and no person who has violated a section of Chapter 9A.60 RCW or a similar law of another state when such violation of Chapter 9A.60 RCW or similar law of another state is related to the operation of a massage business or reflexology business, shall be authorized or entitled to obtain a city of Kent business license for a massage business or reflexology business. Prior to the issuance of a license for the operation of a massage business or reflexology business, the city of Kent department in charge of the issuance of the license may consult with the Kent police department to determine whether the applicant is eligible for such license.

B. The issuance of a business license for a massage business or reflexology business to a person who has previously committed a violation of an offense described in subsection (A) of this section shall be null and void.

C. In the event a person who has obtained a city of Kent business license for a massage business or reflexology business is thereafter found in violation of an offense described in subsection (A) of this section, such business license may be revoked in accordance with KCC 5.01.150. Revocation may occur regardless of the jurisdiction or location in which the violation of the offense occurs. The bases for revocation of the business license pursuant to this section shall be in addition to the grounds for revocation provided in KCC 5.01.130.

D. A business license application for the operation of a massage business or reflexology business may be denied in accordance with this chapter to any licensee who previously violated any provision of Chapter 9.04 KCC. The bases for denial of the business license pursuant to this section shall be in addition to the grounds for denial provided in KCC 5.01.130. Prior to the issuance of a license for the operation of a massage business or reflexology business, the city of Kent department in charge of the issuance of the license may consult with the Kent police department to determine whether the applicant is eligible for such license.

E. A business license for the operation of a massage business or reflexology business may be revoked in accordance with this chapter to any licensee in violation of Chapter 9.04 KCC. The bases for revocation of the business license pursuant to this section shall be in addition to the grounds for revocation provided in KCC 5.01.130.

F. For the purposes of this section, the terms massage, massage business, reflexology, and reflexology business shall have the meanings set forth in RCW 18.108.010 as now enacted or hereafter amended or recodified.

G. For the purposes of this section, the term violation or violated shall mean a conviction after trial, a plea of guilty or a finding of guilt after an Alford plea, Newton plea, or plea of no contest or nolo contendere, or the entry of a deferred sentence, deferred prosecution, or stipulated order of continuance.

(Ord. No. 4156, § 2, 6‑16‑15; Ord. No. 4353, § 5, 1-21-20)


5.01.140 Denial or revocation of license – Notice and opportunity to be heard.

In accordance with KCC 5.01.150 through 5.01.180, a licensee shall have the right to notice and an opportunity to be heard subsequent to the denial of a business license, or prior to the revocation of an existing license. As an alternative to the process set forth in KCC 5.01.150 through 5.01.180, the city may seek an injunction or other legal remedy in court.

(Ord. No. 4001, § 2, 8‑2‑11; Ord. No. 4220, § 4, 11‑15‑16) 


5.01.150 Notice of license denial or revocation and scheduling of hearing.

A. Denial of license. Any action to deny a license applied for or issued shall be commenced by notice of the denial. A notice issued under this subsection shall substantially comply with the following:

1. The notice shall be delivered, by first class mail or by personal service, to the business license applicant or the holder of the business license as set forth in the most recent business license application.

2. The notice shall describe the basis for the denial.

3. The notice shall describe corrective action, if any, that may be taken to eliminate the basis for denial.

4. The notice shall specify a date for which a hearing to contest the denial has been scheduled before the hearing examiner in order for the licensee to appeal the denial. Such date shall occur not less than fourteen (14) but not more than sixty (60) days after the date the notice is delivered in accordance with this subsection (A).

5. The notice shall provide that if the licensee fails to appear on the date specified in the notice, the appeal of the denial is waived. 

B. Revocation of license. Any action to revoke a license issued shall be commenced by a notice of the revocation. A notice issued under this subsection shall substantially comply with the following:

1. The notice shall be delivered, by first class mail or personal service, to the holder of the business license as set forth in the most recent business license application or business license issued.

2. The notice shall describe the basis for the revocation.

3. The notice shall describe corrective action, if any, that may be taken to eliminate the basis for revocation.

4. The notice shall specify a date for which a hearing to contest the revocation has been scheduled before the hearing examiner. Such date shall be scheduled to occur not less than fourteen (14) but not more than sixty (60) days after the date the notice is delivered in accordance with this subsection (B).

5. The notice shall provide that if the holder of the business license fails to appear on the date specified in the notice, default judgment shall be entered, and the license shall be revoked upon the failure to appear.

6. The business may continue to operate until such time as the hearing examiner issues an order regarding the revocation unless the city obtains an order enjoining the operation of the business pending the hearing examiner’s order.

(Ord. No. 4001, § 2, 8‑2‑11) 


5.01.160 Hearing to deny or revoke business license.

A. Parties to hearing. The parties to a hearing provided pursuant to this chapter shall be the city and the licensee. Either party may be represented by legal counsel properly licensed in the state of Washington.

B. Date for hearing. Hearings shall be scheduled to occur no less than fourteen (14) but not more than sixty (60) days after the date the notice is delivered in accordance with KCC 5.01.150; provided, additional hearings may be held after sixty (60) days as determined by the hearing examiner. The hearing examiner shall have discretion to grant continuances and reschedule hearings in the interest of the parties and justice.

C. Prehearing conferences. The hearing examiner may, at his or her discretion, or at the request of either of the parties, hold a prehearing conference to schedule additional hearings, order discovery, and to make other appropriate pretrial determinations. A prehearing conference may be held by telephone.

D. Hearing process. The parties to the hearing, or legal counsel for the parties, may call witnesses and present evidence and rebuttal evidence subject to the following:

1. The city shall have the burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, that there are sufficient grounds for the denial or revocation of the license pursuant to KCC 5.01.130.

2. The parties shall be responsible for securing the appearance of any witnesses they may call. Neither the city nor the hearing examiner shall have the burden of securing any witnesses on behalf of the licensee.

3. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply. The hearing examiner may allow hearsay evidence and may permit the admission of evidence without proof of the chain of custody of evidence. Notes, reports, summaries, notices, photographs, or other materials prepared by the parties may be admitted into evidence if requested without satisfaction of formal rules of evidence. Notwithstanding the admission of evidence, the hearing examiner shall determine the proper weight to be assigned to any evidence admitted.

E. Default judgment. If the licensee fails to appear on the hearing date specified in the notice, or at any other hearing set by the hearing examiner, the right to a hearing shall be forfeited, default judgment shall be entered, and the license shall be denied or revoked.

(Ord. No. 4001, § 2, 8‑2‑11)


5.01.170 Authority of hearing examiner – Order – Appeal.

A. Authority of hearing examiner. The hearing examiner shall have the authority to determine whether or not there are sufficient grounds for the denial or revocation of the business license pursuant to KCC 5.01.130.

B. Order of hearing examiner. The hearing examiner shall issue a written order that sets forth a procedural summary of the hearing, his or her findings of fact and conclusions of law, and his or her determination. In the event of a default judgment, the written order shall set forth whether notice was properly issued, the facts regarding the failure of the licensee to appear, and a determination of default in the event notice was proper. The written order shall be delivered to the parties by first class mail, deposited in the mail no more than twenty-one (21) days following the conclusion of the hearing. The order of the hearing examiner shall become effective on the third day following placement of the order in the mail. 

C. Appeal. An appeal of the order of the hearing examiner must be filed with the King County superior court within twenty-one (21) calendar days of the effective date of the order. 

(Ord. No. 4001, § 2, 8‑2‑11)


5.01.180 Corrective action prior to hearing.

In the event a licensee takes corrective action and the grounds for the denial or revocation are abated, and such corrective action and abatement occurs prior to the date set for hearing, the hearing shall be cancelled, and the license shall be issued or reissued.

(Ord. No. 4001, § 2, 8‑2‑11)


5.01.190 Violations and enforcement – Penalties.

Any violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced as provided for in this section. Each separate date, or portion thereof, during which any violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.

A. Civil infraction. A business, licensee, or person who violates any provision of this chapter commits a Class 1 civil infraction as set forth in RCW 7.80.120(1)(a), as currently enacted or hereafter amended. An infraction issued pursuant to this section shall be issued by law enforcement officers, filed in the Kent municipal court and processed in the same manner as other infractions filed in the Kent municipal court. If a business, licensee, or person cited for failure to obtain a business license appears before the Kent municipal court and provides written evidence that he or she obtained a business license prior to adjudication of the infraction, the monetary penalty shall be reduced to $100 and the court may assess court administrative costs of $25. The court administrative costs shall be in lieu of the statutory assessments referenced in RCW 7.80.120.

B. Civil code enforcement. A civil code enforcement action may be instituted pursuant to Chapter 1.04 KCC to effectuate the abatement or corrective action required as a result of a violation of this chapter. Failure to timely abate the violation or take the required corrective action may result in the issuance of a fine in accordance with KCC 1.04.080 and 1.04.200.

C. Criminal violation. A person who knowingly violates a provision of this chapter, or commits a repeat violation of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by up to the maximum penalty established in RCW 9A.20.021(3), as now enacted or hereafter amended. For purposes of this section, repeat violation means either a prior committed finding by the Kent municipal court of an infraction issued under this chapter, or a committed finding by the hearing examiner of a notice of violation issued under Chapter 1.04 KCC, or a committed finding under KCC 1.04.130, that a violation of this chapter has occurred or has been committed by the same business, licensee, or person within a five-year period. To constitute a repeat violation, the violation need not be the same violation as the prior violation.

D. Injunction. In addition to or as an alternative to any other enforcement or penalty provided for in this chapter, and because a violation constitutes an actual injury to the community, the city may seek injunctive or other equitable relief to prevent any activity in violation of this chapter.

E. Collections. Any license fee or penalty due, unpaid, and delinquent under this chapter shall constitute a debt to the city. The city may, pursuant to Chapter 19.16 RCW, use a collection agency to collect unpaid license fees or penalties, or it may seek collection by court proceedings, which remedies shall be in addition to all other remedies.

(Ord. No. 4001, § 2, 8‑2‑11; Ord. No. 4220, § 5, 11-15-16)


Chapter 5.02 AMUSEMENTS*

Sections:

5.02.010    Application for license. 

5.02.020    Requisite for permit. 

5.02.030    Pool and billiard tables. 

5.02.040    Bowling alleys. 

5.02.050    Roller skating rinks. 

5.02.060    Circuses and sideshows. 

5.02.070    Premises where dancing is permitted. 

5.02.080    Carnivals. 

5.02.090    Fortunetellers. 

5.02.100    Shooting galleries. 

5.02.110    Amusements generally. 

5.02.120    Penalty. 

*Cross reference(s) – Sales and use taxes, ch. 3.16.


5.02.010 Application for license.

Any person intending to carry on or exercise any vocation, trade, or calling shall make application to the finance director for a license authorizing such vocation, trade, or calling. The applicant shall pay to the finance director, at the time of presenting the application for such license, a fee for such vocation, trade, or calling in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 686, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.04.010)


5.02.020 Requisite for permit.

Upon receipt of the application for a license in any of the cases mentioned in this chapter and the payment to the finance director of the requisite license fee, the finance director shall have the authority to issue the license to the person making such application and paying the license fee. If a license shall be issued under this chapter to any firm or corporation, the conduct and operation of the business contemplated shall be by some responsible person who shall assume all liability for any violations of this chapter in the conduct of such business, and shall be subject to the penalties provided in this chapter for any violations.

(Ord. No. 686, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.04.020)


5.02.030 Pool and billiard tables.

The license fee for any public place or resort operating a business wherein pool or billiard tables are operated shall be fifty dollars ($50) per year for the first two (2) billiard or pool tables and ten dollars ($10) per year for each additional pool or billiard table.

(Ord. No. 686, § 4; Ord. No. 1440, § 1; Ord. No. 3027, § 1(5.04.030), 2-19-92. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.04.030)

State law reference(s) – Children and minors present in pool halls, RCW 26.28.080.


5.02.040 Bowling alleys.

The license fee for operating any bowling alley within the limits of the city shall be ten dollars ($10) per year for each alley installed or operated.

(Ord. No. 686, § 5. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.04.040)


5.02.050 Roller skating rinks.

The license fee for the use of any amusement place wherein roller skating is permitted shall be twenty-five dollars ($25) per year. The aforesaid amusement place shall not be used for any other purpose than roller skating.

(Ord. No. 686, § 6. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.04.050)


5.02.060 Circuses and sideshows.

The minimum license fee for any circus, sideshow, or other similar entertainment or business shall be the sum of four hundred dollars ($400) and, in addition, the sum of one hundred dollars ($100) per day for each day or portion thereof over four (4) that the business operates within the city.

(Ord. No. 686, § 8; Ord. No. 1828, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.04.060)


5.02.070 Premises where dancing is permitted.

The license fee for taverns, cocktail lounges, and any other place of business wherein dancing is permitted and where alcoholic beverages are legally served, dispensed, sold, or permitted on the premises shall be fifty dollars ($50) per year, payable quarterly in advance.

(Ord. No. 686, § 10; Ord. No. 2839, § 2, 3-7-89. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.04.070)



Cross reference(s) – Public dances and dance halls, ch. 5.12; conduct in alcoholic beverage premises, ch. 9.32.

State law reference(s) – Permit required for dancing in alcoholic beverage establishments, RCW 66.28.080.


5.02.080 Carnivals.

The license fee for carnivals offering amusement rides only shall be twenty-five dollars ($25) per year.

(Ord. No. 686, § 12; Ord. No. 1828, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.04.080)


5.02.090 Fortunetellers.

The license fee for each fortuneteller or other vocation of a similar nature shall be ten dollars ($10) per day.

(Ord. No. 686, § 13. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.04.090)


5.02.100 Shooting galleries.

The license fee for each shooting gallery, whether temporarily or permanently established shall be ten dollars ($10) per month or one dollar ($1) per day.

(Ord. No. 686, § 14. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.04.100)


5.02.110 Amusements generally.

The license fee for any game, amusement, or entertainment not herein enumerated shall be determined by the city council.

(Ord. No. 686, § 15. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.04.110)


5.02.120 Penalty.

Any person failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in the sum of not more than one hundred dollars ($100), or imprisoned for a term not exceeding thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(Ord. No. 686, § 16. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.04.120)


Chapter 5.03 TAXICABS, VEHICLES FOR HIRE, AND TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANIES*

Sections:

5.03.010    City of Kent business license required. 

5.03.020    King County taxicab, for-hire vehicle, and transportation network company license required.

5.03.030    Appointment of licensing and enforcement authority.

5.03.040    Licensing and regulation of taxicab, for-hire vehicles, and transportation network companies – Adopted by reference.

*Cross reference(s) – Traffic and motor vehicles, ch. 9.36 et seq.

State law reference(s) – For-hire passenger vehicles, RCW 46.72.010 et seq.


5.03.010 City of Kent business license required.

All taxicab, for-hire vehicle companies, and transportation network companies located and/or operating within the city shall secure a city business license.

(Ord. No. 1922, § 1; Ord. No. 3838, § 1, 4-17-07; Ord. No. 4140, § 1, 2-3-15. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.06.010)


5.03.020 King County taxicab, for-hire vehicle, and transportation network company license required.

All taxicabs, for-hire vehicles, and transportation network companies (TNC) operating within the city shall secure a King County taxicab, for-hire vehicle, or TNC license.

(Ord. No. 1922, § 2; Ord. No. 3838, § 1, 4-17-07; Ord. No. 4140, § 1, 2-3-15. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.06.020)


5.03.030 Appointment of licensing and enforcement authority.

A. Pursuant to an interlocal agreement, the director of the King County department of executive administration, and his or her authorized representatives, are delegated the power to determine eligibility for King County taxicab, for-hire vehicle, and transportation network company licenses and the power to enforce the provisions of this chapter, which shall include the power to deny, suspend, or revoke King County taxicab, for-hire vehicle, and transportation network company licenses. A copy of the interlocal agreement shall be available in the city clerk’s office for use and examination by the public.

B. Denial, suspension, or revocation of any King County taxicab, for-hire vehicle, or transportation network company license shall cause the immediate denial, suspension, or revocation of any Kent business license issued for the operation of taxicab, for-hire vehicle, or transportation network companies. 

(Ord. No. 3838, § 1, 4-17-07; Ord. No. 4140, § 1, 2-3-15)


5.03.040 Licensing and regulation of taxicab, for-hire vehicles, and transportation network companies – Adopted by reference.

A. The following sections of Chapter 6.64 of the King County Code, as currently enacted or as later amended or recodified, are adopted by this reference and shall have the same force and effect as if set forth in this chapter, except that, unless the context indicates otherwise, the word “county” and the words “King County” shall refer to the city and references to violations of the county code or county ordinances shall be deemed to be references to violations of city ordinances.

B. If a county ordinance specifically adopted in this chapter refers to another county ordinance not specifically adopted in this chapter, the ordinance referred to shall be given the force and effect necessary to enforce the ordinance specifically adopted in this chapter.

 

King County

Code §:    Title:

6.64.010    Definitions.

6.64.015    Interlocal agreement.

6.64.021    Rules adoption.

6.64.026    Fees – Procedure for setting – Notice – Effective date – Posting – Approval of new fees by ordinance.

6.64.101    Medallions – Distribution and use – Administrative fee – Rules adoption (takes effect February 1, 2015).

6.64.111    Fee surcharge for taxicab licensees, for-hire vehicle licensees and transportation network companies – Use of fee surcharge – Rules adoption.

6.64.121    Taxicab association license (takes effect January 1, 2015).

6.64.131    Taxicab association license – Minimum representation or ownership.

6.64.141    Taxicab association – Annual application – Notice of changes – Expiration – Lease, transfer or assignment prohibited.

6.64.151    Taxicab association license not a right – Denial of application or renewal.

6.64.161    Taxicab association color schemes – Director approval.

6.64.171    Taxicab association license – Revocation or suspension.

6.64.181    Taxicab association – Other requirements.

6.64.191    For-hire vehicle company – Requirements.

6.64.201    Transportation network company – License required – Application dispatch system unlawful except if licensed transportation network company or used exclusively for certain taxicabs or for-hire vehicles.

6.64.211    Transportation network company – License requirements.

6.64.221    Transportation network company – Annual application – Notice of changes – Expiration – Lease, transfer or assignment prohibited.

6.64.231    Transportation network company license not a right – Denial of application or renewal.

6.64.241    Transportation network company – Revocation or suspension.

6.64.251    Transportation network company – Other requirements.

6.64.261    Transportation network company – Drivers active on dispatch system must have for-hire driver’s license – Required vehicles for drivers active on dispatch system.

6.64.271    Transportation network company vehicle endorsement – Requirements of persons, vehicles.

6.64.281    Transportation network company vehicle endorsement – Annual filing – Certificate – Expiration – Lease, transfer or assignment prohibited.

6.64.291    Transportation network company vehicle endorsement – Denial of application.

6.64.295    Transportation network company vehicle endorsement – Suspension – Ceasing operation and surrender of decal.

6.64.300    Taxicab, for-hire vehicle or transportation network company endorsed vehicle – Appropriate license required.

6.64.310    Taxicab and for-hire vehicle application – Additional requirements.

6.64.320    Taxicab and for-hire vehicle application – Additional requirements.

6.64.330    Taxicab and for-hire vehicle applicants – Requirements of person, officer or registered agent.

6.64.340    Taxicab and for-hire vehicle applicants – Requirement of vehicles.

6.64.350    Insurance required.

6.64.360    Certificate of safety – Maintenance and service records retention – Maintenance of vehicles – Certification required of vehicles previously determined to be total wrecks or total losses – Factory specifications required for rebuilt or significantly altered vehicles – Ensurance of safety compliance and maintenance by vehicle owner – Placement of vehicles out of service if determined to be immediate safety hazards.

6.64.380    Taxicab and for-hire vehicle license expiration.

6.64.390    Taxicab and for-hire vehicle license plates, decals or tags.

6.64.400    Taximeter.

6.64.410    Consumer information board.

6.64.420    Taxicab and for-hire licensee – Responsibilities.

6.64.430    Standards for denial – Taxicab or for-hire vehicle license application.

6.64.440    Standards for suspension or revocation – Taxicab or for-hire vehicle.

6.64.450    Destruction, rendering permanently operable, sale, replacement or retirement of a taxicab.

6.64.460    Ceasing operation and surrender of license plate or decal and taxicab or for-hire vehicle license.

6.64.500    For-hire driver’s license required.

6.64.510    For-hire driver’s license – Initial and annual application.

6.64.520    For-hire driver’s license – Investigation.

6.64.530    For-hire driver’s license – Qualifications.

6.64.540    For-hire driver’s license – Temporary permit.

6.64.550    For-hire driver’s license – Application null and void if applicant fails or neglects to complete the application process or obtain a license.

6.64.560    For-hire driver – Certification of being physically and mentally fit – Medical examination upon appearance of incapacitation rendering licensee unfit.

6.64.570    For-hire driver – Required training.

6.64.580    For-hire driver – Examination.

6.64.590    For-hire driver – Driving abstract.

6.64.595    For-hire license – Pick up directly from director – “For-hire permit” display for applicant affiliated with transportation network company – Form of license – Determined by director – Placement.

6.64.600    For-hire driver license – Denial of application.

6.64.610    For-hire driver’s license – Suspension or revocation.

6.64.620    For-hire driver – Additional requirements for license issuance.

6.64.630    For-hire driver – License expiration.

6.64.640    For-hire driver – Operating standards.

6.64.650    Driver – Vehicle safety standards.

6.64.660    Driver – Conduct standards.

6.64.665    Transportation network company’s driver – Additional standards.

6.64.670    Taxicab meter and rates standards.

6.64.680    Driver-passenger relations standards.

6.64.690    Driver – Soliciting and cruising standards.

6.64.695    Driver – Taxicab zone standards.

6.64.700    Taxicab – Maximum number.

6.64.710    Transfer or sale of license.

6.64.730    Taxicab response times.

6.64.740    Director – Annual report.

6.64.750    Determination of fare and number of licenses.

6.64.760    Rates – Requirements – Rules adoption.

6.64.800    Penalties.

6.64.830    Notice and order of denial, suspension, revocation of license or assessment of civil penalty.

6.64.900    Consumer complaint hotline.

6.64.910    Passenger complaint process.

(Ord. No. 1922, § 3; Ord. No. 3838, § 1, 4-17-07; Ord. No. 4140, § 1, 2-3-15. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.06.030)


Chapter 5.04 GUN CLUBS* Revised 5/20

Sections:

5.04.010    Regulations.  Revised 5/20

*State law reference(s) – Firearms and dangerous weapons, RCW 9.41.010 et seq.; discharge of firearms, RCW 9.41.230.


5.04.010 Regulations. Revised 5/20

A. The discharge of firearms and other weapons of similar character shall be lawful if done in connection with any group or club, hereafter called a gun club, which is organized for the purpose of providing for its members an opportunity to engage in skeet or trap shooting, and which complies with the conditions of this section.

B. The shooting may be done only on land owned or leased by the gun club. If the gun club is composed of members of an employee organization, written permission of the employer for use of its land shall suffice.

C. The range where shooting is to occur must be situated so there can be no danger to the general public from misdirected or accidentally discharged weapons.

D. Each gun club must keep posted with the police department of the city a schedule approved by the chief of police or his designated representative of the hours and days during which shooting will take place. Shooting will not be permitted at other than the posted times without prior written permission of the chief of police or his designated representative.

E. Shooting shall be restricted to gun club members and their guests only. Each gun club shall issue some form of identification to each member and guest which must be carried by the member and guest at all times when engaged in shooting at his or another club’s location. The identification card shall be produced for inspection upon demand of any officer of the police department upon the premises of any gun club during the hours that shooting is taking place.

F. Shooting shall be restricted to those districts zoned MA, RA, I1, and I2 or their equivalents. There shall be no shooting within 300 feet of any occupied dwelling or within 400 feet of any school playground.

G. Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall result in revocation of the gun club’s rights and privileges granted in this chapter. Each gun club shall be responsible for policing its own membership to ensure compliance with this chapter.

H. The chief of police is hereby granted the power to enforce the provisions of this chapter. All decisions of the chief of police, including but not limited to whether reasonable shooting hours are being observed, or whether public safety is being adequately protected, shall be final. Any decision of the chief of police requiring a gun club to discontinue operations because of alleged violations of any of the provisions of this chapter may be appealed to the city council by filing written notice of appeal with the city clerk. The city council shall set a date for hearing which shall be not more than 30 days following receipt of the appeal by the city clerk. Between the time of the decision of the chief of police appealed from and the final disposition of the appeal, the gun club shall not engage in any shooting activities. All decisions of the city council shall be final and no appeal may be taken therefrom.

(Ord. No. 1006, § 1; Ord. No. 1768, § 1; Ord. No. 4355, § 12 (Exh. L), 3-3-20. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.08.010)




Chapter 5.05 PAWNBROKERS*

Sections:

5.05.010    Definitions. 

5.05.020    Fixed place of business. 

5.05.030    Records of transactions. 

5.05.040    Report to chief of police. 

5.05.050    Notification of stolen property. 

5.05.060    Retention of pawned property – Inspection. 

5.05.070    Retention of consigned property – Inspection. 

5.05.080    Rates of interest and other fees. 

5.05.090    Sale of pledged property limited. 

5.05.100    Violations, penalty. 

5.05.110    Resale agreement to avoid interest and fee restrictions prohibited. 

5.05.120    Transactions excluded. 

*Cross reference(s) – Sales and use taxes, ch. 3.16.

State law reference(s) – Pawnbrokers and second-hand dealers, RCW 19.60.010 et seq.


5.05.010 Definitions.

The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

1. Loan period means the period of time from the date the loan is made until the date the loan is paid off, the loan is in default, or the loan is refinanced and new loan documents are issued, including all grace or extension periods.

2. Melted metals means metals derived from junk metal or precious metals that have been reduced to a melted state from other than ore or ingots which are produced from ore that has not previously been processed.

3. Metal junk means any metal that has previously been milled, shaped, stamped, or forged and that is no longer useful in its original form, except precious metals.

4. Nonmetal junk means any nonmetal, commonly discarded item that is worn out, or has outlasted its usefulness as intended in its original form, except nonmetal junk does not include an item made in a former period which has enhanced value because of its age.

5. Pawnbroker means every person engaged, in whole or in part, in the business of loaning money on the security of pledges of personal property, or deposits or conditional sales of personal property, or the purchase or sale of personal property.

6. Precious metals means gold, silver, and platinum.

7. Second-hand dealer means every person engaged, in whole or in part, in the business of purchasing, selling, trading, consignment selling, or otherwise transferring for value second-hand property including metal junk, melted metals, and precious metals, whether or not the person maintains a fixed place of business within the state. “Second-hand dealer” also includes persons or entities conducting business at flea markets or swap meets, more than three (3) times per year.

8. Second-hand property means any item of personal property offered for sale which is not new, including metals in any form, except postage stamps, coins that are legal tender, bullion in the form of fabricated hallmarked bars, used books, and clothing of a resale value of seventy-five dollars ($75) or less, except furs.

9. Transaction means a pledge, or the purchase of, or consignment of, or the trade of any item of personal property by a pawnbroker or second-hand dealer from a member of the general public.

(Ord. No. 4007, § 1, 11-15-11)

Cross reference(s) – Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.01.030.

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 19.60.010.


5.05.020 Fixed place of business.

No person may operate as a pawnbroker unless the person maintains a fixed place of business within the city.

(Ord. No. 4007, § 1, 11-15-11)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 19.60.014.


5.05.030 Records of transactions.

A. Every pawnbroker and second-hand dealer doing business in the city shall maintain wherever that business is conducted a record in which shall be legibly written in the English language, at the time of each transaction, the following information:

1. The signature of the person with whom the transaction is made;

2. The date of the transaction;

3. The name of the person or employee or the identification number of the person or employee conducting the transaction as required by the chief of police;

4. The name, date of birth, sex, height, weight, race, and address and telephone number of the person with whom the transaction is made;

5. A complete description of the property pledged, bought, or consigned, including the brand name, serial number, model number or name, any initials or engravings, size, patterns, and color of stone or stones, and in the case of firearms, the caliber, barrel length, type of action, and whether it is a pistol, rifle, or shotgun;

6. The price paid or the amount loaned;

7. The type and identifying number of identification used by the person with whom the transaction was made, which shall consist of a valid driver’s license or identification card issued by any state or two (2) pieces of identification issued by a governmental agency, one (1) of which shall be descriptive of the person identified. At all times, one (1) piece of current government issued picture identification will be required; and

8. The nature of the transaction, a number identifying the transaction, the store identification as designated by the applicable law enforcement agency or the name and address of the business and the name of the person or employee conducting the transaction, and the location of the property.

B. This record shall at all times, during the ordinary hours of business, or at reasonable times if ordinary hours of business are not kept, be open to the inspection of any commissioned law enforcement officer of the city, state, or any of its political subdivisions, and shall be maintained wherever that business is conducted for three (3) years following the date of the transaction.

(Ord. No. 4007, § 1, 11-15-11)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 19.60.020.


5.05.040 Report to chief of police.

A. Upon request, every pawnbroker and second-hand dealer doing business in the city shall furnish or mail within twenty-four (24) hours to the chief of police a full, true, and correct transcript of the record of all transactions conducted on the preceding day within the city. These transactions shall be recorded on such forms as may be provided and in such format as may be required by the chief of police. This information may be transmitted electronically, by facsimile transmission, or by modem or similar device, or by delivery of computer disk subject to the requirements of, and approval by, the chief of police.

B. If a pawnbroker or second-hand dealer has good cause to believe that any property in his possession has been previously lost or stolen, the pawnbroker or second-hand dealer shall promptly report that fact to the chief of police together with the name of the owner, if known, and the date when, and the name of the person from whom, it was received.

(Ord. No. 4007, § 1, 11-15-11)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 19.60.040.


5.05.050 Notification of stolen property.

Following notification from a law enforcement agency that an item of property has been reported as stolen, the pawnbroker or second-hand dealer shall hold that property intact and safe from alteration, damage, or commingling. The pawnbroker or second-hand dealer shall place an identifying tag or other suitable identification on property so held. Property held shall not be released for one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of police notification unless released by written consent of the applicable law enforcement agency or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. In cases where the applicable law enforcement agency has placed a verbal hold on an item, that agency must then give written notice within ten (10) business days. If such written notice is not received within that period of time, then the hold order will cease. The pawnbroker or second-hand dealer shall give a twenty (20) day written notice before the expiration of the one hundred twenty (120) day holding period to the applicable law enforcement agency about the stolen property. If notice is not given within the required twenty (20) day period, then the hold on the property shall continue for an additional one hundred twenty (120) days. The applicable law enforcement agency may renew the holding period for additional one hundred twenty (120) day periods as necessary. After the receipt of notification from a pawnbroker or second-hand dealer, if an additional holding period is required, the applicable law enforcement agency shall give the pawnbroker or second-hand dealer written notice, prior to the expiration of the existing hold order. A law enforcement agency shall not place on hold any item of personal property unless that agency reasonably suspects that the item of personal property is a lost or stolen item. Any hold that is placed on an item will be removed as soon as practicable after the item on hold is determined not to be stolen or lost.

(Ord. No. 4007, § 1, 11-15-11)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 19.60.045.


5.05.060 Retention of pawned property – Inspection.

Property bought or received in pledge by any pawnbroker shall not be removed from that place of business, except when redeemed by or returned to the owner, within thirty (30) days after receipt of the property. Property shall at all times during the ordinary hours of business be open to inspection to any commissioned law enforcement officer of the city, state, or any of its political subdivisions.

(Ord. No. 4007, § 1, 11-15-11)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 19.60.050.


5.05.070 Retention of consigned property – Inspection.

A. Property bought or received on consignment by a second-hand dealer with a permanent place of business in the city shall not be removed from that place of business, except consigned property returned to the owner within thirty (30) days after the receipt of the property. Property shall, at all times during the ordinary hours of business, be open to inspection to any commissioned law enforcement officer of the city, state, or any of its political subdivisions.

B. Property bought or received on consignment by a second-hand dealer without a permanent place of business in the city shall be held within the city, except consigned property returned to the owner, for thirty (30) days after receipt of the property. The property shall be available for inspection at reasonable times by any commissioned law enforcement officer of the city, state, or any of its political subdivisions.

(Ord. No. 4007, § 1, 11-15-11)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 19.60.055.


5.05.080 Rates of interest and other fees.

A. All pawnbrokers are authorized to charge and receive interest and other fees at the rates in this section for money loaned on the security of personal property actually received in pledge. The interest for the loan period shall not exceed:

1. For an amount loaned up to nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($9.99) – interest at one dollar ($1) for each thirty (30) day period to include the loan date.

2. For an amount loaned from ten dollars ($10) to nineteen dollars and ninety-nine cents ($19.99) – interest at one dollar and twenty-five cents ($1.25) for each thirty (30) day period to include the loan date.

3. For an amount loaned from twenty dollars ($20) to twenty-four dollars and ninety-nine cents ($24.99) – interest at one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) for each thirty (30) day period to include the loan date.

4. For an amount loaned from twenty-five dollars ($25) to thirty-four dollars and ninety-nine cents ($34.99) – interest at one dollar and seventy-five cents ($1.75) for each thirty (30) day period to include the loan date.

5. For an amount loaned from thirty-five dollars ($35) to thirty-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($39.99) – interest at two dollars ($2) for each thirty (30) day period to include the loan date.

6. For an amount loaned from forty dollars ($40) to forty-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($49.99) – interest at two dollars and twenty-five cents ($2.25) for each thirty (30) day period to include the loan date.

7. For an amount loaned from fifty dollars ($50) to fifty-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($59.99) – interest at two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) for each thirty (30) day period to include the loan date.

8. For an amount loaned from sixty dollars ($60) to sixty-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($69.99) – interest at two dollars and seventy-five cents ($2.75) for each thirty (30) day period to include the loan date.

9. For an amount loaned from seventy dollars ($70) to seventy-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($79.99) – interest at three dollars ($3) for each thirty (30) day period to include the loan date.

10. For an amount loaned from eighty dollars ($80) to eighty-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($89.99) – interest at three dollars and twenty-five cents ($3.25) for each thirty (30) day period to include the loan date.

11. For an amount loaned from ninety dollars ($90) to ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($99.99) – interest at three dollars and fifty cents ($3.50) for each thirty (30) day period to include the loan date.

12. For an amount loaned from one hundred dollars ($100) or more – interest at the rate of three (3) percent for each thirty (30) day period to include the loan date.

B. The fee for preparation of documents, pledges, or reports required under the laws of the United States, the state, King County, or the city shall not exceed:

1. For the amount loaned up to four dollars and ninety-nine cents ($4.99) – the sum of one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50).

2. For the amount loaned from five dollars ($5) to nine dollars ($9) – the sum of three dollars ($3).

3. For the amount loaned from ten dollars ($10) to fourteen dollars and ninety-nine cents ($14.99) – the sum of four dollars ($4).

4. For the amount loaned from fifteen dollars ($15) to nineteen dollars and ninety-nine cents ($19.99) – the sum of four dollars and fifty cents ($4.50).

5. For the amount loaned from twenty dollars ($20) to twenty-four dollars and ninety-nine cents ($24.99) – the sum of five dollars ($5).

6. For the amount loaned from twenty-five dollars ($25) to twenty-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($29.99) – the sum of five dollars and fifty cents ($5.50).

7. For the amount loaned from thirty dollars ($30) to thirty-four dollars and ninety-nine cents ($34.99) – the sum of six dollars ($6).

8. For the amount loaned from thirty-five dollars ($35) to thirty-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($39.99) – the sum of six dollars and fifty cents ($6.50).

9. For the amount loaned from forty dollars ($40) to forty-four dollars and ninety-nine cents ($44.99) – the sum of seven dollars ($7).

10. For the amount loaned from forty-five dollars ($45) to forty-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($49.99) – the sum of seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50).

11. For the amount loaned from fifty dollars ($50) to fifty-four dollars and ninety-nine cents ($54.99) – the sum of eight dollars ($8).

12. For the amount loaned from fifty-five dollars ($55) to fifty-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($59.99) – the sum of eight dollars and fifty cents ($8.50).

13. For the amount loaned from sixty dollars ($60) to sixty-four dollars and ninety-nine cents ($64.99) – the sum of nine dollars ($9).

14. For the amount loaned from sixty-five dollars ($65) to sixty-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($69.99) – the sum of nine dollars and fifty cents ($9.50).

15. For the amount loaned from seventy dollars ($70) to seventy-four dollars and ninety-nine cents ($74.99) – the sum of ten dollars ($10).

16. For the amount loaned from seventy-five dollars ($75) to seventy-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($79.99) – the sum of ten dollars and fifty cents ($10.50).

17. For the amount loaned from eighty dollars ($80) to eighty-four dollars and ninety-nine cents ($84.99) – the sum of eleven dollars ($11).

18. For the amount loaned from eighty-five dollars ($85) to eighty-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($89.99) – the sum of eleven dollars and fifty cents ($11.50).

19. For the amount loaned from ninety dollars ($90) to ninety-four dollars and ninety-nine cents ($94.99) – the sum of twelve dollars ($12).

20. For the amount loaned from ninety-five dollars ($95) to ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($99.99) – the sum of twelve dollars and fifty cents ($12.50).

21. For the amount loaned from one hundred dollars ($100) to one hundred four dollars and ninety-nine cents ($104.99) – the sum of thirteen dollars ($13).

22. For the amount loaned from one hundred five dollars ($105) to one hundred nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($109.99) – the sum of thirteen dollars and twenty-five cents ($13.25).

23. For the amount loaned from one hundred ten dollars ($110) to one hundred fourteen dollars and ninety-nine cents ($114.99) – the sum of thirteen dollars and seventy-five cents ($13.75).

24. For the amount loaned from one hundred fifteen dollars ($115) to one hundred nineteen dollars and ninety-nine cents ($119.99) – the sum of fourteen dollars and twenty-five cents ($14.25).

25. For the amount loaned from one hundred twenty dollars ($120) to one hundred twenty-four dollars and ninety-nine cents ($124.99) – the sum of fourteen dollars and fifty cents ($14.50).

26. For the amount loaned from one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125) to one hundred twenty-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($129.99) – the sum of fourteen dollars and seventy-five cents ($14.75).

27. For the amount loaned from one hundred thirty dollars ($130) to one hundred forty-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($149.99) – the sum of fifteen dollars and fifty cents ($15.50).

28. For the amount loaned from one hundred fifty dollars ($150) to one hundred seventy-four dollars and ninety-nine cents ($174.99) – the sum of fifteen dollars and seventy-five cents ($15.75).

29. For the amount loaned from one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175) to one hundred ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($199.99) – the sum of sixteen dollars ($16).

30. For the amount loaned from two hundred dollars ($200) to two hundred twenty-four dollars and ninety-nine cents ($224.99) – the sum of seventeen dollars ($17).

31. For the amount loaned from two hundred twenty-five dollars ($225) to two hundred forty-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($249.99) – the sum of eighteen dollars ($18).

32. For the amount loaned from two hundred fifty dollars ($250) to two hundred seventy-four dollars and ninety-nine cents ($274.99) – the sum of nineteen dollars ($19).

33. For the amount loaned from two hundred seventy-five dollars ($275) to two hundred ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($299.99) – the sum of twenty dollars ($20).

34. For the amount loaned from three hundred dollars ($300) to three hundred twenty-four dollars and ninety-nine cents ($324.99) – the sum of twenty-one dollars ($21).

35. For the amount loaned from three hundred twenty-five dollars ($325) to three hundred forty-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($349.99) – the sum of twenty-two dollars ($22).

36. For the amount loaned from three hundred fifty dollars ($350) to three hundred seventy-four dollars and ninety-nine cents ($374.99) – the sum of twenty-three dollars ($23).

37. For the amount loaned from three hundred seventy-five dollars ($375) to three hundred ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($399.99) – the sum of twenty-four dollars ($24).

38. For the amount loaned from four hundred dollars ($400) to four hundred twenty-four dollars and ninety-nine cents ($424.99) – the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25).

39. For the amount loaned from four hundred twenty-five dollars ($425) to four hundred forty-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($449.99) – the sum of twenty-six dollars ($26).

40. For the amount loaned from four hundred fifty dollars ($450) to four hundred seventy-four dollars and ninety-nine cents ($474.99) – the sum of twenty-seven dollars ($27).

41. For the amount loaned from four hundred seventy-five dollars ($475) to four hundred ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($499.99) – the sum of twenty-eight dollars ($28).

42. For the amount loaned from five hundred dollars ($500) to five hundred twenty-four dollars and ninety-nine cents ($524.99) – the sum of twenty-nine dollars ($29).

43. For the amount loaned from five hundred twenty-five dollars ($525) to five hundred forty-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($549.99) – the sum of thirty dollars ($30).

44. For the amount loaned from five hundred fifty dollars ($550) to five hundred ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($599.99) – the sum of thirty-one dollars ($31).

45. For the amount loaned from six hundred dollars ($600) to six hundred ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($699.99) – the sum of thirty-six dollars ($36).

46. For the amount loaned from seven hundred dollars ($700) to seven hundred ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($799.99) – the sum of forty-one dollars ($41).

47. For the amount loaned from eight hundred dollars ($800) to eight hundred ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($899.99) – the sum of forty-six dollars ($46).

48. For the amount loaned from nine hundred dollars ($900) to nine hundred ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($999.99) – the sum of fifty-one dollars ($51).

49. For the amount loaned from one thousand dollars ($1,000) to one thousand four hundred ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($1,499.99) – the sum of fifty-six dollars ($56).

50. For the amount loaned from one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500) to one thousand nine hundred ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($1,999.99) – the sum of sixty-one dollars ($61).

51. For the amount loaned from two thousand dollars ($2,000) to two thousand four hundred ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($2,499.99) – the sum of sixty-six dollars ($66).

52. For the amount loaned from two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) to two thousand nine hundred ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($2,999.99) – the sum of seventy-one dollars ($71).

53. For the amount loaned from three thousand dollars ($3,000) to three thousand four hundred ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($3,499.99) – the sum of seventy-six dollars ($76).

54. For the amount loaned from three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500) to three thousand nine hundred ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($3,999.99) – the sum of eighty-one dollars ($81).

55. For the amount loaned from four thousand dollars ($4,000) to four thousand four hundred ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($4,499.99) – the sum of eighty-six dollars ($86).

56. For the amount loaned from four thousand five hundred dollars ($4,500) or more – the sum of ninety-one dollars ($91).

C. A pawnbroker may charge a storage fee of three dollars ($3). An additional fee of thirty dollars ($30) may be charged for storing a firearm.

D. Fees under subsection (B) of this section may be charged one (1) time only for each loan period; no additional fees, other than interest allowed under subsection (A) of this section, shall be charged for making the loan. Storage fees are allowed under subsection (C) of this section.

E. A copy of this section set in twelve (12) point type or larger shall be posted prominently in each premises subject to this chapter.

(Ord. No. 4007, § 1, 11-15-11)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 19.60.060.


5.05.090 Sale of pledged property limited.

A. The term of the loan shall be for a period of ninety (90) days to include the date of the loan.

B. A pawnbroker shall not sell any property received in pledge until a minimum of ninety (90) days has expired. However, if a pledged article is not redeemed within the ninety (90) day period of the term of the loan, the pawnbroker shall have all rights, title, and interest of that item of personal property. The pawnbroker shall not be required to account to the pledgor for the proceeds received from the disposition of that item. Any provision of law relating to the foreclosures and the subsequent sale of forfeited pledged items shall not be applicable to any pledge as defined under this chapter, the title to which is transferred in accordance with this section.

C. Every loan transaction entered into by a pawnbroker shall be evidenced by a written document, a copy of which shall be furnished to the pledgor. The document shall set forth the term of the loan; the final date of which the loan is due and payable; the loan preparation fee; the storage fee; the firearm fee, if applicable; and any other fee allowed under law that is charged; the amount of interest charged every thirty (30) days; the total amount due including the principal amount, the preparation fee, and all interest charges due if the loan is outstanding for the full ninety (90) days allowed by the term and the annual percentage rate, and shall inform the pledgor of the pledgor’s right to redeem the pledge at any time within the term of the loan.

D. If a person who has entered into a loan transaction with a pawnbroker in this state is unable to redeem and repay the loan on or before the expiration of the term of the loan, and that person wishes to retain his or her rights to use that item by rewriting the loan, and if both parties mutually agree, an existing loan transaction may be rewritten into a new loan, either in person or by mail. All applicable provisions of this chapter shall be followed in rewriting a loan, except that where an existing loan is rewritten by mail, KCC 5.05.030(A)(1) and (7) shall not apply.

(Ord. No. 4007, § 1, 11-15-11)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 19.60.061.


5.05.100 Violations, penalty.

A. It is unlawful for:

1. Any person to remove, alter, or obliterate any manufacturer’s make, model, or serial number, personal identification number, or identifying marks engraved or etched upon an item of personal property that was purchased, consigned, or received in pledge. In addition, an item shall not be accepted for pledge or a second-hand purchase where the manufacturer’s make, model, or serial number, personal identification number, or identifying marks engraved or etched upon an item of personal property have been removed, altered, or obliterated.

2. Any person to knowingly make, cause, or allow to be made any false entry or misstatement of any material matter in a book, record, or writing required to be kept under this chapter.

3. Any pawnbroker or second-hand dealer to receive any property from any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, or any person under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs.

4. For any pawnbroker or second-hand dealer to receive any property from any person known to the pawnbroker or second-hand dealer as having been convicted of burglary, robbery, theft, or possession of or receiving stolen property within the past ten (10) years whether the person is acting in his or her own behalf or as the agent of another.

5. Any pawnbroker to engage in the business of cashing or selling checks, drafts, money orders, or other commercial paper serving the same purpose unless the pawnbroker complies with the provisions of Chapter 31.45 RCW.

6. Any person to violate knowingly any other provisions of this chapter.

B. Violation of any of the sections of this chapter is a gross misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than one (1) year or a fine of not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000) or both.

(Ord. No. 4007, § 1, 11-15-11)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 19.60.066.


5.05.110 Resale agreement to avoid interest and fee restrictions prohibited.

A purchase of personal property shall not be made on the condition of selling it back at a stipulated time and price greater than the purchase price, for the purpose of avoiding the interest and fee restrictions of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 4007, § 1, 11-15-11)


5.05.120 Transactions excluded.

The provisions of this chapter do not apply to transactions conducted by the following:

1. Motor vehicle dealers licensed under Chapter 46.70 RCW;

2. Motor vehicle wreckers or hulk haulers licensed under Chapter 46.79 or 46.80 RCW;

3. Persons giving an allowance for the trade-in or exchange of second-hand property on the purchase of other merchandise of the same kind or greater value; and

4. Persons in the business of buying or selling empty food and beverage containers or metal or nonmetal junk.

(Ord. No. 4007, § 1, 11-15-11)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 19.60.085.


Chapter 5.06 GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALES*

Sections:

5.06.010    License required. 

5.06.020    Requirement for existing business license. 

5.06.030    License application requirements. 

5.06.040    Basic license fee. 

5.06.050    Supplemental licensing. 

5.06.060    False application. 

5.06.070    Commingling of goods. 

5.06.080    Advertising going out of business sales. 

5.06.090    Violation. 

*Cross reference(s) – Sales and use taxes, ch. 3.16.


5.06.010 License required.

It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise or conduct any sale of goods, wares, or merchandise at retail that is represented or advertised as a bankrupt, insolvent, assignee’s, adjustor’s, trustee’s, executor’s administrator’s, receiver’s, wholesaler’s, jobber’s liquidation, quitting business, or any other sale which is by representation of advertisement intended to lead the public to believe that the person conducting such sale is selling out or closing out all or substantially all of the stock of goods, wares, or merchandise or any business for less than the current or going retail price thereof in the city without first filing with the city an inventory hereafter provided for and obtaining from the city a going out of business license. Such license shall be issued by the finance director upon payment of proper license fees provided in KCC 5.06.040.

(Ord. No. 1858, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.12.010)


5.06.020 Requirement for existing business license.

No going out of business license will be issued to any person that does not at the time of application for such license hold a then valid business license.

(Ord. No. 1858, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.12.020)


5.06.030 License application requirements.

Any person desiring to secure a license to advertise or conduct any sale of goods referred to in KCC 5.06.010 shall make application for license to the finance director. The application shall state the name and address of the person, firm, or corporation applying for the license and shall specify the period of time during which the sale will continue, which shall not exceed three (3) months, except as hereinafter provided. The application shall have attached to it an inventory which shall contain a complete and accurate list of goods, wares, and merchandise to be sold, together with the wholesale price. The inventory shall be signed by the person seeking the license or by an authorized agent. The application shall be accompanied by the oath of the applicant or agent that the statements contained in the application are true and correct to the best of his knowledge and belief.

(Ord. No. 1858, § 4. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.12.030)


5.06.040 Basic license fee.

The basic license fee for going out of business sale licenses shall be seventy-five dollars ($75). The basic license shall be valid for a period not to exceed three (3) months. The basic license fee shall be paid at the time of application.

(Ord. No. 1858, § 5. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.12.040)


5.06.050 Supplemental licensing.

A. If at any time during three (3) months after issuance of a basic license a sworn statement is filed with the finance director that all the goods in the original inventory have not been sold and the statement is accompanied by an inventory of what remains unsold showing the wholesale price, a supplemental license to be effective upon expiration of the basic license shall be issued by the finance director. The fee for the supplemental license shall be fifty dollars ($50) per day and the license shall remain in effect only upon receipt each day of the fifty-dollar fee and only so long as full compliance with all provisions of this chapter occurs. No supplemental license may be issued for any period thirty (30) days beyond the expiration date of the basic license.

B. Any application for a license under this chapter covering any goods, wares, or merchandise previously inventoried and licensed, shall be deemed to be an application for a supplemental license under this section, whether presented by the original applicant or by any other person.

(Ord. No. 1858, § 7. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.12.050)


5.06.060 False application.

It shall be unlawful to knowingly make any false statement in any application.

(Ord. No. 1858, § 8. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.12.060)


5.06.070 Commingling of goods.

After sixty (60) days, any license issued under the provision of this chapter shall be valid only for inventoried goods. Commingling of additional merchandise with inventoried merchandise shall cause the inventoried merchandise to lose its identity as goods described in KCC 5.06.010, and any license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall no longer apply to the sale of such goods. After sixty (60) days, if inventoried stock shall be put on sale with other stock, the same shall be deemed to be commingled, unless sufficiently segregated and marked so that the difference can be readily ascertained. A second inventory shall be submitted after sixty (60) days.

(Ord. No. 1858, § 9. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.12.070)


5.06.080 Advertising going out of business sales.

It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise a going out of business sale in a newspaper or other media or in any other manner such as flyers, posters, window displays, etc., without including in such advertisement the number of the license issued to such person by the finance director for such going out of business sale.

(Ord. No. 1858, § 10. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.12.080)


5.06.090 Violation.

No goods shall be sold under the going out of business license except those included in the inventories. After sixty (60) days, each sale of goods not so inventoried shall constitute a separate offense under this chapter.

(Ord. No. 1858, § 11. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.12.090)


Chapter 5.07 SOLICITORS*

Sections:

5.07.010    Definitions. 

5.07.020    License required. 

5.07.030    License fees – Transferability. 

5.07.040    License application. 

5.07.050    Remittance of license fee. 

5.07.060    Investigation of applicants. 

5.07.070    License issuance – Expiration date. 

5.07.080    Carrying and exhibition of license. 

5.07.090    License revocation. 

5.07.100    Order taking requirements. 

5.07.110    Exemptions. 

5.07.120    Cancellation of transaction by buyer – Procedure. 

5.07.130    Violations – Penalty. 

*Cross reference(s) – Sales and use taxes, ch. 3.16; soliciting, peddling, etc., in parks and recreation areas prohibited, § 4.01.050.

State law reference(s) – House to house sales by minors, RCW 49.12.300 et seq.


5.07.010 Definitions.

Solicitor within the meaning of this chapter is to be defined to include:

1. Any person who shall sell, offer or expose for sale or who shall trade, deal or traffic in any services, magazines, periodicals or any other personal property at retail in the city, by going from house to house or from place to place or by indiscriminately approaching individuals. Sales by sample or for future delivery and executory contracts of sale are embraced within this chapter. This section shall not be deemed applicable to any salesman or canvasser who solicits trade from wholesale or retail dealers within the city;

2. Any person who while selling or offering for sale any goods, wares, merchandise or anything of value, stands or is otherwise present in a doorway, any unenclosed vacant lot, parcel of land, any street or public way, or in any other place not used by such person as a permanent place of business.

Master solicitor is a person or firm which employs or uses agents or employees who act as solicitors.

(Ord. No. 1585, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.14.010)


5.07.020 License required.

It shall be unlawful for any person to act as solicitor within the meaning of this chapter unless he and/or his employer shall have secured a license therefor in the manner provided by this chapter.

(Ord. No. 1585, § 3. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.14.020)


5.07.030 License fees – Transferability.

The license fees for solicitors and master solicitors shall be ten dollars ($10) for each calendar year or fraction thereof payable in advance for each master solicitor and two dollars ($2) for each calendar year or fraction thereof payable in advance for each solicitor listed and identified by such master solicitor and five dollars ($5) for each calendar year or fraction thereof payable in advance for each solicitor not certified under a master solicitor’s license application. Licenses issued hereunder shall not be transferable.

(Ord. No. 1585, § 4. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.14.030)


5.07.040 License application.

A. Any person desiring to secure a solicitor’s license shall apply in writing over his signature to the finance director and such application shall state as to each applicant:

1. The name and address of the applicant;

2. The length of service of such applicant with such employer;

3. The place of residence and nature of the employment of the applicant during the last preceding year;

4. The nature or character of the goods, wares, merchandise or services to be offered by the applicant;

5. The personal description of the applicant;

6. State tax commission registration certificate number;

7. Wherever applicable, a copy of applicant’s food handler’s permit issued by King County; and

8. Such credentials and other evidence of good moral character and identity of the applicant as may be reasonably required by the chief of police.

B. Any person or firm desiring to secure a master solicitor’s license shall apply in writing over his signature, or in the case of a corporation over the signature of any two (2) officers accompanied by an impression of the corporate seal of the applicant, to the finance director and such application shall contain the following:

1. Name and address of applicant;

2. Whether applicant is a corporation, partnership or proprietorship, and:

a. If a corporation, the names and home addresses of two (2) principal officers thereof, name and home address of the managing agent of the corporation office within the state nearest to the city; state of incorporation; if a foreign corporation, the name and mailing address of the resident agent for the state;

b. If a partnership, the name and home address of each partner;

3. Nature of character of the goods, wares, merchandise or service to be offered by the applicant;

4. Names and addresses of each solicitor agent of the applicant employed or active in the city and a complete physical description of such agent;

5. A statement that the applicant will be fully responsible for all agreements and acts of its solicitor agents listed in the application or subsequently certified to the finance director as being one (1) of its solicitor agents;

6. Attached to the application shall be the individual solicitor’s license application of each agent listed on the master solicitor’s application.

(Ord. No. 1585, § 5. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.14.040)


5.07.050 Remittance of license fee.

All applications shall be accompanied by the requisite license fee in cash, money order, bank draft or certified check.

(Ord. No. 1585, § 6. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.14.060)


5.07.060 Investigation of applicants.

It shall be the duty of the chief of police to review each application to determine the following information:

1. The existence of the employer or firm of each individual applicant;

2. The genuineness of all credentials presented by the applicant;

3. Whether the applicant or any solicitor agent listed on the application has a criminal record;

4. The truth of the facts set forth in the application;

5. Whether the applicant is engaged in a lawful and legitimate commercial or professional enterprise.

Such investigation must be completed within a reasonable time.

(Ord. No. 1585, § 7. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.14.070)


5.07.070 License issuance – Expiration date.

If the chief of police shall determine from his investigation that the facts set forth in the application are true, that the applicant is reliable, that his purpose is to engage in a lawful and legitimate commercial or professional enterprise, and that he has not been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, he shall approve the application and issue the license. Such license shall expire on the thirty-first day of December of the year in which such license shall have been issued. No license shall be issued until the conclusion of the aforesaid investigation.

(Ord. No. 1585, § 8. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.14.080)


5.07.080 Carrying and exhibition of license.

Such solicitor’s license shall be carried by the solicitor at all times when soliciting or canvassing in the city, and shall be exhibited by any such solicitor whenever he shall be requested to do so by any police officer or any person solicited.

(Ord. No. 1585, § 9. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.14.090)


5.07.090 License revocation.

Any license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the city for the violation of any of the laws or ordinances of the city or any state or federal law, or whenever such solicitor in the judgment of the city council ceases to possess the qualifications required by this chapter for the issuance of such license.

(Ord. No. 1585, § 10. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.14.100)


5.07.100 Order taking requirements.

All orders taken by licensed solicitors shall be in writing, in duplicate, stating the name of the solicitor, as it appears on the license, the solicitor’s permit number as issued under the provisions of this chapter, the address of both the solicitor and his employer, the terms of the order or agreement and the amount of money or checks paid to the solicitor. One (1) copy of such order or agreement shall be given to the purchaser.

(Ord. No. 1585, § 12. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.14.120)


5.07.110 Exemptions.

This chapter shall not apply to:

1. The selling of personal property at wholesale to dealers in such articles or commodities;

2. Merchandise sold completely through interstate commerce;

3. Youth-oriented groups; and

4. Any organization, association or corporation desiring to solicit or have solicited in its name, donations of money or property, or financial assistance of any kind, or desiring to sell or distribute any item of literature or merchandise for charitable, religious, patriotic or philanthropic purpose.

Any person or organization claiming the exemption of this section shall file with the finance director an affidavit setting forth facts sufficient to show the application of this section and the right to such exemption.

(Ord. No. 1585, § 15; Ord. No. 1918, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.14.130)


5.07.120 Cancellation of transaction by buyer – Procedure.

A. In addition to any other rights he may have, the buyer shall have the right to cancel a retail installment transaction for other than the seller’s breach:

1. If the retail installment transaction was entered into by the buyer and solicited in person by the seller or his representative at a place other than the seller’s address, which may be his main or branch office, shown on the contract;

2. If the buyer returns goods received or makes them available to the seller as provided in subsection (B)(1) of this section;

3. By sending notice of such cancellation to the seller at his place of business as set forth in the contract or charge agreement by certified mail, return receipt requested, which shall be posted not later than midnight of the third day (excluding Sundays and holidays) following the date the buyer signs the contract or charge agreement.

B. In the event of cancellation pursuant to this section:

1. The seller shall, without request, refund to the buyer within ten (10) days after such cancellation all deposits, including any down payment, made under the contract traded in to the seller on account or in contemplation of the contract less any reasonable costs actually incurred in making ready for sale of goods so traded in;

2. The seller shall be entitled to reclaim and the buyer shall return or make available to the seller at the place of delivery in its original condition any goods received by the buyer under the contract or charge agreement;

3. The buyer shall incur no additional liability for such cancellation.

(Ord. No. 1585, § 13. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.14.140)

State law reference(s) – Installment contracts, RCW 63.14.154.


5.07.130 Violations – Penalty.

Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined in a sum not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300) and shall be subject to imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment for each offense. Every day during which such violations shall occur or continue shall constitute a separate offense.

(Ord. No. 1585, § 14. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.14.150)


Chapter 5.08 AMUSEMENT DEVICES

Sections:

5.08.010    Definitions. 

5.08.020    License required. 

5.08.030    License fees. 

5.08.040    Master arcade license. 

5.08.050    License expiration. 

5.08.060    Temporary licenses. 

5.08.070    City fee exemption. 

5.08.080    Application for license. 

5.08.090    Appeal of denial. 

5.08.100    Proration of annual license fee. 

5.08.110    Seizure procedure. 

5.08.120    Violation – Penalty. 


5.08.010 Definitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Amusement device means any machine or device which provides recreation or entertainment for which a charge is made for use or play, and includes but is not limited to, pool and billiard tables, shuffleboards, music machines, video games, pinball games, mechanical bulls and other riding devices, and devices for display of pictures or views on films. The term “amusement device” does not mean or include any machine or device used exclusively for the vending of merchandise.

Owner of an amusement device means a person who has legal title to the device, or a person who as purchaser is entitled to possession under a retained title contract, conditional sales agreement, vendor’s lien agreement or other legal purchase agreement.

Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated or unincorporated association, marital community, joint venture, or other legal entity or group of persons however organized.

(Ord. No. 2381, § 1; Ord. No. 3027, § 1(5.19.010), 2-19-92. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.19.010)

Cross reference(s) – Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.01.030.


5.08.020 License required.

It is unlawful for any person to display any amusement device, which is available for use by the public, without first obtaining and displaying an amusement device license issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The license shall be publicly displayed so that it is readily visible. The number of amusement devices displayed on the premises shall correspond to the number of devices authorized by the amusement device license.

(Ord. No. 2629, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.19.020)


5.08.030 License fees.

The fee for any amusement device shall be fifty dollars ($50) per year, per device. The fee for pool or billiard tables shall be consistent with KCC 5.02.030.

(Ord. No. 2381, § 1; Ord. No. 2629, § 2; Ord. No. 3027, § 1(5.19.030), 2-19-92. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.19.030)


5.08.040 Master arcade license.

A. In addition to the license and fees required in KCC 5.08.030, there is hereby established a master license, to be known as a master arcade license. The fee for a master arcade license shall be five hundred dollars ($500) per year.

B. Any person who operates a business where income is derived solely from the operation and use of more than ten (10) amusement devices at one (1) location shall be required to obtain a master arcade license or will be found in violation of the law.

C. Master arcade licenses shall be publicly displayed on the premises during the time of arcade operations.

D. Master arcade licenses expire annually on December 31.

(Ord. No. 2381, § 1; Ord. No. 3027, § 1(5.19.040), 2-19-92. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.19.040)


5.08.050 License expiration.

Amusement device licenses expire annually on December 31.

(Ord. No. 2381, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.19.050)


5.08.060 Temporary licenses.

A. The fee for any temporary amusement device license shall be ten dollars ($10) per device.

B. A master arcade license shall not be required for temporary use of more than ten (10) amusement devices at one (1) location.

C. Temporary use for the purpose of the fees and exemptions of this section means the operation of amusement devices at a licensed fair, carnival, circus, or similar event, the duration of which does not exceed fourteen (14) days.

(Ord. No. 2381, § 1; Ord. No. 2411, § 1; Ord. No. 2629, § 3. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.19.054)


5.08.070 City fee exemption.

City facilities, and amusement devices owned by the city and operated at city facilities, are exempt from the fees required by KCC 5.08.030 and 5.08.040.

(Ord. No. 2381, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.19.055)


5.08.080 Application for license.

A. The application for license shall be made to the city, in such form and containing such information as the city may require and on forms to be furnished by the city to the applicant. The application forms shall contain, among others, the following information:

1. The name of the applicant and persons who have an interest in the business or entity of such applicant;

2. The residence and business address of the applicant and owner or owners;

3. Whether any such license previously issued by the city or any other governmental entity has ever been suspended, revoked or cancelled; if so, for what cause and the dates and circumstances;

4. Whether the applicant for a master arcade license or owner or owners, has been convicted of any felony or any misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or minors within five (5) years of the application.

B. Upon receipt of a completed application form, an investigation shall be made into all matters contained in the application and incidental thereto.

C. Applications for master arcade licenses shall be forwarded to the chief of police to make an investigation concerning subsection (A)(4) of this section. The chief of police shall complete such investigation and shall within thirty (30) days furnish a written report containing the results of his investigation and shall make therein his recommendation whether or not such license should be granted.

D. Upon the completion of the investigation, and review of the recommendation of the chief of police, and determination that all matters contained in the application are true and correct and that this chapter has been complied with, such license shall be issued in accordance with the provisions with this chapter. The applicable license fees, together with any delinquent fees that may then be due shall be paid to the finance director.

E. No license shall be granted to any person who, within five (5) years of the application for such license, has been convicted of any felony or of any misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or minors.

F. The finance director shall notify an applicant, upon denial of a license, of such denial and the right to appeal pursuant to KCC 5.08.090. Notice shall be by United States mail, postage prepaid, to the business address of the applicant, and shall be effective on the date of deposit in the mails.

(Ord. No. 2381, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.19.060)


5.08.090 Appeal of denial.

An applicant shall be given a hearing before the city council upon application therefor, made within fourteen (14) calendar days of notice of license denial, to then present such reasons as the applicant may have that the finance director should reconsider the action of license denial.

(Ord. No. 2381, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.19.070)


5.08.100 Proration of annual license fee.

The license fee for amusement devices or master arcade license fee shall be one-half of the annual license fee should the amusement devices or arcade be operated only during the last six (6) months of an annual license period.

(Ord. No. 2381, § 1; Ord. No. 2629, § 4. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.19.080)


5.08.110 Seizure procedure.

A. Any device found in violation of KCC 5.08.020 shall be subject to confiscation by the chief of police and/or his designate, which shall include all members of the police department.

B. No amusement device so confiscated shall be returned to the owner or licensee thereof until all applicable license or replacement fees have been paid together with any costs incurred by the city as a result of such confiscation.

C. No device which carries a federal gambling stamp shall be licensed or authorized under the provisions of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 2381, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.19.100)


5.08.120 Violation – Penalty.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500) or imprisonment for a period of up to one hundred eighty (180) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(Ord. No. 2381, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.19.110)


Chapter 5.09 MODEL STUDIOS AND BODY PAINTING ESTABLISHMENTS

Sections:

5.09.010    Definitions. 

5.09.020    Model studio license required – Application. 

5.09.030    Issuance of a model studio license. 

5.09.040    Manager or model license required – Application. 

5.09.050    Denial or revocation of licenses. 

5.09.060    Appeals. 

5.09.070    Unlawful conduct. 

5.09.080    Inspection. 

5.09.090    Rules and regulations. 


5.09.010 Definitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Manager means a person other than a licensee who directly supervises and manages the activities of employees of a model studio.

Model means any person furnished for the purpose of being observed, viewed, depicted, painting or being painted in the course of business of a model studio.

Model studio means any premises on which there is conducted primarily the business of furnishing persons as models who pose for the purpose of being depicted by sketching, painting, drawing sculpturing, photographing or being otherwise depicted or being painted on or upon by any other person, or painting on or upon any other person for persons who pay a fee, gratuity or other consideration for the right to observe, view, depict, paint or be painted, or for the right to be admitted to, permitted to remain upon, or as a condition of remaining upon, the premises. Such definition shall expressly exclude any studio which functions as a part of and under the direct supervision of an institution, the curriculum for which is approved by the office of the state superintendent of public instruction.

Premises means the entire area utilized by the business licensed in this chapter and the public areas while utilizing the services.

Substantial connection means:

1. In sole proprietorship, the individual who owns, operates, manages or conducts, directly or indirectly, the establishment;

2. In a partnership, the individual shares in any potential profits of the establishment;

3. In a corporation, the individual is an officer, director or a holder (directly or beneficially) of more than ten (10) percent of any class of stock; or

4. The individual furnishes more than ten (10) percent of the capital of such establishment, whether in cash, goods or services.

(Ord. No. 1837, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.26.010)

Cross reference(s) – Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.01.030.


5.09.020 Model studio license required – Application.

A. It shall be unlawful to conduct, operate or manage a model studio unless such establishment is licensed as provided in this section. The fee for a model studio license and renewal shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000) per calendar year or portion thereof.

B. No license or renewal of a license to conduct, operate or manage a model studio shall be issued or renewed except upon written application to the finance director signed and sworn to by the person who intends to conduct, operate or manage a model studio. Such application shall contain the following information:

1. The business name, business address and telephone number of the establishment or proposed establishment;

2. In relation to each natural person having a substantial connection with such establishment or proposed establishment:

a. True name and any other name by which commonly known;

b. Residence address and telephone number;

c. Date and place of birth;

d. Length of residence in King County, and if less than one (1) year, prior address outside King County;

e. Nature of relationship to establishment or proposed establishment;

f. Whether within ten (10) years of date of application, has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of violating any ordinance, resolution or law of any jurisdiction which involves conducting, operating or managing the business. If so, full circumstances thereof including, but not limited to date, court and case disposition.

3. In relation to each corporation or partnership having a substantial connection with such establishment or proposed establishment:

a. Name of the corporation or partnership;

b. Name of registered agent and address of registered office;

c. Primary office address, if different from above;

d. Date and place of incorporation or organization;

e. Date and place of filing of articles of incorporation;

f. Nature of relationship to establishment or proposed establishment;

g. Names and residence addresses of all officers, directors, limited or general partners, and holders (directly or beneficially) of more than ten (10) percent of any class of stock;

4. Such other and further information as the city may reasonably require to determine the advisability of license issuance.

Incomplete or false information on such application shall be cause for immediate denial or revocation of a license.

(Ord. No. 1837, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.26.020)


5.09.030 Issuance of a model studio license.

A. Upon the filing of any application for issuance or renewal of a model studio license, the finance director shall refer the application to the police department with a request to investigate the statements contained in the application and to furnish a written report containing the results of investigation, together with other information concerning the background and character of all persons having a substantial connection with such establishment, as may aid the finance director in determining whether such license should be issued. The application shall also be referred to the Seattle-King County health department with a request to inspect the premises or proposed premises as to its sanitary and physical conditions and to submit a written report thereon. Inspections by the director of the Seattle-King County health department or his duly authorized representative shall be made in accordance with rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter and as may be adopted by such director. The application shall be referred to the planning department for coordination of housing, zoning and fire inspection of the premises with a request to submit a written report thereon.

B. If, from the reports and other information concerning the applicant, the premises and persons having a substantial connection with such establishment or proposed establishment, the city deems the applicant to comply with all of the conditions required for licensing hereunder, a license shall be issued or renewed.

C. A license shall not be issued or renewed under this chapter if the information received indicates that:

1. Any knowingly false statement was made in the license application;

2. Any person having a substantial connection with such establishment or proposed establishment, within ten (10) years of the date of application, has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of violating any ordinance, resolution or law of any jurisdiction which would influence the conducting, operating or managing of the business in a lawful manner;

3. Any premises on which such establishment or proposed establishment is located or sought to be located fails to meet health, safety, fire, zoning or other valid standards established by regulations governing health and safety; provided, however, denial under this subsection shall be without prejudice to future application; or

4. Another business establishment has filed for or been granted a license under the provisions of this chapter, the premises of which is within a radius of one (1) mile of the proposed establishment.

D. The finance director shall not issue a temporary license or permit until thirty (30) days have elapsed from the filing of the application and only if the license or permit application is still being investigated by the finance director. Such temporary license or permit shall be issued for one (1) month and is not renewable.

(Ord. No. 1837, § 3. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.26.030)


5.09.040 Manager or model license required – Application.

A. It shall be unlawful for any person to be employed as a manager or model without a valid license. The fee for such license shall be five hundred dollars ($500) per calendar year or portion thereof. Application for such license or renewal shall be made to the finance director.

B. All applications for issuance or renewal of a manager’s or model’s license shall be made to and filed with the finance director on forms furnished for such purpose, and be accompanied by both a certified copy of the applicant’s birth certificate and a color photograph of the applicant approximately one (1) inch square. Such photograph, if the license applied for is issued, shall be affixed thereto in a manner designed to discourage alteration or substitution of photographs. This application shall state the true name of the applicant together with such other information concerning the background and character as may aid the finance director in determining if such license should be issued, but not less than that required under this chapter. Applicants shall not be less than eighteen (18) years of age.

C. If the finance director finds that such application for license or renewal is in proper form, the applicant shall be:

1. Referred to the police department with a request to fingerprint the applicant, and to investigate the statements contained in the application, and to furnish a written report containing the results of the investigation, together with such other information as may aid the finance director in determining whether such license should be issued; and

2. Referred to the Seattle-King County health department with a request for a physical examination to ascertain if such applicant is free from contagious or infectious disease and to make a written report.

D. The finance director shall examine the reports and recommendations and if from the reports and other information concerning the background and character of the applicant, the applicant has complied with all of the conditions required for licensing under this chapter, the license shall be issued or renewed for the establishment for which the applicant works or desires to work.

E. A license shall not be issued or renewed under this section if the information received indicates that:

1. Any false statement was knowingly made in the application;

2. The applicant has within ten (10) years of date of application pleaded guilty to or been convicted of violating any ordinance, resolution or law of any jurisdiction relating to prostitution, grand larceny, or violating any section of this chapter or Chapter 9.79 RCW regarding sex crimes;

3. The applicant fails to meet valid health standards.

F. The finance director may issue a temporary license for thirty (30) days pending conclusion of any investigation. Such temporary license shall not be renewable.

(Ord. No. 1837, § 5. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.26.050)


5.09.050 Denial or revocation of licenses.

A. Any application for issuance or renewal of a license pursuant to this chapter shall not be accepted by the finance director unless accompanied by the appropriate license fee. If an application for a license is denied, the entire amount tendered as the license fee shall not be returned to the applicant, but a portion thereof, not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100) shall be retained by the city to defray the cost of examination and investigation.

B. Every license issued or renewed pursuant to this chapter shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the year of issuance.

C. In addition to other penalties provided in this chapter or by law, the finance director shall have the right to suspend or revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter upon showing that any establishment, premises or person licensed under the provisions of this chapter has operated in violation of the provisions of this chapter or has permitted or engaged in unlawful conduct on the premises.

(Ord. No. 1837, § 6. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.26.060)


5.09.060 Appeals.

A. The city council shall have jurisdiction to hear appeals from the denial of a license or suspension or revocation of licenses issued under provisions of this chapter. The aggrieved party shall have the right to appeal to the city council by giving a written notice within seven (7) days after the entry of the order being appealed. The notice of appeal shall specify an address at which the appellant may be given notice of the hearing on the appeal.

B. After the filing of such appeal, the city council shall set a time and place, not more than thirty (30) days from such notice of appeal for a hearing. At the hearing the appellant shall be entitled to appear in person and be represented by counsel and offer such evidence pertinent and material to the action. Upon filing of notice of such appeal, the finance director shall immediately submit to the city council, such records, dates, reports and information as he may have in his possession.

(Ord. No. 1837, § 9. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.26.090)


5.09.070 Unlawful conduct.

A. In conducting, operating or managing a licensed model studio, the model studio is required to:

1. Make the business premises available at all times for inspection as to conditions relating to licensing and conduct regulated hereunder by the Seattle-King County health department, city building department and the city police department;

2. Display during business hours all licenses required hereunder;

3. Have the manager, licensed hereunder, or the model studio applicant on the premises at all times during which the model studio is open.

B. In conducting, operating or managing a licensed model studio, it shall be unlawful to:

1. Employ an unlicensed manager or model;

2. Permit to remain in such establishment any person who is not eighteen (18) years of age or older;

3. Conduct or operate a model studio between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.

(Ord. No. 1837, § 4. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.26.040)


5.09.080 Inspection.

Any model studio licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall be open to inspection by the chief of police or his authorized deputy, the director of Seattle-King County department of health or his authorized representative and the building official of the city or his authorized representative.

(Ord. No. 1837, § 7. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.26.070)


5.09.090 Rules and regulations.

The finance director is authorized to make and enforce rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to violate or fail to comply with any such rules and regulations. All such rules and regulations shall be mailed to each licensee for information and for distribution to employees.

(Ord. No. 1837, § 8. Formerly Code 1986, § 5.26.080)


Chapter 5.10 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT

Sections:

5.10.010    Findings of fact. 

5.10.020    Purpose and intent. 

5.10.030    Definitions. 

5.10.040    Administration of licensing. 

5.10.050    License required – Fee. 

5.10.060    License applications. 

5.10.070    Issuance of licenses. 

5.10.080    Denial of application for licenses. 

5.10.090    License term – Renewals. 

5.10.100    Other license requirements. 

5.10.110    Specifications – Exotic dance studios. 

5.10.120    Standards of conduct and operation applicable to exotic dance studios. 

5.10.130    Regulations applicable to adult arcades, adult motion picture theaters and other adult entertainment businesses providing onsite entertainment. 

5.10.140    Regulations applicable to stores, novelty stores, video stores and other businesses whether or not qualifying as adult entertainment establishments.

5.10.150    Exemptions. 

5.10.160    Record keeping requirements. 

5.10.170    Inspections. 

5.10.180    Hours of operation. 

5.10.190    Appeal of license denial – Hearing. 

5.10.200    License suspension and revocation – Hearing. 

5.10.210    Nuisance declared. 

5.10.220    Limitation of liability. 

5.10.230    Violation – Penalty – Misdemeanor. 

5.10.240    Additional enforcement.

5.10.250    Severability. 


5.10.010 Findings of fact.

Based on public testimony and other evidence and information before it, the city council makes the following findings of fact:

1. The secondary effects of the activities defined and regulated in this chapter are detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city and, therefore, such activities must be regulated as provided in this chapter.

2. Regulation of the adult entertainment industry is necessary because, in the absence of such regulation, significant criminal activity has historically and regularly occurred. This history of criminal activity in the adult entertainment industry has included prostitution, narcotics and liquor law violations, breaches of the peace and the presence within the industry of individuals with hidden ownership interests and outstanding arrest warrants.

3. Contact between entertainers and patrons of adult entertainment businesses facilitates prostitution and other related crimes and the concern over unlawful sexual activities and related crimes is a legitimate health concern of the city which demands reasonable regulation of adult entertainment businesses in order to protect the health and well-being of the citizens.

4. Licensing is a legitimate and reasonable means of accountability to ensure that operators of adult entertainment businesses comply with reasonable regulations and to ensure that operators do not knowingly allow their establishments to be used as places of illegal sexual activity or solicitation.

5. In the absence of regulation, the activities described in this section occur regardless of whether the adult entertainment is presented in conjunction with the sale of alcoholic beverages.

6. It is necessary to license entertainers in the adult entertainment industry to prevent the exploitation of minors, to ensure that each such entertainer is an adult, to ensure that such entertainers have not assumed a false name which would make regulation of the entertainer difficult or impossible and to ensure that such entertainers are not involved in criminal activity.

7. It is necessary to have a licensed manager on the premises of establishments offering adult entertainment at such times as such establishments are offering adult entertainment so that there will, at all necessary times, be an individual responsible for the overall operation of the establishment, including the actions of patrons, entertainers and other employees.

8. The license fees required in this chapter are nominal fees imposed as necessary regulatory measures designed to help defray the substantial expenses incurred by the city in regulating the adult entertainment industry.

9. Hidden ownership interests for the purposes of skimming profits and avoiding the payment of taxes have historically occurred in the adult entertainment industry in the absence of regulation. These hidden ownership interests have historically been held by organized and white collar crime elements. In order for the city to effectively protect the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry, it is important that the city be fully apprised of the actual ownership of adult entertainment establishments.

10. The city council desires to prevent these adverse effects and thereby protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizenry; protect the citizens from increased crime; preserve the quality of life; preserve the property values and character of surrounding neighborhoods; and deter the spread of urban blight.

11. It is not the intent of this chapter to suppress any speech activities protected by the First Amendment or Article I, Section 5 of the Washington State Constitution, but to enact content neutral regulations which address the secondary effects of adult entertainment businesses, as well as the health problems associated with such businesses.

(Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 3221, § 1, 4-18-95)


5.10.020 Purpose and intent.

It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult entertainment businesses and related activities to promote health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city of Kent, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the establishment of adult entertainment businesses in locations within the city which would have a harmful effect on the residents of the city. The purpose of this chapter is to alleviate undesirable social problems that accompany adult entertainment businesses, and to enact content neutral regulations which address the secondary effects of adult entertainment businesses as well as health problems associated with such business, not to curtail the First Amendment expression, namely dancing or entertainment. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the state or federal constitutions, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials.

(Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 3-7-95)


5.10.030 Definitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

A. Adult entertainment means any dance, amusement, show, display, merchandise, material, exhibition, pantomime, modeling or any other like performance of any type for the use or benefit of a member or members of the public or advertised for the use or benefit of a member of the public where such is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description or simulation of “specified anatomical areas” as defined herein, or the exhibition of “specified sexual activities,” also defined herein, or in the case of live adult entertainment performances, which emphasizes and seeks to arouse or excite the patron’s sexual desires. For the purposes of this chapter, any patron of an adult entertainment business, as defined in this section, shall be deemed a member of the public.

B. Adult entertainment business means any establishment providing adult entertainment as defined herein, including, but not limited to, adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult motion picture theater, and exotic dance studio, more specifically defined as follows:

1. Adult arcade means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, one (1) or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, computer-generated or enhanced pornography, panoram, peep show, or similar machines, or other image-producing machines, for personal viewing, are used to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which provide material for individual viewing by patrons on the premises of the business which are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description or simulation of “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities.” 

2. Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description or simulation of “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities” are regularly shown for any form of consideration.

3. Adult retail establishment means any bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, or other similar commercial establishment, business, service, or portion thereof, which for money or any other form of consideration provides as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade the sale, exchange, rental, loan, trade, transfer, and/or provision for viewing or use off the premises of the business adult entertainment material as defined in this section. For purposes of this provision, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that thirty (30) percent or more of a business’ stock-in-trade in adult retail material, based on either the dollar value (wholesale or retail) or the number of titles of such material, is significant or substantial.

In determining whether or not the presumption is rebutted, the clerk may consider the following factors, which are not conclusive:

a. Whether minors are prohibited from access to the premises of the establishment due to the adult entertainment nature of the inventory;

b. Whether the establishment is advertised, marketed, or held out to be an adult merchandising facility;

c. Whether adult entertainment material is an establishment’s primary or one of its principal business purposes; or

d. Whether thirty (30) percent or more of an establishment’s revenue is derived from adult entertainment material.

An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of adult entertainment materials and still be categorized as an adult retail establishment. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such establishments from being categorized as an adult retail establishment so long as one (1) of its principal business purposes is offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, the specified adult entertainment materials.

The clerk shall have full discretion to give appropriate weight to the factors set forth above as well as other factors considered depending on the particular facts and circumstances of each application.

4. Exotic dance studio, also known as “topless bar” and “adult cabaret,” means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment, or any premises or facility to which any member of the public is invited or admitted and where an entertainer provides live performances to any member of the public, which performances are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description or simulation of “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities,” or which emphasize and seek to arouse or excite the patron’s sexual desires.

C. Adult entertainment material means any books, magazines, cards, pictures, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video tapes, slides, or other photographic reproductions, or visual representations, CD roms, DVDs, disks, electronic media, or other such media, or instruments, devices, equipment, paraphernalia, toys, novelties, games, clothing or other merchandise or material, which are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description or simulation of “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities.”

D. City means the city of Kent, Washington.

E. Clerk means such city employees or agents as the mayor shall designate to administer this chapter, or any designee thereof. Unless otherwise designated by the mayor, for purposes relating to decisions under this chapter affecting zoning pursuant to KCC Title 15 and the filing of appeals to the hearing examiner as provided for in this chapter, the term “clerk” shall mean planning director or his or her designee.

F. Conviction means an adjudication of conviction of guilt and occurs at such time as a plea of guilty has been accepted or a verdict of guilty has been filed, notwithstanding the pendency of any future proceedings including but not limited to sentencing or disposition, post-trial or post-fact finding motions, and appeals. “Conviction” also means a bail forfeiture.

G. Employee means any and all persons, including managers, entertainers, and independent contractors, who work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of any adult entertainment business offering adult entertainment, whether or not such person is paid compensation by the operator of said business.

H. Entertainer means any person who provides live adult entertainment in an adult entertainment business whether or not an employee of the operator and whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for such entertainment.

I. Establish means and include any of the following:

1. To open or commence any adult entertainment business as a new business; or

2. To convert an existing business, whether or not an adult entertainment business, to any adult entertainment businesses defined herein; or

3. To add any of the adult entertainment businesses defined herein to any other existing adult entertainment business; or

4. To relocate any such adult entertainment business.

J. License means a license to operate, manage or entertain at any premises that is classified as an adult entertainment business.

K. Licensed premises means any premises that requires a license and that is classified as an adult entertainment business.

L. Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate, manage or entertain at an adult entertainment business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license.

M. Manager means any person appointed by an owner or operator of an adult entertainment business who manages, directs, administers or is in charge of the affairs and/or the conduct or operation of an adult entertainment business and includes assistant managers.

N. Operator means and includes the owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator, or person in charge of, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment business.

O. Panoram or peep show means any device which, upon insertion of a coin or by any other means, exhibits or displays a picture or view by film, video, or by any other means.

P. Person means any individual, firm, joint venture, copartnership, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

Q. Specified anatomical areas means:

1. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of areolae; or

2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

R. Specified sexual activities means:

1. The caressing, touching, fondling or other intentional or erotic touching of male genitals, female genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts of oneself or of one person by another; or

2. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including masturbation, intercourse, oral copulation, flagellation, sodomy, bestiality, or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; or

3. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence or visual state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence, even if completely and opaquely covered; or

4. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (R)(1) through (3) of this section.

(Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 3221, § 1, 4-18-95; Ord. No. 3475, § 2, 10-5-99)


5.10.040 Administration of licensing.

The clerk is responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending, and cancelling adult entertainment business, manager’s and entertainer’s licenses. The planning director and the building official or their designee are responsible for ascertaining whether a proposed adult entertainment business for which an adult entertainment business license is being applied for complies with all building code and land use requirements enumerated herein and all other applicable building code and zoning laws and/or regulations now in effect or as amended or enacted subsequent to the effective date of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 3221, § 1, 4-18-95)


5.10.050 License required – Fee.

A. Adult entertainment business license required.

1. No person or entity shall use any property or premises for an adult entertainment business within the city of Kent except within those areas authorized for location of said businesses as set forth in KCC 15.08.270, and no adult entertainment business shall be established, operated or maintained in the city unless the owner or operator thereof has obtained an adult entertainment business license from the clerk. It is unlawful for any entertainer, employee or operator to knowingly work in or about or to knowingly perform any service directly related to the operation of an unlicensed public adult entertainment business.

Violation/penalty. Any violation of the provisions of this subsection shall constitute a misdemeanor as set forth in this chapter.

2. The annual fee for an exotic dance studio business license shall be five hundred dollars ($500). This amount shall be used for the cost of administration of this chapter.

3. The annual license fee for all other adult entertainment businesses subject to this chapter shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150). This amount shall be used for the cost of administration of this chapter.

4. The above-referenced licenses expire annually on December 31 and must be renewed by January 1.

5. The applicant must be eighteen (18) years of age or older.

B. License for managers and entertainers required.

1. No person shall work as an entertainer at an adult entertainment business without having first obtained an entertainer’s license from the clerk. No person shall work as a manager of an exotic dance studio, adult arcade, adult motion picture theater or other adult entertainment businesses providing onsite entertainment without having first obtained a manager’s license from the clerk, the purpose being to require licensed managers at adult entertainment business establishments to monitor the conduct of patrons viewing adult entertainment on the premises and ensure compliance with this chapter. Onsite entertainment includes, but is not limited to, live entertainment, the viewing of films and videos and other such entertainment on the premises, whether or not for a fee or other consideration, as opposed to strictly the sale or rental of adult books, magazines, novelties and videos.

Violation/penalty. It shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor as set forth in this chapter if he or she acts or performs as a manager or entertainer in an adult entertainment business without said valid and current license as required in this section.

2. The annual fee for such a license shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150). This amount shall be used for the cost of administration of this chapter.

3. This license expires annually on December 31 and must be renewed by January 1.

4. The applicant must be eighteen (18) years of age or older.

(Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 3221, § 1, 4-18-95)


5.10.060 License applications.

A. Adult entertainment business. All applications for an adult entertainment business license for places which offer adult entertainment shall be submitted in the name of the person or entity proposing to conduct such adult entertainment on the business premises. All applications for an adult entertainment business license shall be signed by the applicant and notarized or certified to be true under penalty of perjury. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the city, along with a nonrefundable application processing fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150), which shall contain the following information:

1. Names, any aliases or previous names, driver’s license number, if any, business, mailing, and residential address, telephone number, and social security numbers of the applicant and each general partner, corporate officer, director, and persons having a significant responsibility for management of the business, specifying the interest and management responsibility of each such applicant, partner, corporate officer and/or director.

2. If a partnership, whether general or limited; and if a corporation, date and place of incorporation, evidence that it is in good standing under the laws of Washington, and name and address of any registered agent for service of process.

3. Addresses of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately prior to the date of application.

4. Any and all criminal misdemeanor or felony convictions or forfeitures, other than parking offenses or minor traffic violations, including dates of conviction, nature of the crime, name and location of court and disposition for each individual, partner, corporate officer and/or director identified in subparagraph (1) above for the ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of application.

5. A description of the business, occupation, or employment of the applicant for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of application.

6. Whether the applicant or any individual, partner, corporate officer, or director identified in subparagraph (1) above has had a previous license under this chapter or other similar ordinances from another city or county denied, suspended, or revoked, including the name and location of the adult entertainment business for which the license was denied, suspended, or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension, or revocation.

7. Whether the applicant or any individual, partner, corporate officer, or director identified in subparagraph (1) above holds any other licenses under this chapter, or other similar adult entertainment business ordinance from another city or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other permitted businesses.

8. The single classification of license for which the applicant is filing.

9. The name and location of the proposed adult entertainment business, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number(s), if any, together with the name and address of each owner and lessee of the property.

10. Two (2) two (2) inch by two (2) inch color photographs of each applicant, taken within six (6) months of the date of the application, showing only the full face of the applicant. The photographs shall be provided at the applicant’s expense. Alternatively, the applicant may be required to submit to a photograph taken at the direction of the clerk.

11. Complete sets of fingerprints of each individual, partner, corporate officer, and director on forms prescribed by the chief of police.

12. In the case of an exotic dance studio, a scale drawing or diagram showing the configuration of the premises for the proposed exotic dance studio, including a statement of the total floor space occupied by the business, and marked dimensions of the interior of the premises. Performance areas, seating areas, manager’s office and stations, restrooms and service areas shall be clearly marked on the drawing. The applicant shall further demonstrate conformance with KCC 15.08.270 pertaining to the location of adult entertainment businesses and, in the case of exotic dance studios and adult arcades, conformance with KCC 5.10.110 and 5.10.130 respectively.

13. Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to investigate and seek information to confirm any statements set forth in the application.

14. Identification and/or information, as requested by the clerk, supplemental to that required in a complete application when deemed necessary to confirm statements set forth in the application or determine compliance with this chapter. The application will be deemed complete when the applicant submits responses to all inquiries on the application form.

15. Subparagraphs (10) and (11) above shall not be applicable to adult bookstores, adult novelty stores or adult video stores; provided, that such business does not provide onsite entertainment.

B. Processing adult entertainment business license applications.

1. Upon receipt of the complete application and fee, the clerk shall provide copies to the police, planning and other applicable departments for their investigation and review to determine compliance of the proposed adult entertainment business with the laws and regulations which each department administers. Each department shall, within thirty (30) days of the date of receipt of such application, report to the clerk whether such application and premises complies with the laws administered by each department. No license may be issued unless each department reports that the application and premises comply with the relevant laws. In the event the premises is not yet constructed, the department shall base their recommendation as to premises compliance on their review of the drawings submitted in the application. Any license approved prior to premises construction shall contain a condition that the premises may not open for business until the premises have been inspected and determined to be in substantial conformance with the drawings submitted with the application and in compliance with KCC 5.10.110 and 5.10.130 as applicable. A department shall recommend denial of a license under this subsection if it finds that the proposed adult entertainment business is not in conformance with the requirements of any provision of any applicable statute, code, ordinance, regulation or other law in effect in the city. A recommendation for denial shall be in writing and cite the specific reason therefor, including applicable laws.

2. An adult entertainment business license shall be issued by the clerk within thirty (30) days of the date of filing a complete license application and fee, unless the clerk determines that the applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements of this chapter or provide any information required under this subsection, or that the applicant has made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact on the application for a license. Upon request of the applicant, the clerk shall grant an extension of time, up to but not to exceed twenty (20) additional days, in which to provide all information required for license application. (The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application.) If the clerk finds that the license has failed to meet any of the requirements for issuance of an adult entertainment license, the clerk shall deny the application in writing, and shall cite, in writing, the specific reasons therefor, including applicable laws. If the clerk fails to issue or deny the license within thirty (30) days of the date of filing of a complete application and fee, the applicant shall be permitted, subject to all other applicable laws, operate the business for which the license was sought until notified, in writing, by the clerk that the license has been denied.

C. Manager or entertainer license. All applications for a manager’s or entertainer’s license shall be signed by the applicant and notarized or certified to be true under penalty of perjury. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the city, along with a nonrefundable application processing fee of one hundred dollars ($100), which shall contain the following information:

1. The applicant’s name, any aliases or previous names, home address, home telephone number, date and place of birth, driver’s license number, if any, social security number and, for entertainers, any stage names or nicknames used in entertaining.

2. The name and address of each business at which the applicant intends to work.

3. Documentation that the applicant has attained the age of eighteen (18) years. Any of the following shall be accepted as documentation of age:

a. A motor vehicle operator’s license issued by any state bearing the applicant’s photograph and date of birth; or

b. A state issued identification card bearing the applicant’s photograph and date of birth.

c. An official passport issued by the United States of America.

d. An immigration card issued by the United States of America.

e. Any other picture identification that the city determines to be acceptable.

4. A complete statement of all convictions of the applicant for any misdemeanor or felony violations in this or any other city, county or state, except parking violations or minor traffic infractions.

5. A description of the applicant’s principal activities or service to be rendered.

6. Resident addresses and telephone numbers for the period of three (3) years immediately prior to the date of application specifying the period of residence at each address.

7. The names and addresses of employers or individuals or businesses for whom the applicant was an employee or independent contractor for the period of three (3) years immediately prior to the date of application, including the period of employment.

8. Two (2) two (2) inch by two (2) inch color photographs of each applicant, taken within six (6) months of the date of the application, showing only the full face of the applicant. The photographs shall be provided at the applicant’s expense. Alternatively, the applicant may be required to submit to a photograph taken at the direction of the clerk.

9. Complete sets of fingerprints of each manager and entertainer on forms prescribed by the chief of police.

10. Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to investigate and seek information to confirm any statements set forth in the application.

11. Supplemental identification and/or information, as requested by the clerk, deemed necessary to confirm any information set forth in the application or to determine compliance with this chapter.

D. Processing manager’s or entertainer’s license applications. A copy of the application shall be provided to the police and other applicable departments for its review, investigation and recommendation. An adult entertainment business manager’s or an adult entertainer’s license shall be issued by the clerk within fourteen (14) days from the date the complete application and fee were received unless the clerk determines that the applicant has failed to provide any information required to be supplied according to this chapter, or that the applicant has made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a license. Upon request of the applicant, the clerk shall grant an extension of time, up to but not to exceed twenty (20) additional days, in which to provide all information required for license application. (The time period for granting or denying a license shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the applicant.) If the clerk determines that the applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements for issuance of a manager’s or entertainer’s license, the clerk shall deny the application in writing and shall cite the specific reasons therefor, including applicable laws. If a request for extension of time is not made, and the clerk has failed to approve or deny the license within fourteen (14) days of filing of a complete application for an adult entertainment business manager’s license, the applicant may, subject to all other applicable laws, commence work as an adult entertainment business manager in a duly licensed adult entertainment business until notified, in writing, by the clerk that the license has been denied. An applicant for an adult entertainment manager’s or entertainer’s license shall be issued a temporary license upon receipt of a complete license application and fee. Said temporary license will automatically expire on the fourteenth day (or on such day established pursuant to any extension granted herein) following the filing of a complete application and fee, unless the clerk has failed to approve or deny the license application, in which case the temporary license shall be valid until the clerk approves or denies the application, or until the final determination of any appeal from a denial of the application.

(Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 3221, § 1, 4-18-95)


5.10.070 Issuance of licenses.

Upon completion of the investigation and review by the departments, a review of the recommendations and verifications, and a determination that all matters contained in the application are true and correct and that this chapter has been complied with, the clerk shall issue such license applied for in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The applicable license fee, together with any delinquent fees that may then be due shall first be paid to the city.

(Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 3-7-95)


5.10.080 Denial of application for licenses.

The clerk shall deny the application to:

1. An applicant who is under eighteen (18) years of age.

2. An applicant who is overdue on his/her payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against him/her or imposed upon him/her in relation to an adult entertainment business.

3. An applicant whose place of business is conducted by an agent, unless such agent possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee, or in the case of a manager of an adult entertainment business, the manager has obtained a manager’s license.

4. A partnership, unless all the members thereof are qualified to obtain a license as provided in this chapter. Such license shall be issued to the agent of said partnership.

5. A corporation, unless all the officers and directors thereof are qualified to obtain a license as provided herein. Such license shall be issued to the agent of said corporation.

6. An applicant who has failed to provide information required on a license application for the issuance of the license or has made, with the intent to mislead, a materially false representation in the application for a license under this chapter which the applicant knows to be false.

7. The applicant has failed to comply with any provision or requirement of this chapter.

8. An applicant having an interest in any license granted under this chapter revoked within six (6) months from the date of application.

(Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 3221, § 1, 4-18-95)


5.10.090 License term – Renewals.

A. There shall be no prorating of the license fees for licenses required pursuant to this chapter, and all such licenses shall expire on the thirty-first day of December of each year, except that in the event that the original application is made subsequent to June 30, then one-half of the annual fee may be accepted for the remainder of said year.

B. Application for renewal of licenses issued hereunder shall be made to the clerk no later than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of adult entertainment business licenses and manager’s and entertainer’s business licenses. The renewal license shall be issued in the same manner and on payment of the same fees as for an original application under this chapter. All applicants for a license renewal shall present their current license for verification of identity, and upon issuance of a renewed license, shall surrender the expiring license to the clerk. There shall be assessed and collected by the clerk, an additional charge of twenty-five (25) percent of the license fee, on applications not made on or before said date.

C. The clerk shall renew a license upon application unless the clerk is aware of facts that would disqualify the applicant from being issued the license for which he or she seeks renewal, and further provided that the application complies with all provisions of this chapter as now enacted or as the same may hereafter be amended.

(Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 3-7-95)


5.10.100 Other license requirements.

A. Duty to supplement.

1. Applicants for a license under this chapter shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required in the event that said information changes in any way from what is stated on the application. If any person or entity acquires, subsequent to the issuance of an adult entertainment business license for places offering adult entertainment, an interest in the licensed premises or the licensed business, immediate notice of such acquisition shall be provided in writing to the clerk. The notice shall include the information required to be provided for the original adult entertainment business. The failure to supplement the application on file with the clerk regarding such change in ownership or interest, within thirty (30) days from the date of such change, shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license.

2. The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this section and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with health, fire, and building codes of the city.

3. The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city permits and/or licenses does not exempt him/her from the requirement of obtaining an adult entertainment business.

B. Manager on premises. A licensed manager shall be on duty on the premises of an adult business at all times that adult entertainment is being provided.

C. License nontransferable. No license or permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be assignable or transferable. For purposes of this chapter, “assignable” or “transferable” shall mean and include any of the following:

1. The sale, lease or sublease of the business; or

2. The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or

3. The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal devise which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law.

D. Name of business and place of business. No person granted a license pursuant to this chapter shall operate the adult entertainment business under a name not specified in the license, nor shall he or she conduct business under any designation or location not specified in the license.

E. License; posting and display.

1. The adult entertainment business license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is issued, the expiration date, and the address of the licensed adult entertainment business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the licensed premises so that it can be easily read at any time the business is open.

2. The license of the manager on duty shall be prominently posted during business hours.

3. Entertainer licenses need not be posted, but must be available on the premises when the entertainer is on the premises, for immediate inspection by any city official or law enforcement agency having jurisdiction. Managers’ and entertainers’ licenses must be endorsed by the clerk for the business premises for which the manager is managing and the entertainer is entertaining.

4. Under no circumstances will photocopies or other forms of reproduction be acceptable as proof of issuance of any license required under this chapter.

5. Violation/penalty. Any violation of the provisions of this subsection is a misdemeanor as set forth in this chapter.

F. Inspection of licenses. The manager shall, upon request by any law enforcement officer or inspector, make available for inspection the entertainer licenses required to be on the premises as described herein.

(Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 3221, § 1, 4-18-95)


5.10.110 Specifications – Exotic dance studios.

A. Separation of adult entertainment performance area. The portion of the exotic dance studio premises in which dancing and adult entertainment by an entertainer is performed shall be a stage or platform at least twenty-four (24) inches in elevation above the level of the patron seating areas and shall be situated so that no dances, performances, or exhibitions by an entertainer shall occur closer than ten (10) feet to any patron. The stage(s) must be visible from the common areas of the premises and at least one (1) manager’s station.

B. Lighting. Sufficient lighting shall be provided and equally distributed in and about the parts of the premises which are open to and used by patrons so that all objects are plainly visible at all times, and shall be illuminated so that patrons, on any part of the premises open to the public, shall be able to read a program, menu, or list printed in eight (8) point type.

C. Visibility. No adult entertainment performance may be visible outside the premises of the adult entertainment businesses.

D. Submittal of plans. Building plans showing conformance with the requirements of this section shall be included with any application for an exotic dance studio business license.

E. Signs. Signs of sufficient size to be readable at twenty (20) feet shall be conspicuously displayed in the public area of the establishment stating the following:

THIS ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT IS REGULATED BY THE CITY OF KENT. ENTERTAINERS ARE:

(A) Not permitted to engage in any type of sexual conduct;

(B) Not permitted to dance or appear nude, except on stage;

(C) Not permitted to solicit or demand or to directly accept, or receive any gratuity or other payment from a patron.

(Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 3221, § 1, 4-18-95)


5.10.120 Standards of conduct and operation applicable to exotic dance studios.

A. Standards for patrons, employees and entertainers. The following standards of conduct must be adhered to by patrons, entertainers and/or employees of exotic dance studios at all times adult entertainment is performed:

1. Admission to exotic dance studios under this section shall be restricted to persons of the age of eighteen (18) years or more.

2. All dances, performances, or exhibitions by an entertainer shall occur on the entertainment performance areas intended for that purpose described in KCC 5.10.110(A).

3. No dances, performances, or exhibitions by an entertainer shall occur closer than ten (10) feet to any patron.

4. No patron shall go into or upon the adult entertainment performance area described in KCC 5.10.110(A) while adult entertainment is being performed.

5. No patron, employee or entertainer shall be nude on the premises and no entertainer shall perform adult entertainment as defined in this chapter or otherwise entertain while nude except on the entertainment performance area described in KCC 5.10.110(A).

6. No patron, employee or entertainer shall allow, encourage, or knowingly permit any person upon the premises to touch, caress, or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus, pubic area, or genitals of any other person.

7. No patron, employee or entertainer shall allow, encourage, or permit physical contact between an employee or entertainer and any member of the public, which contact is intended to arouse or excite sexual desires.

8. No employee or entertainer shall perform acts in a lewd or obscene fashion or perform acts of or acts which simulate:

a. Specified sexual activities as defined in this chapter; or

b. The touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks or genitals.

9. No entertainer employed or otherwise working at an exotic dance studio shall solicit any gratuity or other payment from a patron or customer.

10. No customer or patron of an adult entertainment business shall directly pay or give any gratuity or other payment to any entertainer.

11. It is unlawful for any entertainer, manager, employee, or waitperson to perform more than one (1) such function at an exotic dance studio on the same business day.

12. It is unlawful for any entertainer to use any stage name or nickname not listed in the application for entertainer’s license.

13. No exotic dance studio licensee shall employ as an entertainer a person under the age of eighteen (18) years or a person not licensed pursuant to this chapter.

14. No exotic dance studio licensee shall service, sell, distribute, or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee.

B. The responsibilities of the manager of an exotic dance studio shall include but are not limited to:

1. A licensed manager shall be on duty at an exotic dance studio at all times adult entertainment is being provided or members of the public are present on the premises. The name and license of the manager shall be prominently posted during business hours. Managers shall be required to verify and ensure that entertainers possess a current and valid entertainer’s license available for immediate inspection on the premises.

2. The licensed manager on duty shall not be an entertainer.

3. The manager licensed under this chapter shall maintain visual observation of each member of the public at all times any entertainer is present in the public or performance area of the exotic dance studio. Where there is more than one (1) performance area, or the performance area is of such size or configuration that one (1) manager or assistant manager is unable to visually observe, at all times, each adult entertainer, each employee, and each member of the public, a manager or assistant manager licensed under this chapter shall be provided for each public or performance area or portion of a public or performance area visually separated from other portions of the exotic dance studio.

4. The manager shall be responsible for and shall assure that the actions of members of the public, the adult entertainers and all other employees shall comply with the dress code and conduct set forth in this section and all other requirements of this chapter.

C. Violation/penalty. Any violation of the provisions of this section by a patron, owner, operator, manager, or any employee is a misdemeanor as set forth in this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 3221, § 1, 4-18-95; Ord. No. 3475, § 3, 10-5-99)


5.10.130 Regulations applicable to adult arcades, adult motion picture theaters and other adult entertainment businesses providing onsite entertainment.

A. Specifications.

1. The licensee shall not permit any doors to public areas on the premises to be locked during business hours.

2. Any room or area on such premises shall be readily accessible at all times for inspection by any law enforcement officer or license inspector.

B. Additional specifications applicable to adult arcades.

1. The interior of the show premises shall be arranged in such a manner as to ensure that patrons are fully visible from the waist down, and all persons viewing such panorama pictures shall be visible from the common areas of such premises.

2. No more than one (1) patron at a time shall be present in a booth, cubicle, room, or stall wherein adult entertainment is provided.

3. The licensee shall maintain, at a minimum, illumination as required in this chapter for exotic dance studios generally distributed in all parts of the premises at all times when the facility is open or when the public is permitted to enter or remain therein.

C. Standards of conduct.

1. Admission shall be restricted to persons of the age of eighteen (18) years or more and it shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager or employee of an adult arcade to knowingly permit or allow any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be in or upon such premises.

2. No patron shall be unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing so as to be in a state of nudity or engage in any specified sexual activity and no owner, operator, manager or employee shall knowingly allow such conduct in or upon the premises.

3. Violation/penalty. Any violation of the provisions of this subsection by a patron, owner, operator, manager, or any employee is a misdemeanor as set forth in this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 3221, § 1, 4-18-95)


5.10.140 Regulations applicable to stores, novelty stores, video stores and other businesses whether or not qualifying as adult entertainment establishments.

A. Bookstores, novelty stores, video stores, and other businesses that sell or otherwise distribute books, magazines, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description or simulation of “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities,” whether or not such businesses qualify as an adult entertainment establishment pursuant to KCC 5.10.030(B)(3), shall be subject to the following regulations:

1. All such items as are described above shall be physically segregated and closed off from other portions of the store so that these items are not visible and/or accessible from other portions of the store where non-adult entertainment material, if any, is displayed, sold or rented.

2. No advertising for such items shall be posted or otherwise visible, except where such items are authorized for display. 

3. Signs readable at a distance of twenty (20) feet shall be posted at the entrance to the business or the area where such items are displayed stating that persons under the age of eighteen (18) are not allowed access to the area where such items are displayed. 

4. The manager or attendant shall take responsible steps to monitor the area where such items are displayed to insure that persons under eighteen (18) years of age do not access the age-restricted area. 

5. Employees of such businesses shall check identification of persons appearing to be eighteen (18) or under to insure that such items are not rented or sold to persons under the age of eighteen (18). 

B. Rental or sale of obscene material (as defined by state law) or material harmful to minors (as defined by state law) to persons under eighteen (18) years of age is prohibited.

C. Violation/penalty. Any violation of the provisions of this section by an owner, operator, manager, or employee of an adult entertainment business is a misdemeanor as set forth in this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 3221, § 1, 4-18-95; Ord. No. 3475, § 4, 10-5-99)


5.10.150 Exemptions.

A. This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit:

1. Plays, operas, musicals, or other dramatic works which are not obscene;

2. Classes, seminars and lectures held for serious scientific or educational purposes; or

3. Exhibitions or dances which are not obscene.

B. For purposes of this chapter, an activity is obscene if:

1. Taken as a whole by an average person applying contemporary community standards the dominant theme of the activity appeals to a prurient interest in sex;

2. The activity portrays or depicts in a patently offensive way, as measured against community standards, representations of:

a. Ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; or

b. Masturbation, fellatio, cunnilingus, bestiality, excretory functions, or lewd exhibition of the genitals or genital area; or violent or destructive sexual acts, including but not limited to human or animal mutilation, dismemberment, rape or torture; and

3. The activity taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.

(Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 3221, § 1, 4-18-95)


5.10.160 Record keeping requirements.

A. All licenses, papers, records, and things required to be kept pursuant to this chapter shall be open to inspection by the clerk during the hours when the licensed premises are open for business, upon two (2) days’ written notice. The purpose of such inspections shall be to determine whether the licenses, papers, records, and things meet the requirements of this chapter.

B. Each adult entertainment business shall maintain and retain for a period of two (2) years the name, address, and age of each person employed or otherwise retained or allowed to perform on the premises as an adult entertainer, including independent contractors and employees. This information shall be open to inspection by the clerk during hours of operation of the business upon twenty-four (24) hours’ notice to the licensee.

C. No later than March 1 of each year, an exotic dance studio licensee shall file a verified report with the clerk showing the licensee’s gross receipts and amounts paid to entertainers for the preceding calendar year. Amounts paid to entertainers include, but are not limited to, tips patrons pay indirectly to entertainers through the adult entertainment business.

(Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 3221, § 1, 4-18-95)


5.10.170 Inspections.

In order to insure compliance with this chapter, all areas of licensed adult entertainment businesses which are open to members of the public shall be open to inspection by city agents and employees during the hours when the premises are open for business. The purpose of such inspections shall be to determine if the licensed premises are operated in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. It is hereby expressly declared that unannounced inspections are necessary to insure compliance with this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 3-7-95)


5.10.180 Hours of operation.

A. It is unlawful for any adult entertainment business premises, to be conducted, operated, or otherwise open to the public between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.

B. Violation/penalty. Any violation of the provisions of this section by the owner, operator or manager of an adult entertainment business is a misdemeanor as set forth in this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 3-7-95)


5.10.190 Appeal of license denial – Hearing.

A. Notice. Any person aggrieved by the action of the clerk in refusing to issue or renew any license under this chapter shall have the right to appeal such action to the hearing examiner by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk within ten (10) days of notice of the refusal to issue or renew. Such appeal shall be processed pursuant to the hearing procedures set forth in Ch. 2.32 KCC. The hearing examiner shall set a date for hearing such appeal, to take place within forty-five (45) days of the date of receipt of the notice of appeal unless such time is extended by mutual consent. At such hearing, the appellant and other interested persons may appear and be heard, subject to rules and regulations of the hearing examiner. The decision of the clerk not to renew a license shall be stayed during the pendency of any appeal to the hearing examiner and during any judicial appeal.

B. Final administrative review. Appeal to the hearing examiner shall constitute final administrative review.

C. Appeal to superior court. An appeal of the decision of the hearing examiner must be filed with superior court within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the hearing examiner’s decision was personally served upon or was mailed to the person to whom the notice of civil violation was directed, or is thereafter barred.

(Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 3221, § 1, 4-18-95)


5.10.200 License suspension and revocation – Hearing.

A. Grounds. The clerk, upon the recommendation of the chief of police or other city official responsible for administering laws and regulations pertaining to any license issue under this chapter, or his/her designee, may suspend or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this chapter at any time where the same was procured by fraud or through a materially false representation of fact; or for the violation of, or failure to comply with, the provisions of this chapter or any other similar local or state law by the licensee or any of his/her servants, agents or employees when the licensee knew or should have known of such acts or violations committed by its servants, agents or employees; or the conviction of the licensee, or any of his or her servants, agents, or employees, of any crime or offense involving prostitution, promoting prostitution, sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape, distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors, or transactions involving controlled substances (as that term is defined in Chapter 69.50 RCW) committed on the premises of the adult entertainment business.

B. Suspension and revocation. A license procured by fraud or misrepresentation shall be revoked. Where other violations of this chapter or other applicable ordinances, statutes or regulations are found, the license shall be suspended for a period of thirty (30) days upon the first such violation, ninety (90) days upon the second violation within a twenty-four (24) month period, and revoked for third and subsequent violations within a twenty-four (24) month period, not including periods of suspension; except that where the city building official or fire marshall or their designees or the King County health department find that any condition exists upon the premises of an adult entertainment business which constitutes a threat of immediate serious injury or damage to persons or property, said official may immediately suspend any license issued under this chapter pending a hearing in accordance with KCC 5.10.190 above. The official shall issue notice setting forth the basis for the action and the facts that constitute a threat of immediate serious injury or damage to persons or property.

C. Notice. The clerk shall provide at least ten (10) days’ prior written notice to the licensee of the decision to suspend or revoke the license. Such notice shall inform the licensee of the right to appeal the decision to the hearing examiner and shall state the effective date of such revocation or suspension and the grounds for revocation or suspension. Such appeal shall be filed with the clerk within ten (10) days of said notice and shall be processed pursuant to the hearing procedures set forth in Ch. 2.32 KCC. The hearing examiner shall set a date for hearing such appeal, to take place within forty-five (45) days of the date of receipt of the notice of appeal unless such time is extended by mutual consent. At such hearing the appellant and other interested persons may appear and be heard, subject to rules and regulations of the hearing examiner. The decision of the clerk shall be stayed during the pendency of any appeal to the hearing examiner and during any judicial appeal.

D. Final administrative review. Appeal to the hearing examiner shall constitute final administrative review.

E. Appeal to superior court. An appeal of the decision of the hearing examiner must be filed with the superior court within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the hearing examiner’s decision was personally served upon or was mailed to the person to whom the notice of suspension or revocation was directed, or is thereafter barred.

(Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 3221, § 1, 4-18-95; Ord. No. 3475, § 5, 10-5-99)


5.10.210 Nuisance declared.

A. Public nuisance. Any adult entertainment business operated, conducted, or maintained in violation of this chapter or any law of the city of Kent or the state of Washington shall be, and the same is, declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of any other remedies set forth in this chapter, commence an action to enjoin, remove or abate such nuisance in the manner provided by law and shall take such other steps and apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such public nuisance, and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment business contrary to the provisions of this chapter.

B. Moral nuisance. Any adult entertainment business operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of Chapter 7.48A RCW, moral nuisance, shall be, and the same is declared to be, unlawful and a public and moral nuisance and the city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of any other remedies set forth herein, commence an action or actions, to abate, remove and enjoin such public and moral nuisance, or impose a civil penalty, in the manner provided by Chapter 7.48A RCW.

(Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 3-7-95)


5.10.220 Limitation of liability.

None of the provisions of this chapter are intended to create a cause of action or provide the basis for a claim against the city, its officials, or employees for the performance or the failure to perform a duty or obligation running to a specific individual or specific individuals. Any duty or obligation created herein is intended to be a general duty or obligation running in favor of the general public.

(Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 3-7-95)


5.10.230 Violation – Penalty – Misdemeanor.

In addition to other remedies provided for in this chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter constituting a misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, and each and every day during which any violation is committed, continued or permitted shall be deemed a separate offense; provided, no person shall be deemed guilty of any violation of this chapter if acting in an investigative capacity pursuant to the request or order of the police chief or prosecuting attorney or duly appointed agent thereof.

(Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 3-7-95)


5.10.240 Additional enforcement.

The remedies found in this chapter are not exclusive, and the city may seek any other legal or equitable relief, including but not limited to enjoining any acts or practices which constitute or will constitute a violation of any business license ordinance or other regulations herein adopted.

(Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 3-7-95)


5.10.250 Severability.

If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter should be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter. Any ordinance or regulation in conflict with this chapter is hereby repealed.

(Ord. No. 3214, § 1, 3-7-95)


Chapter 5.11 AMBULANCES*

Sections:

5.11.010    Purpose. 

5.11.020    Definitions.

5.11.030    Administration of licensing.

5.11.040    Conditions of a business license. 

5.11.050    Response criteria. 

5.11.060    Business license required for each ambulance company. 

5.11.070    Application for business license – Issuance. 

5.11.080    License renewal. 

5.11.090    Licenses not transferable. 

5.11.100    Denial, revocation or suspension of business license. 

5.11.110    Insurance and identification. 

5.11.120    State license and standards and requirements. 

5.11.130    Ambulance attendants. 

5.11.140    Verification. 

5.11.150    Rates to be filed. 

5.11.160    Community events. 

5.11.170    Violations – Penalties – Misdemeanor. 

5.11.180    Additional enforcement. 

*Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3214, § 2, adopted Mar. 7, 1995, repealed former ch. 5.11, §§ 5.11.010 – 5.11.190, which pertained to adult entertainment. Subsequently, Ordinance No. 3341, § 1, April 2, 1997, added a new chapter 5.11.


5.11.010 Purpose.

The city council declared it to be in the public interest and for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city and its environs to provide for the highest level of emergency medical services reasonably practicable. The city council finds it to be in the public interest to provide for the inspection, regulation and control of emergency medical services to achieve high standards and thereby to eliminate inadequate, improper and harmful practices that may endanger the health and safety of the people. The city council also designates the chief of the fire department as the city’s representative with respect to matters of emergency medical services and the coordination of health care issues to collate with the fire department provision of emergency medical services, health care services and transport. Such issues include but are not limited to the fire department responsibilities to be the city’s prime provider of emergency medical services, along with related health care and transportation issues which must be coordinated to deliver our overall quality of emergency medical services (Advanced Life Support, Basic Life Support and relationships with related health care providers).

(Ord. No. 3341, § 1, 4-2-97)


5.11.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

Ambulance means any privately or publicly owned vehicle that is especially designed, constructed, equipped, maintained and licensed by Washington state for the transportation of patients who are sick, injured or otherwise incapacitated.

Aid unit means any publicly owned vehicle that is especially designed, constructed, equipped, maintained, used and licensed by the state of Washington to primarily deliver emergency medical personnel and equipment to an emergency scene. An aid unit has limited means to transport patients who are sick, injured or otherwise incapacitated. This specifically relates to Kent fire department engine/aid apparatus.

Ambulance attendant means any trained or otherwise qualified individual responsible for the operation of an ambulance and the care of the patients, whether or not the medical attendant also serves as a driver, who is the holder of a valid certificate issued under this chapter.

Ambulance company means any person corporation or other legal entity who operates an ambulance for hire.

Business license or license means a license to operate an ambulance company within the city.

Business license clerk means such city employees or agents as the mayor shall designate to issue and administer business licenses under this chapter, or any designee thereof.

City means city of Kent.

City clerk means the city clerk of the city of Kent designated as the official keeper of records.

Fire department or department means the fire department of the city.

Fire official means the fire chief or the fire chief’s designee to perform the duties provided for in this chapter.

Patient means an individual who is sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless.

Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate an ambulance company within the city has been issued as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license.

Person means any individual, firm, joint venture, co-partnership association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

(Ord. No. 3341, § 1, 4-2-97)


5.11.030 Administration of licensing.

The business license clerk, subject to a review and recommendation from the fire official, is responsible for issuing, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending, and canceling business licenses to operate aid ambulance company within the city. The fire official is responsible for ascertaining whether a proposed application complies with all the requirements enumerated herein and all other applicable codes and regulations now in effect or as amended or enacted subsequent to the effective date of this chapter. The fire official shall make all necessary investigations and inspections for enforcement of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3341, § 1, 4-2-97)


5.11.040 Conditions of a business license.

The fire official is responsible for ascertaining whether a proposed application complies with all the requirements enumerated herein and all other applicable codes and regulations now in effect or as amended or enacted subsequent to the effective date of this chapter. The fire official shall make all necessary investigations and inspections for enforcement of this chapter. As a condition of issuance of a business license, the operator of each ambulance company consents to the following:

1. The fire official shall be permitted to make regular inspections of any ambulance company operating under a business license issued, at all reasonable hours, with or without advance notice, upon the presentation of appropriate credentials to an authorized representative of the company, and shall make such reports relative to conditions existing at such times and in such manner as the fire official may direct.

2. The fire official is given authority to determine whether and to what extent an ambulance rotation list, fire department units, sole contract/franchise approach or a mix of the above will be utilized to transport patients from an emergency medical scene. The fire official is authorized to establish procedures, guidelines and contracts for implementing the above mentioned approaches for emergency medical service transport.

3. The fire official shall be the final authority to determine if an ambulance company should be added to or removed from the fire department rotation list.

4. It is recognized that the fire department currently transports patients where it serves the interest of the public. The fire official shall determine the distribution of transportation responsibilities as it relates to calls within the scope of the fire department’s responsibilities.

5. Further, the fire department is authorized to provide transport, preventative and cooperative medical services to serve the interests and needs of our citizens. It is recognized that this may be done in conjunction with other health care providers in order to manage the risk to our citizens and to control the rate of growth in the demand for EMS services.

6. It is understood that a significant expansion of services shall be reviewed by city administration and any significant additional program costs are subject to council approval.

7. In the future, if it is determined that it would best serve the interests of the city to provide ALS services in lieu of the county, the fire department shall be designated as the provider and/or coordinator of ALS services. Such a program change would be subject to review and approval of the mayor and city council.

(Ord. No. 3341, § 1, 4-2-97)


5.11.050 Response criteria.

A. The city shall be the first response provider of emergency medical services (EMS). Ambulance companies receiving a direct request for EMS services shall notify the fire department’s 9-1-1 communications center immediately so that a fire department first response can be initiated. The only exception to this requirement shall be for the transport of stable patients from one (1) medical facility to another and routine medical transports and exams.

B. The 9-1-1 system must be activated for all pre-hospital EMS primary examinations and unstable patient care.

C. The department shall establish ambulance response criteria and make such criteria known to each ambulance company at the time of application and renewal of business license. Application for a business license does not automatically qualify an ambulance company to be on the rotation list for the fire department for ambulance services.

D. Each ambulance company shall submit a response report quarterly or on demand of the fire official outlining compliance with the response criteria.

(Ord. No. 3341, § 1, 4-2-97)


5.11.060 Business license required for each ambulance company.

Every person who operates an ambulance company within the city shall be required to obtain a business license from the business license clerk. An ambulance company operates within the city if it is:

A. Stationed within the corporate limits of the city; or

B. Dispatched from within or without the corporate limits of the city and repeatedly or customarily makes trips for hire within the city to pick up injured or sick fares; or

C. Making any trips into the city for hire to pick up injured or sick fares after occasional or repeated advertising, within the city, for such service.

The business license shall be renewed on an annual basis. The business license clerk shall not issue such business license unless the applicant has fulfilled all requirements of this chapter and any applicable provisions of the state law relating to personnel, equipment and operations including but not limited to Chapter 18.73 RCW and Chapter 246-976 WAC as now or hereafter amended. Provided, that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any ambulance which shall pass through the city in the delivery of fares picked up at points beyond the corporate limits of the city.

(Ord. No. 3341, § 1, 4-2-97)


5.11.070 Application for business license – Issuance.

A. Application for a business license to operate an ambulance company shall be made upon forms provided by the city and shall contain:

1. Name, home address and telephone number of the applicant;

2. Business name under which the ambulance company will be operated within the city, and business address and telephone number;

3. The number of ambulances to be initially placed in service within the city;

4. The number of licensed ambulance attendants initially to be employed;

5. A roster of ambulances to be used in the city with proof that each ambulance is currently licensed as an ambulance by the state of Washington;

6. A roster of certified ambulance attendants with proof that each attendant is currently certified as an emergency medical technician (EMT) by the state of Washington (including certification expiration date);

7. Proof that ambulances and personnel are verified trauma providers as provided in Chapter 246-976 WAC;

8. Certificate of insurance as required by the city; and

9. The schedule of rates.

B. Prior to the issuance of a business license, the application and all pertinent records shall be reviewed by the fire official to ensure compliance with the license requirements under this chapter, as well as, any rules or regulations referenced herein or issued hereunder. Upon written approval of the application by the fire chief or the chief’s designee and the payment of fees, the business license clerk shall issue an ambulance operator’s business license. All equipment proposed for use shall be subjected to random inspection by the designated fire official, who shall determine whether said records and equipment conform to all the requirements of this chapter.

C. Business license fee. The business license fee schedule for issuance and renewal of business licenses under this chapter shall be that currently charged for general business licenses under Ch. 5.01 KCC until such time as the city council may, by resolution, modify the fee schedule.

(Ord. No. 3341, § 1, 4-2-97)


5.11.080 License renewal.

The business license clerk shall mail the forms for application of business license renewals to business enterprises in the city to the last address provided to the director by the licensee. Failure of the business enterprise to receive any such form shall not excuse the business enterprise from making application for and securing the required license or renewal, or for payment of the license fee when and as due hereunder.

(Ord. No. 3341, § 1, 4-2-97)


5.11.090 Licenses not transferable.

No business license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable or assignable unless otherwise specifically provided for; except that a license may be transferred when a business changes its structure of ownership, provided, however, that a new license shall be required upon a substantial change of ownership whereby those primarily accountable for the business have changed or upon a substantial change in the type of business operated, whereby the primary business being conducted has significantly changed.

(Ord. No. 3341, § 1, 4-2-97)


5.11.100 Denial, revocation or suspension of business license.

A. Grounds. The issuance of a business license to operate an ambulance company may be denied, or such license may be suspended or revoked by the business license clerk, upon the recommendation of the designated fire official when the public interest will be served thereby, upon any of the following grounds:

1. The license was procured by fraud, false representation, or material omission of fact, or for the violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter by the person holding such license, or any of his servants, agents, or employees, while acting within the scope of their employment; or

2. The licensee violates any applicable city, state, or federal law, or the purpose for which the license was issued is being abused to the detriment of the public, or such license is being used for a purpose different from that for which it was issued; or

3. Overcharging of customer rates set forth in the company’s schedule of rates filed with the city clerk or fraudulent billing; or

4. Failure to maintain ambulances and equipment to the standards set forth in Chapter 246-976 WAC; or

5. Repeated complaints by citizens of poor customer service such as rudeness, misrepresentation, unprofessional behavior, etc.

B. Suspension and revocation. A business license procured by fraud or misrepresentation shall be revoked. Where other violations of this chapter or other applicable ordinances, statutes, or regulations are found, the license shall be suspended for a period of thirty (30) days upon the first such violation, ninety (90) days upon the second violation within a twenty-four (24) month period, and revoked for a third and subsequent violation within a twenty-four (24) month period, not including periods of suspension, except that where the fire official finds that any situation exists in licensee’s operations which constitutes a threat of immediate serious injury or damage to persons or property, the business license clerk may immediately suspend any license issued under this chapter, pending a hearing in accordance with this section. The business license clerk shall issue a notice setting forth the basis for the action and the facts that constitute a threat of immediate serious injury or damage to persons or property.

C. Notice. Except when a business license is immediately suspended as set forth in subparagraph (B) above, the business license clerk shall provide at least ten (10) days’ prior written notice to the licensee of the decision to suspend or revoke the license. Such notice shall inform the licensee of the right to appeal the decision to the hearing examiner and shall state the effective date of such revocation or suspension under grounds for revocation or suspension. An appeal at the denial, suspension or revocation of a business license shall be made within thirty (30) days of notice of such denial, suspension or revocation. Such appeal shall be processed pursuant to the hearing procedures set forth in Ch. 2.32 KCC. The hearing examiner shall set a date for hearing such appeal, to take place within forty-five (45) days of the date of the receipt of the notice of appeal unless such time is extended by mutual consent. At such hearing, the appellant and any other interested persons may appear and be heard, subject to the rules and regulations of the hearing examiner. The decision of the business license clerk shall be stayed during the pendency of any appeal to the hearing examiner and during any appeal unless the license was immediately suspended pursuant to subparagraph (B) above.

D. Final administrative review. Appeal to the hearing examiner shall constitute final administrative review.

E. Appeal to superior court. An appeal of the decision of the hearing examiner must be filed with the superior court within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the hearing examiner’s decision was personally served upon or was mailed to the person to whom the notice of denial, suspension or revocation was directed or is thereafter barred.

(Ord. No. 3341, § 1, 4-2-97)


5.11.110 Insurance and identification.

No ambulance operator’s business license shall be issued, nor shall such license be valid after issuance, nor shall any ambulance be operated in the city, unless the operator maintains a policy or policies of insurance against claims for injuries to persons or damages to property which may arise from or in connection with the performance of activities associated with the operation of the ambulance company. Such insurance shall name the city as an additional insured. The ambulance company shall also indemnify and hold the city harmless from any causes of action arising from the operation of the ambulance company. The minimum scope and limits of coverage shall be set by the city’s risk manager or other person designated by the mayor. Evidence of such insurance shall accompany the application for license and shall be maintained on a continuous basis through subsequent license renewal periods.

(Ord. No. 3341, § 1, 4-2-97)


5.11.120 State license and standards and requirements.

All ambulances operating in the city must be licensed by the state and must meet the standards and requirements set forth in Chapter 246-976 WAC, as now or hereafter amended. Proof of a state license as a transport ambulance must be provided with any application for a city business license for each transport vehicle.

(Ord. No. 3341, § 1, 4-2-97)


5.11.130 Ambulance attendants.

Each ambulance company shall have, for each ambulance in service, on duty and available for immediate response, two (2) ambulance attendants who are currently certified as emergency medical technicians (EMT), as provided in Chapter 246-976 WAC. A certificate of license shall be carried on the person of each ambulance attendant while on duty.

(Ord. No. 3341, § 1, 4-2-97)


5.11.140 Verification.

Any ambulance company operating in the city must be a verified trauma provider and must meet the requirements for personnel and equipment as required in Chapter 246-976 WAC for trauma providers. The ambulance company must specifically be authorized to act as a trauma provider by the Seattle/King County trauma council or successor.

(Ord. No. 3341, § 1, 4-2-97)


5.11.150 Rates to be filed.

Each ambulance company applying for a business license or renewal of license pursuant to this chapter shall, at the time of filing its application therefor, file with the city clerk its schedule of rates to be charged for services during the license period for which application is made. Such schedule or rates shall be a matter of public record open to public inspection in the city clerk’s office during normal city business hours and such schedule must be adhered to by the licensee throughout the period for which the license is issued.

(Ord. No. 3341, § 1, 4-2-97)


5.11.160 Community events.

When an ambulance company is contracted to provide emergency medical standby (i.e., 10K Fun Runs, etc.) by community event promoters, the following conditions shall apply:

1. The ambulance company shall notify the fire official in writing fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the event, or as soon to the event as reasonably possible, stating the date, time and scope of standby responsibilities.

2. Ambulance companies engaging in standby activities shall notify the fire department’s 9-1-1 communications center immediately on all advanced life support/life threatening or significant basic life support calls as required pursuant to subsection (3). Calls will be considered significant based upon extent of injury/illness or when there are multiple patients (more than three (3)).

3. Ambulance company standby for handling basic life support calls must obtain prior approval and parameters for care set by the fire official.

4. All EMS activity provided by the ambulance company at such events shall be documented and a report forwarded to the fire official within one (1) week subsequent to the completion of the event.

(Ord. No. 3341, § 1, 4-2-97)


5.11.170 Violations – Penalties – Misdemeanor.

In addition to other remedies provided for in this chapter, any person who operates an ambulance company within the city without a business license as required in KCC 5.11.060 above, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such find and imprisonment at each and every day during which any violation is committed, continued or permitted, shall be deemed a separate offense.

(Ord. No. 3341, § 1, 4-2-97)


5.11.180 Additional enforcement.

The remedies found in this chapter are not exclusive. The city may seek any other legal or equitable relief, including but not limited to enjoining any acts or practices which constitute or will constitute a violation of any business license, ordinance, or other regulations herein adopted.

(Ord. No. 3341, § 1, 4-2-97)


Chapter 5.12 PUBLIC DANCES AND DANCE HALLS*

Sections:

5.12.010    Definitions. 

5.12.020    License required – Fee – Renewals. 

5.12.030    License exemption and waiver of payment. 

5.12.040    License application. 

5.12.050    License criteria for approval – Reapplications. 

5.12.060    Conditions upon issuance of license – Review of operations. 

5.12.070    Appeal from denial or conditions. 

5.12.080    Security personnel required. 

5.12.090    Litter control – Security for cleanup. 

5.12.100    Loitering on premises prohibited. 

5.12.110    Area for waiting for admission entrance and security. 

5.12.120    Revocation or suspension of license. 

5.12.130    Age restrictions. 

5.12.140    Hours of operation. 

5.12.150    Readmission fee. 

5.12.160    Access by police and fire officers. 

5.12.170    License limited to licensee and location. 

5.12.180    Applicability. 

5.12.190    Violations.

*Cross reference(s) – Licenses for premises where dancing is permitted, § 5.02.070.

State law reference(s) – Dance hall regulations, RCW 35.23.440.


5.12.010 Definitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Public dance means any dance that is open to the public and which is conducted for a profit, directly or indirectly; or requires a monetary payment or contribution from the persons admitted. The term “public dance” does not include a banquet, party or celebration conducted for invited guests which is not open to the public, and for which no fee or membership contribution is required. Additionally, the term “public dance” does not include any dance held by a licensed liquor establishment or at any location wherein alcoholic beverages are legally served, sold, dispensed or permitted on the premises. It is the intent that such dances be governed by the appropriate provisions of RCW Title 66 and all other pertinent laws and regulations including but not limited to KCC 5.02.070.

Dance hall means any place or premises where a public dance is conducted, including but not limited to all hallways, bathrooms and all adjoining enclosed areas accessible to the public or any patron during the dance.

Police chief means the city police chief or his designee.

Fire chief means the city fire chief or his designee.

(Ord. No. 2839, § 1(5.35.010), 3-7-89)

Cross reference(s) – Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.01.030.


5.12.020 License required – Fee – Renewals.

A. It is unlawful for any person to conduct a public dance within the city without first having obtained and being the holder of a valid and subsisting license for such activity, to be known as a public dance license. The annual fee for a public dance license is one hundred fifty dollars ($150). A limited license for a single event is twenty-five dollars ($25) per event day, but no more than three (3) limited licenses shall be obtained in any calendar month or more than six (6) limited licenses in any calendar year unless the full annual license has been paid.

B. The entire annual license fee shall be paid for the applicable calendar year regardless of when the application for license is made. The license fee shall not be prorated for any part of the year except that if the original application for license is made subsequent to June 30, the license fee for the remainder of that year shall be one-half of the annual license fee. Annual license renewals shall be obtained and paid in full by January 1 of each calendar year.

C. There shall be assessed and collected by the finance director an additional charge of fifty dollars ($50), on renewal applications not made when due, including payment of the required fee, on or before January 31 of each calendar year.

D. Failure to obtain license renewal and to pay all required fees by January 31 shall result in suspension and/or revocation of the license pursuant to KCC 5.12.120.

(Ord. No. 2839, § 1(5.35.020), 3-7-89)


5.12.030 License exemption and waiver of payment.

A. A license is not required under this chapter if the dance is conducted by the city or by a public and/or private school licensed by the state.

B. The police chief or his designee shall have the right to waive the requirement of payment of the license fee in the case of any dance open to the public which is conducted for a charitable purpose by a nonprofit, tax exempt organization, corporation or association recognized as exempt from federal income tax pursuant to the internal revenue code. Application for a fee waiver shall be made no less than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the dance for which a license is sought.

(Ord. No. 2839, § 1(5.35.030), 3-7-89)


5.12.040 License application.

A. Applications for any license pursuant to this chapter shall be submitted in writing to the finance director upon such forms as the police chief may prescribe at least thirty (30) days prior to the first dance. In addition to other information requested, application forms shall contain the name and place of residence of the applicant and owner, if different than applicant, the address and description of the premises to be licensed and the time and date of the dance or dances to be held. The finance director must be notified within ten (10) days of any changes in the information required in this section.

B. The applicant shall be required to maintain comprehensive liability insurance for the establishment with minimum coverage in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000). Certificate of insurance as evidence of coverage shall be provided to the city at time of application. Applicant shall provide to the city notification of any changes in such coverage within fifteen (15) days of any changes. This shall not apply to applicants for single events.

C. All applications shall be referred to the police chief who shall conduct an investigation as to the truth of the statements contained therein and investigate all other matters pertaining to the criteria for license approval set forth in this chapter. The chief of police shall confer with the finance director as to the results of such investigation, as well as his other findings as to whether the criteria for obtaining a public dance license have been met.

(Ord. No. 2839, § 1(5.35.040), 3-7-89)


5.12.050 License criteria for approval – Reapplications.

A. The finance director shall grant a license unless he finds that one (1) or more of the following conditions exist:

1. The building, structure, equipment or location of the business or dance for which license is sought does not comply with the requirements or fails to meet the standards of the applicable health, zoning, building, fire safety or other applicable laws and ordinances of the state, King County and the city or the requirements of this chapter;

2. The applicant or any of the applicant’s employers, officers, directors, partners, operators, employees or any other person involved in the operation or business of the dance or dance hall has been convicted within the last five (5) years of:

a. A felony involving a crime of violence as defined in RCW 9.41.010(2) as it now exists or as hereafter amended or any felony under Chapters 9A.44, 9A.64, 9A.88 or 69.50 RCW; or

b. A crime involving prostitution, promoting prostitution, prostitution loitering or lewd conduct or assault on a juvenile.

B. Any applicant denied a license may reapply and be granted a license if the applicant can show that the basis for such denial no longer exists or may appeal such denial pursuant to KCC 5.12.070.

C. Applications for renewal of a license issued under this chapter shall be processed and considered according to the criteria for initial issuance of the license.

(Ord. No. 2839, § 1(5.35.050), 3-7-89)


5.12.060 Conditions upon issuance of license – Review of operations.

A. At the time of granting a license or license renewal pursuant to this chapter, the finance director, when authorized by the code or state or federal law, rule or regulation may impose such conditions as necessary to adequately protect the public health, safety and general welfare.

B. The police chief shall review the operations of all public dance halls approximately six (6) months after commencement of business to determine whether additional or revised conditions are needed to protect the public welfare. The licensee shall be given notice of all proposed additional conditions and an opportunity to be heard concerning the conditions pursuant to KCC 5.12.070.

(Ord. No. 2839, § 1(5.35.060), 3-7-89)


5.12.070 Appeal from denial or conditions.

A. When the finance director refuses to grant or renew a license or grants or renews a license with conditions, the city shall notify the applicant in writing and shall inform the applicant of his right to a hearing before the land use hearing examiner by the applicant filing a written notice of appeal which contains a specific statement of the reasons for the appeal with the land use hearing examiner within ten (10) days of the date of the notice from the finance director.

B. If the applicant timely files a notice of appeal, the applicant shall be afforded a hearing before the hearing examiner at which time the applicant shall be afforded an opportunity to show that the conditions imposed are arbitrary and capricious or that the reasons for denial of the license do not justify the denial. After the hearing, the hearing examiner shall determine whether the applicant has shown reason to revise the conditions or to issue the license and shall issue its final findings of fact, conclusions of law and decision within ten (10) days of the date of the hearing. Any aggrieved party may appeal the hearing examiner’s decision by seeking, within fourteen (14) days of the date of the decision, a writ of review from the superior court.

(Ord. No. 2839, § 1(5.35.070), 3-7-89)


5.12.080 Security personnel required.

A. It shall be the obligation of every person licensed under this chapter to insure that an adequate number of qualified security personnel are employed and in attendance before, during and following each public dance as is necessary in order to maintain order and insure compliance with the laws of the state and ordinances of the city. A minimum of two (2) security persons shall be required for up to the first two hundred (200) persons in attendance; thereafter one (1) additional security person for each additional one hundred (100) persons in attendance shall be required.

B. If the police chief determines extra security is necessary because of past incidents at the dance hall which threaten public safety, health or welfare or threats or evidence of future incidents that threaten public safety, health or welfare, the police chief shall have the right to require that security personnel for the establishment include a minimum of two (2) persons trained as law enforcement personnel, which may include off-duty police officers approved by the police chief. Additionally, the police chief may require that at no time shall fewer than twenty-five (25) percent of the security personnel have training as law enforcement personnel or similar training as approved by the police chief. Those security personnel not having law enforcement training must have received formal training in crowd control by an agency not associated with the licensee as approved by the police chief. Decrease in hours of operation, and/or an increase in security personnel may also be required. Any decision of the police chief to require extra security personnel may be appealed to the hearing examiner in the manner described in KCC 5.12.070.

(Ord. No. 2839, § 1(5.35.080), 3-7-89)


5.12.090 Litter control – Security for cleanup.

A. Prior to issuance of any public dance license, a cash security deposit in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200) or bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000) shall be submitted to the finance director as security for the cleanup of all litter resulting from any public dance authorized by the license. If the licensee fails to clean up all litter on any public or private property which results from any public dance conducted by the licensee within twenty-four (24) hours of the end of the dance, the city may cause such litter to be cleaned up and pay the costs of the clean up out of the security funds. Litter resulting from the public dance shall be limited to that occurring within a one (1) block radius of the location of the dance unless clearly identified with the dance. If the cost of the clean up exceeds the amount of funds on deposit, the licensee shall pay such excess costs.

B. In the event funds are expended out of a security deposit required by this section, the licensee shall, within five (5) days of receipt of written notice of such expenditure, submit the amount necessary to replenish the security fund to the amount of the full security deposit. No renewal license shall be issued unless the full amount of the security deposit for litter clean up is on deposit with the city at the time of the application for renewal. If funds sufficient to replenish the fund are not received within five (5) days of receipt of written notice, then the dance hall license shall be suspended until sufficient funds are received. Within the five (5) days of receipt of notice of deficiency, the dance hall licensee may inform the finance director in writing of circumstances justifying nonpayment of additional funds which information shall be considered by the finance director and the license shall not be suspended if the nonpayment is justified.

C. If the funds for security for cleanup are fully expended within any one (1) week period, or if the funds for cleanup fall below one hundred dollars ($100) twice in any quarter or five (5) times in any year, the finance director shall require an additional cash deposit of not less than two hundred dollars ($200) and not more than the greatest one (1) week expenditure for cleanup during the prior year.

D. Upon termination of all activities authorized by a public dance license and clean up of all litter resulting from such activity, the remainder of all funds deposited as security for litter clean up shall be refunded to the licensee, without interest.

(Ord. No. 2839, § 1(5.35.090), 3-7-89)


5.12.100 Loitering on premises prohibited.

It shall be the obligation of each person issued a license under this chapter to use best efforts to prevent loitering of all persons on the premises of the dance hall, including all parking lot and driveway areas used by patrons of the dance hall. Loitering shall not include walking between the entrance to the public dance and parked vehicles, nor shall it include the act of waiting in line to gain admission to the dance including both inside and outside the dance hall premises. The licensee shall use every best effort to cooperate with the police department for removal of loiterers by enforcement of criminal trespass charges against loiterers. Failure by the licensee to cooperate shall be grounds for possible revocation and/or suspension of license.

(Ord. No. 2839, § 1(5.35.100), 3-7-89)


5.12.110 Area for waiting for admission entrance and security.

A. A dance hall shall provide an area, which area is not part of the public right-of-way or sidewalks, where patrons may wait for admission to the dance hall. This area shall be clearly marked. The number of persons permitted in this area shall be limited to a number of persons reasonably likely to obtain admission to the dance hall within thirty (30) minutes considering the normal rate of turnover of patrons within the dance hall. At no time shall the number of patrons waiting exceed the permitted occupancy load of the dance hall as established by the fire code and fire marshal. The dance hall operator shall provide security personnel to control the waiting area one (1) hour before opening and throughout the hours of operation. The security personnel shall use their best efforts to prevent persons seeking admission but not permitted in the waiting area from congregating on the public right-of-way and sidewalks, and the security personnel shall require such persons to leave the property under control of the dance hall.

B. All persons admitted to the dance hall shall be admitted through a single entrance so that the occupancy load can be monitored.

C. The licensee and management of any dance hall shall prohibit any person under the influence of intoxicants or drugs from entering the dance hall and shall expel any person under such condition if found within the premises.

(Ord. No. 2839, § 1(5.35.110), 3-7-89)


5.12.120 Revocation or suspension of license.

A. After giving notice to the licensee of the right to a hearing pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter, and conducting a hearing if a timely request is filed, the finance director may suspend or revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter where one (1) or more of the following conditions exist:

1. The license was procured by fraud or false representation of material fact in the application or in any report or record required to be filed;

2. The building, structure, equipment or location of the business or dance for which the license was issued does not comply with the requirements or fails to meet the standards of the applicable health, zoning, building, fire and safety laws and ordinances of the state, King County and the city or the requirements of this chapter;

3. The applicant or any of the applicant’s officers, directors, partners, operators, or with the applicant’s actual or imputed knowledge employees or any other person involved in the operation of the dance or dance hall has been convicted within the last five (5) years of:

a. A felony involving a crime of violence (as defined in RCW 9.41.010(2) as it now exists or as hereafter amended) or any felony under Chapters 9A.44, 9A.64, 9A.88 or 69.50 RCW; or

b. A crime involving prostitution, promoting prostitution, prostitution loitering or lewd conduct, or assault on a juvenile.

4. The licensee or his employee, agent, partner, employer, director, officer or manager has knowingly allowed or permitted:

a. A felony involving a crime of violence, as defined in RCW 9.41.010(2) as it now exists or as hereafter amended or any felony under Chapters 9A.44, 9A.64, 9A.88 or 69.50 RCW to occur in or upon the dance hall premises;

b. A crime involving prostitution, promoting prostitution, prostitution loitering or lewd conduct or assault on a juvenile to occur in or upon the dance hall premises;

c. Any unlawful act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation to be committed in or upon the dance hall premises;

d. The dance hall premises to be used as a place in which unlawful solicitations for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation occur;

e. The possession or consumption of liquor by persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years in or upon the dance hall premises;

f. The giving or supplying of liquor to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years;

g. The use by any person in or upon the dance hall premises of marijuana, cocaine or any other controlled substance as defined in RCW 69.50.101(d), which is not prescribed by a licensed physician for use by the person possessing or using the substance;

h. Violation of any condition placed upon a license issued pursuant to this chapter or of any other applicable law or ordinance, which the finance director finds constitutes an unreasonable interference with surrounding land uses or is otherwise unreasonably detrimental to the public welfare;

i. Failure to timely file and pay any admissions tax or other fee owing to the city; or

j. Allowing any person under the influence of intoxicants or drugs onto or to remain within the premises.

B. If the finance director finds that any of the conditions set forth in this chapter exist and that the existence of such condition constitutes a threat of immediate and serious injury or damage to person or property, and such conditions can be eliminated by the licensee and notice of the conditions has been given to the licensee and at least twenty-four (24) hours have expired without the elimination of such conditions, the finance director may immediately suspend any license issued under this chapter without prior opportunity to be heard. In this event the licensee shall be entitled to appeal the decision to the hearing examiner in accordance with KCC 5.12.070. The notice of immediate suspension of license given pursuant to this subsection shall include a statement of the conditions found to exist that constitutes a threat of immediate and serious injury or damage to persons or property, and shall inform the applicant of his right to appeal within ten (10) days of the date of the notice by filing a written notice of appeal with the hearing examiner which contains a statement of the specific reasons for the appeal.

C. Revocation of any license issued under this chapter shall be accomplished pursuant to KCC 5.12.070.

D. Any decision of the finance director to revoke or suspend a dance hall license may be appealed to the hearing examiner within ten (10) days of the finance director’s decision. The appellant shall pay a seventy-five-dollar ($75) fee as a condition of filing such appeal.

E. Any aggrieved party may appeal the hearing examiner’s decision rendered under subsections (B) and (D) of this section, by seeking, within ten (10) days of the decision, a writ of review from the superior court.

(Ord. No. 2839, § 1(5.35.120), 3-7-89)


5.12.130 Age restrictions.

A. No person conducting a public dance or maintaining a public dance hall shall knowingly allow persons under the age of sixteen (16) years to enter or remain in the dance hall without a parent or legal guardian present.

B. It is the responsibility of the licensee and any other person conducting and/or operating a public dance to require identification showing the age of each person admitted. A valid state driver’s license or photo identification card issued by the State Department of Licensing shall be the only acceptable forms of proof of age.

C. Every person who knowingly or recklessly allows a person to enter or remain in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

D. Any person who affirmatively misrepresents his age to obtain admission to or permission to remain in any public dance in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

(Ord. No. 2839, § 1(5.35.130), 3-7-89)


5.12.140 Hours of operation.

No public dance shall be operated past the hour of 2:00 a.m., with the exception that on Saturday nights, dances may operate until 3:00 a.m. Sunday morning.

(Ord. No. 2839, § 1(5.35.140), 3-7-89)


5.12.150 Readmission fee.

No person conducting or operating a public dance or public dance hall shall permit any person, other than an employee, to leave the dance or dance hall and return unless that person pays a readmission fee equal to the original price of admission.

(Ord. No. 2839, § 1(5.35.150), 3-7-89)


5.12.160 Access by police and fire officers.

All police and fire officers of the city shall have free access to public dances and dance halls when a dance is being conducted, for the purpose of inspection and to enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable city, county and state health, zoning, building, fire and safety ordinances and laws.

(Ord. No. 2839, § 1(5.35.160), 3-7-89)


5.12.170 License limited to licensee and location.

Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall apply to a single licensee and to a single location only and shall not be transferable to other locations or to other persons.

(Ord. No. 2839, § 1(5.35.170), 3-7-89)


5.12.180 Applicability.

All dance halls required to be licensed by this chapter within the city shall be regulated by the provisions of this chapter, regardless of whether a public dance license or business license was obtained from the city prior to or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(Ord. No. 2839, § 1(5.35.180), 3-7-89)


5.12.190 Violations.

It shall be a misdemeanor to operate or manage a public dance in violation of the provisions of this chapter, without having first obtained a valid license, or renewal or to operate or manage a public dance when one’s license has been suspended or revoked.

(Ord. No. 2839, § 1(5.35.190), 3-7-89)


Chapter 5.14 RENTAL HOUSING SAFETY

Sections:

5.14.010    Findings.

5.14.020    Definitions.

5.14.025    Chapter 5.01 KCC applicable – Conflicts.

5.14.030    Business license required – Penalty.

5.14.040    Business license period – Application and relicensing – Fee.

5.14.060    Business license fee – Increase for code violations.

5.14.070    Denial or revocation of business license – Appeal.

5.14.080    Tenant violations – Criminal conduct on property – Notification to property owner – Property owner responsibilities – Civil infraction.

5.14.090    Civil infractions – Kent municipal court.

5.14.100    Civil infractions – Reasonable steps to reduce the likelihood that criminal conduct will reoccur on the property – Defense.

5.14.110    Safe tenants and rentals program – Establishment – Purpose.

5.14.120    Safe tenants and rentals program – Requirements.

5.14.130    Safe tenants and rentals program – Benefits.

5.14.140    City assistance to landlords.

5.14.150    Rental agreement – Crime-free housing addendum.

5.14.160    Other remedies not waived.


5.14.010 Findings.

The council declares that the citizens of the city of Kent have a right to safe rental housing and that the city should assist rental property owners and managers in order to reduce the occurrence of criminal conduct on rental properties. The council finds that it is a reasonable exercise of its police powers to require rental property owners to take reasonable steps to prevent the use of rental property for criminal purposes, and that rental property owners should be penalized in the event they take no action to discourage crime from reoccurring on their rental properties. The council further finds that a program that provides incentives to property owners who take proactive steps to prevent criminal conduct on rental property will serve the public health, safety, and welfare.

(Ord. No. 3860, § 1, 9-18-07; Ord. No. 4070, § 1, 2-19-13)


5.14.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter clearly requires otherwise, the words or phrases defined in this section shall have the indicated meanings.

A. Code enforcement officer shall have the same meaning as provided in Chapter 1.04 KCC.

B. Criminal conduct shall mean any criminal act that is defined by the city of Kent, the state of Washington, or the United States as a misdemeanor, gross misdemeanor, felony, or a crime, or is otherwise punishable by a sentence in a correctional facility, jail, or prison, that substantially affects the health and safety of the tenant or other tenants. Gang or gang-related activity, as those terms are defined by RCW 59.18.030, shall also be considered criminal conduct. The term shall also include drug-related activity, the seizure of illegal drugs, and the requirement that a tenant register as a sex offender.

C. Dwelling unit shall mean a unit within rental property further defined as:

1. A structure or that part of a structure which is used as a home, residence, or sleeping place by one (1) person or by two (2) or more persons maintaining a common household, including but not limited to units of rental property, mobile homes as that term is defined in RCW 59.20.030, and manufactured homes as that term is defined in RCW 59.20.030;

2. A single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation; or

3. One (1) room, or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, or rental or lease on a weekly, monthly, or longer basis, and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure or on the same property, and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities.

D. Landlord shall mean the owner, lessor, or sublessor of the dwelling unit or the property of which it is a part and any person designated as a representative of the landlord; any person or business entity such as a corporation, limited liability corporation, partnership, or agency that owns, operates, or manages rental housing or rental property; and in addition means any person designated by the landlord who has authority to sign a lease or rental agreement.

E. Police officer shall mean any general authority, limited authority, or specially commissioned Washington peace officer, or any federal peace officer, as those terms are defined by Chapter 10.93 RCW, as now enacted or hereafter amended.

F. The phrase reasonable steps to reduce the likelihood that criminal conduct will reoccur on the property requires the landlord to report criminal conduct that occurs on the property whenever the commission of criminal conduct on the rental property is suspected, and further requires the landlord to take other steps to prevent the recurrence of crime, which may include, but are not limited to, one of the following:

1. The landlord and onsite managers of the rental property attend and complete the city’s landlord training program or an equivalent training program approved by the city within ninety (90) days from the date the notice pursuant to KCC 5.14.080(B) is issued; or

2. The landlord pursues eviction to judgment of the tenant who is the subject of a notice issued pursuant to KCC 5.14.080(B), and begins the eviction process within thirty (30) days from the date such notice is issued; or

3. In the event the landlord has not previously utilized a crime-free housing addendum, the landlord utilizes a crime-free housing addendum for the tenant who is the subject of a notice issued pursuant to KCC 5.14.080(B) within sixty (60) days from the date the notice pursuant to KCC 5.14.080(B) is issued; or

4. In the event the rental property, through its landlord, is not a participant in the STAR program, the rental property participates in the STAR program within ninety (90) days from the date the notice is issued pursuant to KCC 5.14.080(B); or

5. The landlord requests the city’s assistance pursuant to KCC 5.14.140.

G. Rental agreement or lease shall have the same meaning as the term rental agreement defined in RCW 59.18.030, as now enacted or hereafter amended or recodified.

H. Rental housing or rental property shall mean a rental housing facility of two (2) or more dwelling units that are rented or intended to be rented, are located on a single parcel or lot, and for which a postal address exists or may exist for each individual unit, and the common areas and appurtenances to the rental housing facility, provided, these terms shall also include any mobile home park or manufactured housing community as those terms are defined by RCW 59.20.030 as now enacted or hereafter amended. The terms shall not include the following:

1. A retail, commercial, or industrial rental;

2. A properly registered and licensed nursing home; or

3. A properly registered and licensed assisted living facility.

I. STAR shall mean the safe tenants and rentals program as established in KCC 5.14.110.

J. Tenant shall have the same meaning as the term tenant set forth in RCW 59.18.030 and 59.20.030, as those sections are now enacted or hereafter amended or recodified.

K. Third party background check shall mean a check of a person’s criminal conviction records that is conducted by the Washington State Patrol or another lawfully licensed agency or entity in the business of conducting checks of a person’s criminal conviction records, and which produces for the requesting party a report of the person’s criminal conviction records. The third party background check shall report convictions for state charges from any of the states in the United States and convictions for federal offenses.

(Ord. No. 3860, § 1, 9-18-07; Ord. No. 4070, § 1, 2-19-13)


5.14.025 Chapter 5.01 KCC applicable – Conflicts.

Chapter 5.01 KCC relating to business licensing shall apply to rental housing and rental property; provided, that in the event there is a conflict between this chapter and Chapter 5.01 KCC, this chapter shall control.

(Ord. No. 4070, § 1, 2-19-13)


5.14.030 Business license required – Penalty.

A. License required. As a condition of operation, each and every rental property within the city limits shall, in accordance with Chapter 5.01 KCC, obtain and maintain a business license. The issuance of a license shall be considered a privilege and not an absolute right of the landlord, and the possession of such license shall not entitle the landlord to a new business license for subsequent years. 

B. Penalty for not obtaining license. In addition to the penalties set forth in Chapter 5.01 KCC, there shall be assessed a penalty of $100 per day for each day that a rental property operates without a valid and current business license for the first 10 days of noncompliance with this section, and up to $400 per day for each day in excess of 10 days of noncompliance with this section.

(Ord. No. 3860, § 1, 9-18-07; Ord. No. 4070, § 1, 2-19-13; Ord. No. 4220, § 6, 11-15-16)


5.14.040 Business license period – Application and relicensing – Fee.

The business licensing period shall run from January 1st through December 31st of each year. Any application for a license required by this chapter shall be accompanied by a fee as established in Chapter 5.01 KCC and any resolution established in accordance with that chapter, as well as any fee required in accordance with KCC 5.14.060, if applicable. Business licensing applications shall comply with the requirements of KCC 5.01.090 and 5.01.110.

(Ord. No. 3860, § 1, 9-18-07; Ord. No. 4070, § 1, 2-19-13; Ord. No. 4220, § 7, 11-15-16)


5.14.060 Business license fee – Increase for code violations.

A. Rental property shall be maintained in accordance with applicable building codes pursuant to Chapter 14.01 KCC, and shall be free of nuisances, graffiti, litter, rodents, weeds, and junk vehicles in conformance with Chapters 8.01, 8.04, 8.06, 8.07, and 8.08 KCC as now enacted or hereafter amended. The rental property shall be maintained in accordance with all other codes applicable to rental property.

B. If, at the time a landlord applies for a subsequent business license, it is determined that a notice of violation pursuant to Chapter 1.04 KCC was issued relating to the condition of the rental property, and the notice of violation was issued within the calendar year preceding the year for which the new license is required, the rental property shall be assessed an additional business license fee of $1,000, which shall be added to the fee required by Chapter 5.01 KCC; provided, this additional fee shall not be assessed in the event that, prior to the date of application for the business license, either a hearing examiner or a court with jurisdiction has determined that the violation was not committed or the city has determined that the code violation was voluntarily corrected.

C. The additional fee established in subsection (B) of this section shall also apply to the issuance of an initial license if there is good cause to believe that the landlord who owned the property transferred the property to a new landlord in order to avoid the provisions of subsection (B) of this section.

(Ord. No. 3860, § 1, 9-18-07; Ord. No. 4070, § 1, 2-19-13; Ord. No. 4220, § 8, 11-15-16)


5.14.070 Denial or revocation of business license – Appeal.

A. Denial or revocation of license. A license issued under this chapter may be denied or revoked for the following reasons:

1. Any reason set forth in KCC 5.01.130.

2. The rental property is subject to an order of abatement for a code violation pursuant to Chapter 1.04 KCC or violation of the Revised Code of Washington, and such order of abatement was issued by the city’s hearing examiner or a court with jurisdiction.

B. Process – Appeal. The denial or revocation of a business license required by this chapter shall comply with the business license revocation procedures set forth in Chapter 5.01 KCC. The denial or revocation of a business license required by this chapter may be appealed in conformance with the requirements of Chapter 5.01 KCC.

(Ord. No. 3860, § 1, 9-18-07; Ord. No. 4070, § 1, 2-19-13)


5.14.080 Tenant violations – Criminal conduct on property – Notification to property owner – Property owner responsibilities – Civil infraction.

A. Landlord responsible. It shall be the responsibility of the landlord to take precautionary measures to reduce the likelihood that the rental property will be used for criminal conduct. In the event a landlord is notified that criminal conduct has occurred on the property, the landlord shall take reasonable steps to reduce the likelihood that criminal conduct will reoccur on the property. Repeated criminal conduct committed by tenants or guests shall result in a civil infraction chargeable to the landlord.

B. Notice of criminal conduct. Upon the occurrence of criminal conduct on the rental property, the police department may cause notice to be sent to the landlord setting forth the date of the occurrence, the location of the occurrence, the nature of the occurrence, and the name of the person who engaged in the occurrence. Notice may be sent whenever the police department has reasonable grounds to believe that criminal conduct has occurred on the rental property. Notice shall be deemed properly delivered when it is either served upon the landlord or a property manager of the rental property, or is delivered by first class mail, postage prepaid, or by certified mail, to the last known address of the landlord or business license applicant as listed in the most recent business license application on file with the city. The issuance of the notice set forth in this subsection shall be a prerequisite to the issuance of a notice of infraction under subsection (C) of this section; provided, the issuance of the civil infraction under subsection (C) of this section shall constitute the notice of the third instance of criminal conduct.

C. Civil infraction. Three (3) instances of criminal conduct committed in the same unit or anywhere on the rental property by the same tenant or any guest of the tenant within any twelve (12) month period shall be deemed a civil infraction chargeable to the landlord; provided, that when the conduct is committed by guests of the tenant, the city need not establish that the criminal conduct was committed by the same guest. Each instance of criminal conduct committed in the same unit or anywhere on the rental property by the same tenant or any guest of the tenant in excess of three (3) instances of criminal conduct in a twelve (12) month period shall be considered an additional infraction chargeable to the landlord.

D. Penalties. The following penalties shall apply:

1. Three (3) instances of criminal conduct committed in the same unit or anywhere on the rental property by the same tenant or any guest of the tenant:

	STAR Participant	$500

	Non-STAR Participant 	$1,000

2. For every instance of criminal conduct committed in the same unit or anywhere on the rental property by the same tenant or any guest of the tenant in excess of three (3) instances of criminal conduct within the same twelve (12) month period:

	STAR Participant	$1,000

	Non-STAR Participant 	$2,000

(Ord. No. 3860, § 1, 9-18-07; Ord. No. 4070, § 1, 2-19-13)


5.14.090 Civil infractions – Kent municipal court.

A. Jurisdiction. Pursuant to Chapter 3.50 RCW, as now enacted or hereafter amended or recodified, the Kent municipal court shall have jurisdiction to hear violations of KCC 5.14.080.

B. Filing. A civil infraction may be filed when there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of KCC 5.14.080 has occurred.

C. Rules of procedure. Except as set forth in this chapter and except as other rules apply, the Infraction Rules for Courts of Limited Jurisdiction (IRLJ) and all local rules and policies as promulgated by the Kent municipal court shall govern infraction proceedings and appeals of infractions filed pursuant to a violation of KCC 5.14.080.

D. Burden of proof. The city shall have the burden of establishing an instance of criminal conduct by a preponderance of the evidence. The entry of a certified order of judgment and sentence, or other certified court document that establishes a conviction or the entry of a deferred prosecution or sentence, or any certified document maintained by the court that contains an entry of a finding of guilt, an admission to the commission of the criminal conduct, and admission to the facts that would establish the commission of the criminal conduct, or an acknowledgement that there are sufficient facts to prove the instance of criminal conduct, shall be sufficient proof of the occurrence of the criminal conduct; provided, that an absence of such court document(s) shall not prohibit the city from establishing that an instance of criminal conduct occurred. Police reports and other documentary evidence shall be admissible as evidence of criminal conduct; provided, that such reports are certified pursuant to RCW 9A.72.085.

E. Costs and assessments. Any costs and assessments as required or permitted by law shall be in addition to any fine or fees owing pursuant to this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3860, § 1, 9-18-07; Ord. No. 4070, § 1, 2-19-13)


5.14.100 Civil infractions – Reasonable steps to reduce the likelihood that criminal conduct will reoccur on the property – Defense.

It shall be a defense to an infraction filed pursuant to KCC 5.14.080 that, subsequent to an act of criminal conduct, but prior to the issuance of a civil infraction, the landlord took reasonable steps to reduce the likelihood that criminal conduct will reoccur on the property; provided, this defense shall be available on one (1) occasion and shall not be available for repeat violations of KCC 5.14.080.

(Ord. No. 3860, § 1, 9-18-07; Ord. No. 4070, § 1, 2-19-13)


5.14.110 Safe tenants and rentals program – Establishment – Purpose.

The city hereby establishes the safe tenants and rentals program, hereinafter “STAR.” The purpose of STAR is to encourage landlords to establish the foundation for the provision of safe rental properties to tenants, to avoid the rental of units to those who engage in criminal conduct, to improve the quality of available rental housing in the city, and to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.

(Ord. No. 3860, § 1, 9-18-07; Ord. No. 4070, § 1, 2-19-13)


5.14.120 Safe tenants and rentals program – Requirements.

A. The STAR program shall be voluntary, and the issuance of a business license shall not be conditioned upon a rental property’s status as a STAR participant.

B. As a condition of participating in the STAR program, landlords shall be required to:

1. Utilize a crime-free housing addendum for the lease of each unit of the rental property as set forth in KCC 5.14.150, which makes criminal conduct on the property a material breach of a covenant of the lease or rental agreement, and enforce the terms of the crime-free housing addendum.

2. As a condition of any rental agreement, reserve the right to expel any person not specified on the rental agreement from the rental property.

3. Perform a third party background check of any manager or other onsite employee.

4. Perform a third party background check of any person who will be employed by the property owner or landlord and who will work on the premises, and provide details of the third party background check procedures to the Kent police department.

5. Perform a third party background check of any tenants, and provide details of the third party background check procedures to the Kent police department.

6. Maintain the property in accordance with applicable building codes pursuant to Chapter 14.01 KCC, and free of nuisances, graffiti, litter, rodents, weeds, and junk vehicles in conformance with Chapters 8.01, 8.04, 8.06, 8.07, and 8.08 KCC as now enacted or hereafter amended.

7. Ensure compliance with RCW 59.18.060 relating to the Residential Landlord-Tenant Act, or RCW 59.20.130 relating to the Manufactured/Mobile Home Landlord Tenant Act, as those sections are now enacted or hereafter amended or recodified.

(Ord. No. 3860, § 1, 9-18-07; Ord. No. 3968, § 1, 6-15-10; Ord. No. 4070, § 1, 2-19-13)


5.14.130 Safe tenants and rentals program – Benefits.

STAR certified properties will be provided with the following benefits:

A. An annual certificate signifying the attainment of STAR status.

B. The authority of the rental property to utilize its STAR status in any advertising.

C. All business license fees as required by Chapter 5.01 KCC shall be waived.

(Ord. No. 3860, § 1, 9-18-07; Ord. No. 4070, § 1, 2-19-13)


5.14.140 City assistance to landlords.

A. When criminal conduct occurs on rental property, or the occurrence of criminal conduct on the rental property is suspected by the landlord, the landlord may request the assistance of the city in taking steps to reduce the likelihood that criminal conduct will reoccur on the property. The city shall assist landlords when such a request is made, and such assistance may include, but not be limited to, the following:

1. Providing the landlord with disclosable information relating to the criminal conduct which has occurred on the property.

2. Having a police officer communicate with the tenant suspected of engaging in the criminal conduct regarding the ramifications of continued criminal conduct.

3. Providing advice to the landlord regarding methods of preventing the reoccurrence of criminal conduct.

4. Providing the landlord with resources available to assist the landlord in pursuing eviction of the tenant.

B. A request for the assistance of the city pursuant to this section shall be considered a “reasonable step to reduce the likelihood that criminal conduct will reoccur on the property” under KCC 5.14.020(F); provided, the following shall apply:

1. The landlord shall cooperate with the city’s assistance and take reasonable measures to implement the suggested methods of the city to reduce the reoccurrence of criminal conduct on the property.

2. A request for assistance shall in no way relieve the landlord of the duty to comply with any section of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3860, § 1, 9-18-07; Ord. No. 4070, § 1, 2-19-13)


5.14.150 Rental agreement – Crime-free housing addendum.

In order to obtain STAR level status, the landlord shall, as a condition of any rental agreement, require the tenant to sign a crime-free housing addendum, which shall make it a material term and covenant of the lease or rental agreement that the tenant will not engage in criminal conduct on the property. The crime-free housing addendum shall become a material part of the rental agreement. In the event the crime-free housing addendum is violated by the tenant, the landlord shall take all lawful action to evict the tenant from the rental housing. The crime-free rental housing addendum shall be in substantially the following form:

Crime-Free Housing Addendum

In consideration of the original execution or continuation of the lease or rental agreement relating to the below signed Tenant’s lease or rental of the unit, the Tenant hereby agrees to the following material terms, conditions, and covenants:

1. A Tenant, any member of the Tenant’s household, or a guest or other person affiliated with the Tenant shall not engage in criminal conduct on the property, including any unit rented or leased or the common areas of the property. Criminal conduct shall be defined as any act that is defined by the city of Kent, the state of Washington, or the United States as a misdemeanor, gross misdemeanor, felony, or a crime. Gang or gang-related activity, as those terms are defined by RCW 59.18.030, shall also be considered criminal conduct.

2. The Landlord or property owner, or his or her designee, shall have the right and authority to bar or prohibit any person not specified on the rental agreement from the property, including from the unit, for good cause. Good cause shall include conduct that is, at the sole discretion of the Landlord or his or her designee, criminal conduct, disruptive to tenants of the property or neighboring properties, or destructive to the rental property or neighboring properties.

3. When a person has been barred or prohibited from the property by the Landlord or his or her designee, any attempt by the Tenant to license, allow, invite, fail to exclude, or otherwise permit the person to enter any portion of the property, including the unit rented by the Tenant or the common areas of the property, shall be considered a material violation and breach of the rental agreement or lease, and shall be grounds for termination of the rental agreement or lease.

4. The Tenant shall comply with the terms and conditions of RCW 59.18.130 (residential tenants) or RCW 59.20.080 (manufactured/mobile home tenants), which is incorporated herein by this reference.

5. The Tenant shall not park any inoperable vehicle on the rental property and agrees that the Landlord or his or her designee shall have the right to remove the inoperable vehicle from the property at the Tenant’s expense.

ANY VIOLATION OF THE ABOVE PROVISIONS SHALL BE A MATERIAL AND IRREPARABLE VIOLATION OF THE RENTAL AGREEMENT OR LEASE AND SHALL BE GOOD CAUSE FOR THE TERMINATION OF THE TENANT’S RESIDENCY AND SHALL RESULT IN EVICTION; PROVIDED, IF EVICTION WOULD, UNDER NORMAL CIRCUMSTANCES, BE APPROPRIATE AS A RESULT OF CRIMINAL CONDUCT BEING COMMITTED ON THE PROPERTY, THEN, THE TENANT MAY NOT BE EVICTED IF THE TENANT WAS A VICTIM OR DEPENDENT OF THE VICTIM OF THE CRIMINAL CONDUCT WHICH OCCURRED ON THE RENTAL PROPERTY, AND PROVIDED FURTHER THAT THIS ADDENDUM SHALL NOT BE INTERPRETED OR APPLIED CONTRARY TO THE RIGHTS PROVIDED IN RCW 59.18.580.

By signing below, Tenant agrees that this addendum is a reasonable obligation or restriction pursuant to RCW 59.18.140, and that Tenant has a duty to comply with its terms.

In case of conflict between the provisions of this addendum and any other provisions of the rental agreement or lease, the provisions of this addendum shall govern.

This addendum is hereby incorporated into the rental agreement or lease executed or renewed either this day or on a prior occasion between the Landlord and Tenant.

_______________    	_________________

Landlord    Tenant

(Ord. No. 3860, § 1, 9-18-07; Ord. No. 4070, § 1, 2-19-13)


5.14.160 Other remedies not waived.

The city may use any means available at law or equity to enforce any provision of this chapter, and may, in addition to any other available remedy, seek injunctive relief, declaratory relief, execution of any judgment, or abatement. The city may, at its discretion, refer any fines owing to a collection agency for collection. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prohibit the city from enforcing any applicable regulation, ordinance, or statute applicable to rental property or landlords.

(Ord. No. 3860, § 1, 9-18-07; Ord. No. 4070, § 1, 2-19-13)


Title 6 PUBLIC WORKS Revised 1/20 Revised 6/20

Chapters:

6.01    Public Works Contract Requirements

6.02    Required Infrastructure Improvements

6.03    Improvement Plan Approval and Inspection Fees

6.04    Assessments for Improvements

6.05    Latecomer Agreements – Street and Utility Revised 6/20

6.06    Street and Curb Cuts

6.07    Street Use Permits Revised 1/20

6.09    Street or Alley Vacation

6.10    Street Trees

6.12    Commute Trip Reduction

6.14    Complete Streets

6.15    Franchise Applications for Use of Right-of-Way

6.16    Utility Design Standards in the Right-of-Way


Chapter 6.01 PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS

Sections: 

6.01.010    State law contract requirements. 

6.01.020    Contracting and procurement process.

6.01.030    Public works apprentice program.

*Cross reference(s) – Department of public works, ch. 2.28; procurement contracts, ch. 3.70.

State law reference(s) – Public works contracts, RCW 35A.40.200, 39.04.010 et seq.


6.01.010 State law contract requirements.

All public works and improvements contracts entered into by the city shall be in conformance with, and subject to, the following minimum provisions of the Revised Code of Washington, which are not exclusive:

1. Chapter 39.04 RCW relating to public works.

2. RCW 35.22.620, 35.23.352, 35A.40.210, and 39.04.155 relating to competitive bidding for public works, and purchases of goods, materials, equipment, and supplies.

3. RCW 9.18.120 and 9.18.150 relating to the suppression of competitive bidding.

4. Chapter 60.28 RCW relating to liens for materials and labor performed.

5. Chapter 39.08 RCW relating to contractor’s bonds.

6. Chapter 39.12 RCW relating to prevailing wages.

7. Chapter 49.12 RCW relating to hours of labor.

8. Chapter 51.12 RCW relating to worker’s compensation.

9. Chapter 49.60 RCW relating to antidiscrimination in employment.

10. Chapter 39.28 RCW relating to emergency public works.

(Ord. No. 3025, § 1, 1-21-92; Ord. No. 4150, § 3, 5-19-15; Ord. No. 4312, § 1, 3-5-19. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.02.010)

State law reference(s) – Public works and contracts, RCW 35A.40.200, 39.04.010 et seq.; bids, RCW 35.23.352, 9.18.120, 9.18.150; liens, RCW 60.28.010 et seq.; contractor’s bonds, RCW 39.08.010 et seq.; prevailing wages, RCW 39.12.010 et seq.; resident employees on public works, RCW 39.16.010 et seq.; hours of work, RCW 49.28.010 et seq.; workers’ compensation, RCW 51.12.010 et seq.; antidiscrimination in employment, RCW 51.12.010 et seq.; state of Washington preference, RCW 39.24.010 et seq.; emergency public works, RCW 39.28.010 et seq.


6.01.020 Contracting and procurement process.

All public works and improvement contracts entered into by the city shall also be in conformance with and subject to the contracting and procurement process provided for in Chapter 3.70 KCC, unless otherwise provided. 

(Ord. No. 4150, § 3, 5-19-15; Ord. No. 4312, § 1, 3-5-19)


6.01.030 Public works apprentice program.

A. Purpose. The city of Kent recognizes that a well-trained construction workforce is critical to the ability of constructing successful public works projects. Apprenticeship training programs are particularly effective in providing training and experience to individuals seeking to enter or advance in the workforce. By providing for apprenticeship utilization on public works projects, the city can create opportunities for training and experience that will help assure that a trained workforce will be available in sufficient numbers in the future for the construction of public works projects.

B. Project requirements.

1. Public work projects, as defined in KCC 3.70.030 and RCW 39.04.010, with an estimated construction cost greater than $1,000,000 shall require that no less than 15 percent of the labor hours performed by workers subject to prevailing wages employed by the contractor or its subcontractors be performed by apprentices enrolled in a state-approved apprenticeship program.

2. The contractor may elect to meet the requirements of this subsection (B) as part of the work of a subcontractor; however, the contractor shall retain the responsibility for complying with this section.

C. Administration. The chief administrative officer or his/her designee (“CAO”) shall implement and administer this section and shall develop and adopt procedures to implement and enforce this section. The chief administrative officer or his/her designee shall establish and maintain contract specification language to implement the apprenticeship requirement and develop and implement a system for monitoring the actual use of apprentices on public work contracts.

D. The chief administrative officer or his/her designee may waive or adjust the apprenticeship requirements for apprentices in bid documents under the following circumstances:

1. The apprenticeship requirement conflicts with state or federal funding conditions, or the conditions of any other grant or funding program;

2. An insufficient number of apprentices is available to meet the contract requirements;

3. The project involves a high proportion of equipment and materials costs compared to the anticipated labor hours;

4. The contractor has demonstrated that is has utilized its “best efforts” to meet the established percentage requirement, but remains unable to fulfill the goal; or

5. In order to meet the requirement, the contractor will be forced to displace members of its workforce.

If waiver is appropriate, the director shall prepare a memo to the chief administrative officer or his/her designee outlining the reasons for the requested waiver. If the chief administrative officer or his/her designee authorizes the waiver, the project may proceed without complying with the requirements in subsection (B) of this section. The document evidencing the waiver granted by the chief administrative officer or his/her designee shall be maintained with the contract on file with the city clerk’s office in accordance with KCC 3.70.050.

E. Penalty for noncompliance.

1. A contractor or subcontractor failing to comply with the apprenticeship requirements of this section shall be assessed a penalty of $10.00 for each hour that is not achieved.

2. An appeal of an assessed penalty shall be filed in writing with the chief administrative officer or his/her designee within 10 business days of the imposition of penalties.

3. The chief administrative officer or his/her designee shall either affirm, reduce, or reverse the imposition of the penalty based upon the specific facts and circumstances and the existence and extent of any good faith efforts of the contractor to comply with the requirements of this section.

(Ord. No. 4312, § 1, 3-5-19)


Chapter 6.02 REQUIRED INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS*

Sections:

6.02.010    Construction standards adopted. 

6.02.020    Intention. 

6.02.030    Purpose. 

6.02.040    Scope and exceptions. 

6.02.050    General. 

6.02.060    Procedure. 

6.02.070    Criteria for requiring infrastructure improvements. 

6.02.080    Criteria for deferral of infrastructure improvements. 

6.02.090    Enforcement. 

6.02.100    Appeals. 

*Cross reference(s) – Department of public works, ch. 2.28; subdivisions, ch. 12.04.

State law reference(s) – Public improvements, RCW 35.43.010 et seq.


6.02.010 Construction standards adopted.

The city hereby adopts the 2009 City of Kent Design and Construction Standards (“construction standards”) and all codes, standards, and provisions cited therein in Section 1.6. One (1) copy of the construction standards is on file in the city clerk’s office.

(Ord. No. 1672, § 1; Ord. No. 3325, § 1, 11-27-96; Ord. No. 3927, § 4, 8-18-09. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.04.010)


6.02.020 Intention.

It is intended that the construction standards shall become the base specifications and standards for the construction of and improvements to city infrastructure including: streets, alleys, sanitary sewer systems, water distribution systems, storm drainage systems, and other transportation, telecommunications and utility systems and associated appurtenances. It is also intended that the construction standards shall govern all permits for excavation and grading in the city and be applicable to the city’s own projects for public works.

(Ord. No. 1672, § 1; Ord. No. 3325, § 2, 11-27-96; Ord. No. 3927, § 4, 8-18-09. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.04.020)

State law reference(s) – Streets, RCW 47.24.010 et seq.


6.02.030 Purpose.

A. The purpose of this chapter is to establish:

1. The intention of the city to require each developer for a development permit (“developer”) to construct or install reasonable infrastructure improvements; and

2. Procedures to determine the nature, extent, and location of the required infrastructure improvements; and

3. Criteria that will be used to determine the nature, extent and location of the required infrastructure improvements.

B. The criteria established in this chapter do not satisfy or supersede additional requirements imposed by the city under other code provisions or the State Environmental Policy Act.

(Ord. No. 2224, § 1; Ord. No. 3927, § 4, 8-18-09. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.14.010)


6.02.040 Scope and exceptions.

All development in the city will require infrastructure improvements as conditions of permit except when:

A. The permit is to make additions, alterations, or repairs of less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) in cost to any site, as that term is defined in the standards. This threshold amount shall be automatically adjusted annually by the percentage increase or decrease in the Washington State Department of Transportation Construction Cost Index; or

B. The permit is to make additions, alterations or repairs of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) or more in cost to any site, such threshold amount to be subject to the automatic adjustment described in subsection (A) of this section, if the developer proves to the public works director or his or her designee (“director”) that the additions, alterations or repairs will result in no adverse impacts to existing infrastructure; or

C. The permit is to make wholly interior improvements within an existing structure.

Provided, however, that if a developer chooses to make any infrastructure improvements for a development permit that would otherwise be exempt, then such improvements shall be in compliance with the construction standards.

(Ord. No. 2224, § 2; Ord. No. 2353, § 1; Ord. No. 3927, § 4, 8-18-09. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.14.020)


6.02.050 General.

The city shall require each developer not exempted by this chapter to install or otherwise provide for the following infrastructure improvements in compliance with the construction standards:

A. Adequate rights-of-way and paved streets;

B. Street lighting systems;

C. Curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and landscaping;

D. Storm drainage systems;

E. Sanitary sewer systems;

F. Domestic water and fire systems;

G. Traffic control systems;

H. Conduit for fiber optic systems.

(Ord. No. 2224, § 3; Ord. No. 3927, § 4, 8-18-09. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.14.030)


6.02.060 Procedure.

A. Generally. After consultation with representatives of the departments listed in subsection (B) of this section, the director shall tentatively determine:

1. The nature, extent, and location of the infrastructure improvements that are to be provided within the criteria set forth in KCC 6.02.070;

2. Whether to require the developer to:

a. Install necessary infrastructure improvements; and/or

b. Pay a fee in lieu of construction; and/or

c. Execute and record a covenant to run with the land agreeing not to protest the formation of a local improvement district to finance any deferred infrastructure improvements required under this chapter; and/or

d. Provide plat guarantees as set forth in the construction standards to secure the later construction of the required infrastructure improvements.

The director shall discuss the tentative determination with the developer in relation to the criteria of KCC 6.02.040. After any resulting modifications deemed appropriate by the director, the director shall inform the developer of the final determination.

B. Interdepartmental review. Before making the final determination required by subsection (A) of this section, the director shall consult with and may incorporate or modify the recommendations of representatives from the following departments of the city:

1. Police;

2. Fire;

3. Community development;

4. Parks and recreation.

The director may consult with other city departments as appropriate. Department representatives shall use only the criteria in this chapter to formulate their recommendations.

(Ord. No. 2224, § 4; Ord. No. 3927, § 4, 8-18-09. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.14.040)


6.02.070 Criteria for requiring infrastructure improvements.

The director shall use only the following criteria in making the determinations required by KCC 6.02.060(A)(1):

A. If the city council, through an approved plan or policy, has, by ordinance or resolution, established the nature, extent, and location of infrastructure improvements to be provided in the vicinity of the property for which the development permit is sought, the director shall require infrastructure improvements under this chapter consistent with the nature, extent, and location thereof as established by the city council.

B. If the city council has not established the nature, extent and location of infrastructure improvements in the vicinity of the property for which the development permit is sought:

1. The director shall require the appropriate infrastructure improvements if the director has first explored alternatives to requiring the developer to provide the improvements and has found these alternatives in his opinion not reasonably feasible, and if the director additionally finds any of the following:

a. Similar infrastructure improvements already exist or are scheduled in the immediate vicinity of the property for which the development permit is sought;

b. The proposed use of the property for which the development permit is sought necessitates the installation of the infrastructure improvements;

c. The property for which the development permit is sought is located in close proximity to an activity center, defined as a park, school, commercial center, large employment center, large multifamily development or any other public or private development where people or activities are concentrated, and that the required improvements will enhance access to this activity center and that it is in the best interests of the residents of the city to enhance access to this activity center;

d. Physical characteristics of the property for which a development permit is sought, including but not limited to topography, slope, soil type, drainage pattern, or vegetation, necessitate the installation of infrastructure improvements;

e. Infrastructure improvements are necessary to maintain water quality; or

f. For any other reason, the infrastructure improvements are in the public interest. If the director requires infrastructure improvements under this subsection, the director shall make written findings and conclusions specifying the public interest that necessitates the improvements and the manner in which these improvements will fulfill this public interest.

2. The public works director shall require any infrastructure improvement to comply with the construction standards.

(Ord. No. 2224, § 5; Ord. No. 3927, § 4, 8-18-09. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.14.050)


6.02.080 Criteria for deferral of infrastructure improvements.

The director may allow the developer to defer the construction of portions of the required infrastructure improvements where such improvements will result in only partial structures, where anticipated future development and/or planned city public works projects will result in more complete and logical systems, and where such deferral is otherwise in the public interest. Upon the determination of the director to allow deferral, the developer shall secure its contribution pursuant to KCC 6.02.060(A)(2).

(Ord. No. 2224, § 6; Ord. No. 3927, § 4, 8-18-09. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.14.060)


6.02.090 Enforcement.

A. Infrastructure improvements and the conditions of any deferrals required by the director under this chapter shall be listed as conditions of approval and shall become part of the approved development permit.

B. Procedure. The provisions required by the director under subsection (A) of this section shall be enforced as conditions of the approved development permits and otherwise as allowed by applicable law.

(Ord. No. 2224, § 7; Ord. No. 3927, § 4, 8-18-09. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.14.070)


6.02.100 Appeals.

A. The determination of the director regarding the nature, location, and extent of infrastructure improvements shall be final, unless an appeal by the developer is made to the hearing examiner within fourteen (14) days after the director’s determination. The appeal shall be in writing to the hearing examiner and filed with the public works department. The hearing examiner shall act on the appeal within sixty (60) days unless an extension thereto is agreed to, in writing, by the developer. The hearing examiner should review the decision of the director to assure compliance with this chapter, the general purposes of the comprehensive plan of the city as well as all adopted ordinances, resolutions and standards.

B. A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25) shall be paid at the time of filing the written appeal. The appeal will not be accepted unless accompanied by full payment.

C. The decision of the hearing examiner may be appealed to the city council pursuant to the rules and procedures established for the hearing examiner under Ch. 2.32 KCC.

D. Decisions of the director with respect to compliance with the construction standards shall be final with no administrative appeal.

(Ord. No. 2224, § 8; Ord. No. 3927, § 4, 8-18-09. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.14.080)

Cross reference(s) – Hearing examiner, ch. 2.32.


Chapter 6.03 IMPROVEMENT PLAN APPROVAL AND INSPECTION FEES*

Sections:

6.03.010    Fees designated. 

*Cross reference(s) – Department of public works, ch. 2.28; environmental policy, ch. 11.03; flood hazard regulations, ch. 14.09.


6.03.010 Fees designated.

A. The city’s public works department is responsible for the planning, design, construction, maintenance, and operation of a complex network of rights-of-way and public easements, including the placement of private utility facilities such as gas, electrical, telephone, fiber optic, and other lines and conduits. As a result, the public works and economic and community development departments are responsible for plan review, plan approval, inspection, and acceptance of all construction within any public easement or right-of-way and all public works improvements, such as streets, sidewalks, and walkways, street lighting systems, storm drainage systems (public and private), and public and private utilities. Accordingly, the city incurs substantial costs in both time and materials to provide these services, and it is necessary and appropriate to charge fees for those services. As a result, the city council shall, by resolution, establish the fees to be assessed to implement and operate the codes adopted by this chapter. The resolution may require that certain fees be pre-paid and/or designated to be nonrefundable because staff time and materials will be expended whether or not the permit applied for is approved by the city or pulled by the applicant. In the event of any conflict or ambiguity regarding any fees established by council resolution, the public works director is authorized to interpret the fee schedule(s) to resolve that conflict or ambiguity.

B. In consideration of the mutual benefits received when another agency of the state (including, without limitation, counties, other cities, or special purpose districts) seeks to construct public improvements not intended for conveyance to the city but that will provide a regional benefit, the city will limit this fee to that portion of the work which affects the city’s interests, concerns, and improvements within and abutting the city’s rights-of-way.

C. Two (2) re-reviews of the construction plans are included with a plan review fee. Additional re-reviews, whether attributed to the developer’s action or inaction, shall be charged at an hourly rate established by resolution. A certain number of inspection hours may be designated for each inspection fee, and inspection time over and above the designated number of hours, whether attributed to the developer’s action or inaction, shall be charged at an hourly rate established by resolution.

(Ord. No. 3085, §§ 2, 3, 1-19-93; Ord. No. 3490, § 1, 11-16-99; Ord. No. 3517, § 1, 7-5-00; Ord. No. 3534, § 1, 12-5-00; Ord. No. 3713, § 1, 9-21-04; Ord. No. 4019, § 5, 12-13-11)


Chapter 6.04 ASSESSMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS*

Sections:

6.04.010    Definition. 

6.04.020    Resolution and notice of required improvements. 

6.04.030    Notice to describe property, construction. 

6.04.040    Notification and publication. 

6.04.050    Assessment roll – Hearing – Notice – Confirmation – Appeal. 

6.04.060    Method of payment of assessments. 

6.04.070    Collection of assessments. 

6.04.080    Noncompliance with notice – Hearing. 

6.04.090    Chargeable property. 

6.04.100    Hazardous conditions on public street right-of-way. 

6.04.110    Property owner liability. 

6.04.120    Permit required. 

6.04.130    Penalty. 

*Cross reference(s) – Department of public works, ch. 2.28; local improvement districts, ch. 3.22.

State law reference(s) – Local improvements, RCW 35.43.010 et seq.


6.04.010 Definition.

Sidewalk means and includes any and all structures, forms, or improvement included in the space between the street margin and roadway boundary and known as the sidewalk area.

(Ord. No. 2259, § 8. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.16.080)

Cross reference(s) – Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.01.030.


6.04.020 Resolution and notice of required improvements.

Whenever in the judgment of the officer or department having the responsibility for the maintenance of streets, public places, rights-of-way, or other improvements as provided in RCW 35.43.040(1) – (18) in the city, the public convenience or safety requires that a sidewalk, curb, gutter, or driveway be constructed, renewed, or repaired, hereinafter called the improvement, along either side of any street or other public place therein, the officer or department shall immediately report the fact to the city council. If the city council shall deem the improvement necessary or convenient for the public convenience or safety, it shall by resolution order the improvement. Thereafter, a notice in writing shall be served on the owner of each lot, block, or parcel of land immediately abutting upon that portion and side of such street or public place where the improvement is to be constructed, requiring that such improvement be constructed in accordance with such resolution.

(Ord. No. 2259, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.16.010)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 35.43.040.


6.04.030 Notice to describe property, construction.

The resolution and notice provided for in KCC 6.04.040 shall:

1. Describe each lot, block, or parcel of land immediately abutting on that portion of the street or other public place where the improvement is to be constructed;

2. Specify the kind of improvement required, the method and material to be used in the construction; and

3. Contain an estimate of the cost thereof.

The notice shall state that unless the improvement is constructed in compliance with the notice and within the time therein specified, the improvement will be constructed by the city and the cost and expense thereof assessed against the property abutting thereon.

(Ord. No. 2259, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.16.020)


6.04.040 Notification and publication.

If all or any portion of the cost of the improvement is to be assessed against the benefitting property owner, or if the benefitting property owner is required to construct the improvement, the resolution shall fix the time from and after its passage, and a place, for hearing on the resolution. The resolution shall be published for two (2) consecutive weeks before the time of hearing in the official newspaper of the city and a notice of the date of such hearing shall be given each owner or reputed owner of the abutting property by mailing to the owner or the King County treasurer, at the address shown thereon a notice of the date of hearing. Such mailing shall be at least ten (10) days before the date fixed for such hearing. The hearing may be postponed from time to time to a definite date until the hearing is held. At the time of the hearing, the city council shall hear persons who appear for or against the improvement. The city council shall determine whether it will or will not proceed with the improvement and whether it will make any changes in the original plan, and what the changes shall be. This action may be taken by motion adopted by the city council.

(Ord. No. 2259, § 3. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.16.030)

State law reference(s) – Notice, RCW 35.43.150.


6.04.050 Assessment roll – Hearing – Notice – Confirmation – Appeal.

Where all or any portion of the costs are to be assessed against the abutting property, an assessment roll shall be prepared by the director of public works or his designee, which shall describe the property assessed, the name of the owner, if known, or if not known, stating that the owner is unknown, and fixing the amount of the assessment. The assessment roll shall be filed with the city clerk. When the assessment is filed, the city council shall by resolution fix the date for a hearing thereon and direct the city clerk to give notice of the time and place of such hearing. The notice of hearing shall be mailed to the person whose name appears on the King County treasurer’s tax roll as the owner or reputed owner of the property, at the address shown thereon. The notice shall be published before the date fixed for the hearing for two (2) consecutive weeks in the official newspaper of the city. The notice shall be mailed and first publication made at least ten (10) days before the hearing date. Following the hearing, the city council shall by ordinance affirm, modify, or reject or order recasting of the assessment roll. An appeal may be taken to the superior court from the ordinance confirming the assessment roll in the same manner as is provided for appeals from the assessment roll by Chapters 35.43 through 35.54 RCW, inclusive, as now or hereafter amended.

(Ord. No. 2259, § 4. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.16.040)

State law reference(s) – Procedure, RCW 35.43.130, 35.44.080 et seq.


6.04.060 Method of payment of assessments.

The city council shall by resolution provide whether the full amount of the assessment shall be paid in one (1) payment or whether it may be paid in installments and shall prescribe the time and amount of such payments. If more than one (1) payment is provided for, the city council may by resolution provide for interest on unpaid installments and fix the rate of interest.

(Ord. No. 2259, § 5. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.16.050)

State law reference(s) – Procedure for challenging the assessment roll, etc., RCW 35.44.070.


6.04.070 Collection of assessments.

The assessment roll as affirmed or modified by the city council shall be filed with the finance director for collection, and the amount including interest, if any, shall become a lien against the property described therein from the date of such filing. Whenever any payment on any assessment or installment is delinquent and unpaid for a period of thirty (30) days or more, the lien may be foreclosed in the same manner and with the same effect as is provided by Chapters 35.43 through 35.54 RCW.

(Ord. No. 2259, § 6. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.16.060)

State law reference(s) – Collection procedure, RCW 35.49.010.


6.04.080 Noncompliance with notice – Hearing.

If the notice provided for in KCC 6.04.040 is not complied with within the time specified therein, the officer or department having charge of the maintenance of the streets and public places in the city shall proceed to construct the improvement and shall report to the city council an assessment roll showing each lot, block or parcel of land immediately abutting upon such improvement. The report shall contain the name of the owner of the described property, if known, and the portion of the cost of such improvement to be assessed against each lot, block or parcel of land. The procedures for hearing and confirmation of assessment roll including procedures for notification, publication and appeal shall be identical with those set forth in KCC 6.04.050.

(Ord. No. 2259, § 7. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.16.070)


6.04.090 Chargeable property.

For the purpose of this chapter, all property having a frontage on the side or margin of any street or other public place or property otherwise specially benefitted shall be deemed benefitting property. Such property may be chargeable as provided in this chapter with all the costs of construction of any improvement between the margin of such street or other public place and the roadway lying in front of and adjacent to such property.

(Ord. No. 2259, § 8. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.16.080)


6.04.100 Hazardous conditions on public street right-of-way.

It is unlawful for the owner and/or person occupying or having charge or control of any premises abutting upon any public street right-of-way or alley in the city to construct, place, cause, create, maintain or permit to remain upon any part of such right-of-way located between the curbline, or if there is no curbline, then between the adjacent edge of the traveled portion of such right-of-way by the members of the general public, including but not limited to the following conditions:

1. Defective sidewalk surfaces, including but not limited to broken or cracked cement, stub-toes, depressions within or between sidewalk joints;

2. Defective cement surfaces placed adjacent to the public sidewalk or defects at the juncture between such cement surfaces and public sidewalks, including stub-toes or depressions at the junction;

3. Defects in sidewalks or publicways caused or contributed to by the roots of trees or similar growth or vegetation located either on private adjoining property or on the parking strip portion of any such street right-of-way;

4. Defective conditions caused by tree limbs, foliage, brush or grass on or extending over such public sidewalks or rights-of-way;

5. Defective conditions on the parking strip area between the curbline and the sidewalk or, if there is no curbline, then between the edge of the traveled portion of the street and the sidewalk and between the sidewalk and the abutting property line;

6. Defects resulting from accumulation of ice and snow on public sidewalks or on the right-of-way between the curbline or, if there is no curbline, then between the adjacent edge of the traveled portion of the street roadway and the abutting property line;

7. Defects consisting of foreign matter on the public sidewalks, including but not limited to gravel, oil, grease, or any other foreign subject matter that might cause pedestrians using the sidewalk to fall, stumble or slip by reason of the existence of such foreign matter;

8. Defective handrails or fences or other similar structures within or immediately adjacent to said right-of-way area.

(Ord. No. 2259, § 9. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 4.16.090 – 4.16.098)


6.04.110 Property owner liability.

A. In the event of any injury or damage to any person and/or property proximately caused by the defective, dangerous or hazardous condition of any sidewalk as specified in this chapter or by the presence or accumulation of ice or snow thereon or by lack of proper guards or railings on or along the property abutting on any public way, then the abutting property owner where such injury or damage occurred shall be liable therefor including liability to the city for all damage, injury, costs and disbursements including court costs and attorney’s fees, which the city may be required to pay or incur to any person injured or property damaged.

B. Whenever any public right-of-way in the city has been improved by the construction of a sidewalk along either side, the duty and expense of the maintenance, cleaning, repair and renewal of such sidewalk, including the erection or maintenance of suitable barriers along the outer margin of such sidewalk where the same is elevated more than two (2) feet above the abutting property, shall be upon the owner of the directly abutting property. If the difference in elevation is the result of a change in street grade occasioned by any city, county or state roadway construction, reconstruction or improvement project, such barrier shall be erected or installed as a part of such project and the cost thereof shall not be borne by the abutting owner. All such repairs shall be made after application for and issuance of a proper street excavation permit, as required by law. All such work shall be duly inspected and approved by the department of public works.

(Ord. No. 2259, § 10. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.16.110)


6.04.120 Permit required.

Any person desiring to change or relocate any sidewalk in front of and abutting his property shall make application in writing to the department of public works of the city. Such application shall contain, among other things:

1. The exact location of such proposed change or relocation;

2. The location of any new sidewalk to be paved; and

3. The connections and locations of other sidewalks upon such street.

No change or relocation of any sidewalk shall be made until the issuance of an appropriate permit.

(Ord. No. 2259, § 11. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.16.120)


6.04.130 Penalty.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300) or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(Ord. No. 2259, § 12. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.16.130)


Chapter 6.05 LATECOMER AGREEMENTS – STREET AND UTILITY Revised 6/20

Sections:

6.05.010    Purpose. Revised 6/20

6.05.020    Definitions. Revised 6/20

6.05.030    Application for latecomer agreement. Revised 6/20

6.05.040    Preliminary determinations. Revised 6/20

6.05.050    Preliminary determination notice. Revised 6/20

6.05.060    Latecomer agreement. Revised 6/20

6.05.070    Construction – Final costs – Conveyance. Revised 6/20

6.05.080    Recording of latecomer agreement. Revised 6/20

6.05.090    Defective work. Revised 6/20

6.05.100    Payment of assessment – Remittance to developer. Revised 6/20

6.05.110    Segregation. Revised 6/20

6.05.120    Removal of unauthorized connections or taps. Revised 6/20

6.05.130    City fees and cost recovery. Revised 6/20

6.05.140    Enforcement of latecomer obligations. Revised 6/20

6.05.150    City participation authorized. Revised 6/20

Prior legislation: Ord. No. 2532 and Code 1986, §§ 4.15.010 and 4.15.020.


6.05.010 Purpose. Revised 6/20

The purpose of this chapter is to provide the conditions and procedures under which developers, including the city, who installed qualifying street system improvements or utility system improvements required as a prerequisite for future development and pursuant to the city’s development ordinances and policies, may be partially reimbursed for the expenses of such improvements by other property owners that did not contribute to these costs and receive a benefit from these improvements. The city is authorized to enter into latecomer agreements for these reimbursements pursuant to Chapters 35.72 and 35.91 RCW, as they now exist or are hereafter amended.

(Ord. No. 4356, § 2, 4-7-20)


6.05.020 Definitions. Revised 6/20

The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

A. Adjacent means abutting on public roads, streets, rights-of-way, or easements in which street system improvements are installed or directly connecting to street system improvements through an interest in real property such as an easement or license.

B. Assessment means an equitable pro rata charge to be paid by an owner of property within the assessment reimbursement area for the cost of construction of street and/or utility system improvements made pursuant to a latecomer agreement.

C. Assessment reimbursement area means that area which includes all parcels of real property adjacent to street system improvements or likely to require connection to or service by utility system improvements constructed by a developer.

D. City administrative costs means all costs incurred by the city that are directly related to the drafting, execution, recording, and administration of the latecomer agreement, including any mailings to other property owners, any hearings before city council, as well as any costs and expenses incurred for attorneys or consultants. City administrative costs do not include permit fees or the application fee for the latecomer agreement.

E. Cost of construction means the sum of the direct construction costs incurred to construct the street and/or utility system improvements plus developer administrative costs and the city latecomer administrative costs. Direct construction costs include but are not limited to the actual labor and material construction costs incurred by the developer, reasonable engineering and surveying costs, bonding costs, environmental mitigation, relocation and/or new construction of private utilities as required by the city, and relocation and/or installation of street lights and signage.

F. Developer means the individual or entity that contracts with the city for the construction of street and/or utility system improvements, where such improvements are a requirement for development of real property owned by such entity or individual. As permitted by RCW 35.72.050 and 35.91.020, the city, or other public entity, may join with or be construed as a developer for the purpose of recovery of street or utility system improvement costs.

G. Developer administrative costs means all indirect costs incurred by the developer in the creation and execution of the latecomer agreement and managing the project, such as office supplies, mailings, clerical services, telephone expenses, accounting expenses, and project oversight. Developer administrative costs shall not exceed three percent of all direct construction costs.

H. Director means the city of Kent public works director, or his or her designee.

I. Latecomer agreement means a written contract between the city and one or more developers providing partial reimbursement for the cost of construction of street system improvements and/or utility system improvements to the developer by owners of property who would be required to construct these improvements and who did not contribute to the original cost of construction.

J. Latecomer fee or assessment means a charge collected by the city against a real property owner within the assessment reimbursement area who:

1. Connects to or uses the utility system improvement where fees are separately stated, or is a part of a connection fee or other fee for providing access to the city’s utility system; or

2. Receives a building or development permit for real property located adjacent to, or having access to, the street system improvement constructed under this chapter.

K. Street system improvements means public street and alley improvements made in existing or subsequently dedicated or granted rights-of-way or easements and any associated improvements including but not limited to such things as design, engineering, surveying, inspection, grading, paving, installation of curbs, gutters, pedestrian facilities, street lighting, bike lanes, and traffic control devices, relocation and/or construction of private utilities as required by the city, relocation and/or construction of street lights, traffic control devices, signage, and other similar improvements.

L. Utility system improvements means city-owned water, sewer, and storm drainage system improvements as defined by RCW 35.91.015, which shall include but not be limited to design, engineering, surveying, inspection, testing, and installation of improvements as required by the city, and includes but is not limited to the following, by utility type:

1. Water system improvements, including but not limited to such things as mains, valves, fire hydrants, telemetry systems, pressure reducing stations and/or valves, and other associated appurtenances;

2. Sewer system improvements, including but not limited to such things as gravity mains, lift stations, force mains, telemetry systems, and other associated appurtenances; and

3. Storm sewer system improvements, including but not limited to such things as water quality structures and systems, detention and retention facilities, and storm water collection and conveyance facilities.

(Ord. No. 4356, § 2, 4-7-20)


6.05.030 Application for latecomer agreement. Revised 6/20

A. Applicants. Any developer using private funds to construct street system improvements and/or utility system improvements required as a prerequisite to further property development may apply to the city for a latecomer agreement in order to recover a pro rata share of the costs of construction from other property owners that will later connect to or use the street and/or utility system improvements constructed by the developer.

B. Application form and fee. An application for a latecomer agreement shall be submitted upon a form provided by the city and be accompanied by the application fee established by resolution by the city council.

C. Timing of application. The application for a latecomer agreement shall be made before the street and/or utility system improvements proposed for construction are approved by the city through the issuance of a civil construction or other applicable permit.

D. Application contents. The application shall contain the following information which shall be approved by a state of Washington licensed engineer or other appropriately licensed professional:

1. A legal description and vicinity map of the developer’s property.

2. A legal description of the properties within the developer’s proposed assessment reimbursement area, together with the names and addresses of the owners of such property as shown on the records of the assessor’s office of King County.

3. The developer’s proposed assessment reimbursement area and general location of the system improvements to be included.

4. The developer’s proposed allocation of the costs of construction to the individual properties within the proposed assessment reimbursement area and the method used for such allocation.

5. Statement from a state of Washington licensed contractor or civil engineer containing an itemized estimate of the total projected cost of construction.

6. Such other information as the director determines would be relevant in considering the application.

E. Application review.

1. The director shall review all applications and shall approve the application if following criteria are met:

a. The application is timely, complete and the application fee has been paid;

b. The city’s ordinances require the proposed improvements to be constructed as a prerequisite to further property development;

c. The proposed improvements fall within the definition of street and/or utility system improvements as those terms are defined in this chapter; and

d. The proposed improvements are consistent with the City of Kent Design and Construction Standards, design guidelines, development regulations, comprehensive plan, comprehensive sanitary sewer plan, comprehensive water plan, storm water master plan, and transportation master plan.

2. If any of the above criteria are not met, the director shall either condition approval as necessary in order for the application to conform to such criteria, or deny the application. The final determination of the director shall be in writing.

3. The director may establish policies and procedures for processing applications and complying with the requirements of this chapter and applicable state law.

(Ord. No. 4356, § 2, 4-7-20)


6.05.040 Preliminary determinations. Revised 6/20

Upon approval of a latecomer application, the director shall formulate a preliminary assessment reimbursement area and preliminary assessment amount for each real property parcel included in the preliminary assessment reimbursement area as follows:

A. For street system improvements, the assessment reimbursement area shall be formulated based upon a determination of which parcels adjacent to the street system improvements would require similar street system improvements upon development or redevelopment.

B. For utility system improvements, the assessment reimbursement area shall be formulated based upon a determination of which parcels in the proposed area would require similar utility system improvements upon development or redevelopment or would be allowed to connect to or use the utility system improvements.

C. A pro rata share of the cost of the improvements shall be allocated to each parcel included in the assessment reimbursement area based upon the benefit to the property owner. The method or methods used to calculate the allocation of the assessment may be either front footage, number of units, square footage, zone and termini method, or other equitable method, as determined by the city.

(Ord. No. 4356, § 2, 4-7-20)


6.05.050 Preliminary determination notice. Revised 6/20

A. The city shall send the preliminary assessment reimbursement area and the preliminary assessment formulated by the director, including the preliminary determination of area boundaries, assessments, and a description of the property owner’s rights and options, by certified mail to the property owners of record within the preliminary assessment reimbursement area.

B. The developer or any property owner within the preliminary assessment reimbursement area may, in writing within 20 days of the date of mailing the notice, request a hearing to be held before the city council to contest the preliminary assessment reimbursement area and preliminary assessment. Notice of such hearing shall be given to all property owners within the preliminary assessment reimbursement area and the hearing shall be conducted as soon as is reasonably practical. The city council is the final authority to establish the assessment reimbursement area and the assessment for each property within the assessment reimbursement area.

C. If no written request for a hearing is received as required, the determination of the director shall be final.

(Ord. No. 4356, § 2, 4-7-20)


6.05.060 Latecomer agreement. Revised 6/20

A. Based upon the preliminary assessment reimbursement area and the preliminary assessment if no hearing is requested, or based upon the city council’s determination of the assessment reimbursement area and assessment if a hearing is requested, the director shall prepare and give to the developer a latecomer agreement. A separate latecomer agreement shall be executed for each of the following categories of improvement, as applicable: street system improvements and utility system improvements.

B. Each agreement shall include a provision requiring that, every two years from the date the agreement is executed, the developer entitled to reimbursement under this section shall provide the city with information regarding the current contact name, address, and telephone number of the person, company, or partnership that originally entered into the agreement. If the developer fails to comply with the notification requirements within 60 days of the specified time, then the city may collect any reimbursement funds owed to the developer under the agreement. The funds collected under this subsection shall be deposited in the capital expenditure account of either the city’s utility fund or street fund, as appropriate.

C. The term of latecomer agreements is as follows:

1. For street system improvements, each latecomer agreement shall be valid for a period not to exceed 15 years from the effective date of the agreement.

2. For utility system improvements, each latecomer agreement shall be valid for a period not to exceed 20 years from the effective date of the agreement.

D. The city may terminate a latecomer agreement if the developer fails to commence or complete construction within the time and manner required in the permits for the improvements. If the agreement is terminated, the city shall record a release of latecomer agreement in the King County recorder’s office.

(Ord. No. 4356, § 2, 4-7-20)


6.05.070 Construction – Final costs – Conveyance. Revised 6/20

A. The developer shall construct the improvements and, upon completion, request final inspection and acceptance of the improvements by the city, subject to any required obligation to repair defects. All construction, inspection, and testing shall conform to the Kent City Code and City of Kent Design and Construction Standards.

B. Within 120 days of completion of construction, the developer shall provide the city with documentation of the actual costs of the improvements and a certification by the applicant that all of such costs have been paid. The city shall use this information to finalize the assessment paid by owners within the assessment reimbursement area, which will become part of the latecomer agreement recorded in accordance with KCC 6.05.080.

C. After the requirements of subsections (A) and (B) of this section have been satisfied, the developer shall provide the city with an appropriate deed of conveyance or other equivalent written document transferring ownership of the improvements to the city, together with any easements needed to ensure the city’s right of access for maintenance of the improvements. Title to the improvements shall be conveyed to the city clear of all encumbrances.

D. No connection to, or other use of, the improvements will be allowed or permitted until the city has officially accepted the construction and title to the improvements has been conveyed to the city.

(Ord. No. 4356, § 2, 4-7-20)


6.05.080 Recording of latecomer agreement. Revised 6/20

A. The provisions of the latecomer agreement shall not become effective as to any owner of real estate not a party to the agreement until it is recorded with the King County recorder’s office. For a utility latecomer agreement, recording must be prior to the time that the owner of the real estate taps into or connects to water or sewer facilities.

B. The city shall file the fully executed latecomer agreement in the official property records of King County within 30 days of final execution; provided, that the developer shall have an independent duty to review the King County recorder’s office records to confirm that the latecomer agreement has been properly and timely recorded.

(Ord. No. 4356, § 2, 4-7-20)


6.05.090 Defective work. Revised 6/20

The developer shall be responsible for all work found to be defective within one year after the date of acceptance of the improvements by the city. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the director from requiring a performance bond for the street or utility system improvements as authorized for such improvements within the Kent City Code or City of Kent Design and Construction Standards.

(Ord. No. 4356, § 2, 4-7-20)


6.05.100 Payment of assessment – Remittance to developer. Revised 6/20

A. Upon recording, the latecomer agreement shall be binding upon all parcels located within the assessment reimbursement area who are not party to the agreement and did not contribute to the original cost of the utility system improvements and/or street system improvements. Payments shall be paid to the city in one lump sum as follows:

1. Assessments for street system improvements shall be paid prior to the development or redevelopment of property.

2. Assessments for utility system improvements shall be paid prior to connection to or use of the utility system improvements.

B. The city will pay over to the developer the amounts collected less any unpaid city administrative costs within 60 days of receipt.

C. When the assessment for any property has been paid in full, the director shall issue a certification of payment that will release such property from the latecomer agreement which may be recorded by the owner.

D. The latecomer assessment shall be in addition to the usual and ordinary charges, including connection charges, tap charges, system development charges, and any other fees or charges which must be paid by persons applying for city services.

(Ord. No. 4356, § 2, 4-7-20)


6.05.110 Segregation. Revised 6/20

The director shall, upon the request of any property owner within the assessment reimbursement area, segregate the assessment. Any request for to segregate the assessment must be submitted before the application for a lot line adjustment or subdivision. The request shall include a map showing the proposed subdivision of property, including legal descriptions and the proposed cost segregation based on the original method of assessment. The assessment shall only be segregated if the lot line adjustment or subdivision is completed. The property owner seeking segregation of the assessment shall pay an additional review fee as established by resolution by the city council.

(Ord. No. 4356, § 2, 4-7-20)


6.05.120 Removal of unauthorized connections or taps. Revised 6/20

Whenever any tap or connection is made into any utility improvement without payment of the assessment being made as required by this chapter, the director is authorized to remove and disconnect, or cause to be removed and disconnected, such unauthorized tap or connection including all connecting tile or pipe located in the right-of-way and to dispose of such unauthorized material without liability. The owner of the property where the unauthorized connection is located shall be liable for all costs and expenses of any type incurred to remove, disconnect, and dispose of the unauthorized tap or connection.

(Ord. No. 4356, § 2, 4-7-20)


6.05.130 City fees and cost recovery. Revised 6/20

The developer shall pay the following fees:

A. Application fee. The application fee as set forth in KCC 6.05.030, payable at the time the application is submitted.

B. City administrative costs. The developer shall reimburse the city for its administrative costs, as defined in KCC 6.05.020(D). This shall be paid prior to and as a condition of the recording of the latecomer agreement.

C. Recording fee. For every separate parcel of property within the developer’s assessment reimbursement area, the city shall charge a recording fee in accordance with fees charged by the King County recorder’s office. This fee shall be paid as part of the city administrative costs prior to and as a condition of the recording of the latecomer agreement.

(Ord. No. 4356, § 2, 4-7-20)


6.05.140 Enforcement of latecomer obligations. Revised 6/20

A. Nothing in this chapter is intended to create a private right of action for damages against the city for failing to comply with the requirements of this chapter. The city, its officials, employees, or agents may not be held liable for failure to collect a latecomer assessment unless the failure was willful or intentional.

B. In processing and imposing obligations in this chapter for reimbursement of developers, the city in no way guarantees payment of assessments, or enforceability of assessments, or enforceability of the latecomer agreement, or the amount(s) thereof, against such persons or property; nor will the offices or finances of the city be used for enforcement or collection of assessments beyond those duties specifically undertaken by the city herein. It shall be the obligation of a developer to take whatever authorized means are available to enforce payment of assessments, and developers are hereby authorized to take such actions. The city shall not be responsible for locating any beneficiary or survivor entitled to any benefits by or through a latecomer agreement.

C. If the developer fails to comply with the notification requirements set forth in KCC 6.05.050 and within the latecomer agreement within 60 days of the specified time, then the city may collect any reimbursement funds owed to the developer under the latecomer agreement. Such funds must be deposited in the capital fund of the city.

(Ord. No. 4356, § 2, 4-7-20)


6.05.150 City participation authorized. Revised 6/20

As an alternative to financing projects under this chapter solely by a developer, the city may join in the financing of improvement projects and may be reimbursed in the same manner as the developer who participates in the projects. As another alternative, the city may create an assessment reimbursement area on its own initiative, without the participation of a private property owner or developer, finance the costs of the street or utility improvements, and become the sole beneficiary of the reimbursements that are contributed. The city will only seek to be reimbursed for the costs of improvements that benefit that portion of the public who will use the improvements within the assessment reimbursement area established pursuant to state law. No costs for improvements that benefit the general public may be reimbursed. 

(Ord. No. 4356, § 2, 4-7-20)


Chapter 6.06 STREET AND CURB CUTS*

Sections:

6.06.010    Purpose. 

6.06.020    Permit required. 

6.06.030    Permit application. 

6.06.040    Permit requirements. 

6.06.050    Permit and inspection fees and permit renewal. 

6.06.060    Specifications and special requirements. 

6.06.070    Enforcement and penalties. 

*Cross reference(s) – Department of public works, ch. 2.28; environmental policy, ch. 11.03; subdivisions, ch. 12.04.


6.06.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum rules and regulations relating to the street and curb cuts and to provide for enforcement.

(Ord. No. 2202, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.06.010(A))


6.06.020 Permit required.

No person shall cut a street or curb without first obtaining a separate right-of-way permit for each cut of a street or curb from the department of public works.

(Ord. No. 2202, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.06.010(B))


6.06.030 Permit application.

The applicant shall file a permit application in writing on a form furnished by the city for that purpose. Every application shall:

1. Identify the contractor and/or subcontractor who is to actually perform the work;

2. Include the state contractor’s number of such contractor or subcontractor;

3. Include the city business license number of such contractor or subcontractor;

4. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made;

5. Describe the location where such work is to be performed;

6. Be signed by the owner or the agent of the firm who will actually be performing the work.

(Ord. No. 2202, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.06.010(C))


6.06.040 Permit requirements.

A. Prior to issuance of any right-of-way permit for cutting any portion of city right-of-way, whether improved or not, the location first shall be inspected and approved by a city official.

B. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for or approval of any violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance or appropriate rule or regulation of the city.

C. Every permit issued by the city under the provisions of this chapter shall expire ninety (90) days after issuance of the permit unless work has commenced or unless the permit has been extended.

D. The director of public works, or designate, may in writing suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter whenever the permit was issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied or in violation of any other ordinance or regulation of the city.

(Ord. No. 2202, § 2; Ord. No. 3713, § 2, 9-21-04; Ord. No. 4019, § 6, 12-13-11. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.06.020)


6.06.050 Permit and inspection fees and permit renewal.

A. The city council shall, by resolution, establish the fees to be assessed to implement and operate the regulations adopted in this chapter. By way of example, and without limitation, these fees shall apply to street cuts, curb cuts, sidewalk cuts, or any portion of city right-of-way, whether or not improved, and all utility work within the public right-of-way that involves cutting the public right-of-way. Utility work shall include, but not be limited to, work performed in association with gas, telephone, electric power, cable TV, water, stormwater, and sewer, and underground facilities. The resolution may require that certain fees be pre-paid and/or designated to be nonrefundable because staff time and materials will be expended whether or not the permit applied for is approved by the city or pulled by the applicant. In the event of any conflict or ambiguity regarding any fees established by council resolution, the public works director is authorized to interpret the fee schedule(s) to resolve that conflict or ambiguity.

B. Review and inspection fees may be limited to a set number of hours of staff time work. Any staff time incurred exceeding those hours of work may be subject to an additional hourly time charge. This extra charge will be invoiced to the applicant separately at the hourly rate established by resolution.

C. When work for which a permit would be required by this chapter is commenced or performed without first obtaining that permit, the basic permit fee shall be doubled, but the payment for that double fee shall not relieve that person or entity from full compliance with all of the requirements of this chapter in the execution of the work, nor from any other penalties which may be provided for by local, state, or federal law, including criminal penalties.

(Ord. No. 2202, § 3; Ord. No. 3713, § 3, 9-21-04; Ord. No. 3819, § 1, 11-21-06; Ord. No. 4019, § 6, 12-13-11. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.06.030)

State law reference(s) – Compliance with state law, Chapter 19.122 RCW.


6.06.060 Specifications and special requirements.

A. Specifications. All curb and street cuts shall be repaired to conform to the requirements of the latest version of the City of Kent Design and Construction Standards, as adopted by KCC 6.02.010. Copies of this publication and any additions or amendments are on file with the city clerk and available to the general public.

B. Permittee’s performance responsibility. In addition to all other requirements specified by this chapter or the latest version of the City of Kent Design and Construction Standards, adopted in subsection (A) of this section, the permittee shall be responsible for restoration of the street, or curb, and all disturbed public right-of-way area to its original or better condition, including any required overlays as approved by the director of public works. The permittee shall complete the street or curb cut in accordance with the permit requirements immediately upon completion of the project. The permittee shall be responsible for defects or failure of the street or curb cut area for a period of two (2) years following final inspection.

C. Curb cut locations. The location of each curb cut must be approved by the city. The city reserves the right to deny any request to cut any curb.

D. Special conditions. At the discretion of the director of public works or designate, one (1) or more of the following requirements may be specified when conditions require their use. Wherever such special conditions are required, they shall be set forth on the permit at the time of issuance or as an amendment to the permit in those instances where conditions requiring their use become known after the permit has been issued:

1. Curb cuts within the right-of-way shall be made only in areas and by methods approved by the public works director, or his or her designee. All improved or unimproved areas within the right-of-way shall be restored to an equal or better condition;

2. Excavated material shall be completely removed from the street surface;

3. Signs, cones, barricades, and all other traffic control devices to protect and control pedestrian and vehicular traffic in the construction area shall be used as prescribed by the traffic engineer, and in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways as amended, and shall be at the expense of the permittee;

4. One (1) or more traffic lanes shall be kept open at all times. Moving traffic shall be properly controlled by uniformed flagmen, if specified. Hours of operation during construction and restoration shall be as specified on the permit;

5. Ingress and egress for vehicles and personnel to abutting property shall be maintained at all times;

6. Backfill and replacement of pavement or oiling of surface shall be done to the satisfaction of the public works director. Unless otherwise specified by the city, backfill material shall conform to the latest version of the City of Kent Design and Construction Standards, adopted in subsection (A) of this section;

7. The permittee must file a surety indemnity bond approved by the city to protect the city to cover completion of the permit work during construction and throughout the two (2) year warranty period, and the permittee must provide approved liability insurance naming the city as an additional insured in the amount specified on the face of the permit;

8. Open cuts within the paved area will not be permitted;

9. The construction inspector shall require that a temporary patch be made for thirty (30) days, and thereafter, a permanent patch will be placed by the permittee within five (5) days.

(Ord. No. 2202, § 4; Ord. No. 3713, § 4, 9-21-04; Ord. No. 4019, § 6, 12-13-11. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.06.040)


6.06.070 Enforcement and penalties.

A. Enforcement authority. The public works director, or his or her designee, is authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this chapter.

B. Penalties. It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to cut a street or curb, or cause the same to be done, in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted.

(Ord. No. 2202, § 5; Ord. No. 3713, § 5, 9-21-04. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.06.050)


Chapter 6.07 STREET USE PERMITS* Revised 1/20

Sections:

6.07.010    Purpose.

6.07.020    Definitions. Revised 1/20

6.07.030    Permit required.

6.07.040    Construction and property development.

6.07.050    Signs. Revised 1/20

6.07.060    Street vendors.

6.07.070    Sidewalk cafes.

6.07.080    Sidewalk displays.

6.07.090    Street closures.

6.07.100    Master use permit.

6.07.110    City development or use – Exemptions.

6.07.120    Permit application.

6.07.130    Processing of applications.

6.07.140    Indemnity deposit – Surety bond – Liability insurance.

6.07.150    Indemnity agreement.

6.07.160    Permit issuance, expiration, and renewal.

6.07.170    Permit and inspection fees.

6.07.180    Director’s decision to deny, revoke, suspend, or restrict.

6.07.190    Appeals.

6.07.200    Administrative policies.

6.07.210    Violation – Penalties.

*Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3471, § 1, adopted Aug. 17, 1999, which amended ch. 6.07, §§ 6.07.010 – 6.07.150, in its entirety, has been treated as superseding the provisions of former ch. 6.07 and pertained to similar subject matter.

Cross reference(s) – Department of public works, ch. 2.28; subdivisions, ch. 12.04.


6.07.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum rules and regulations relating to street use associated with property development, utility work not requiring cuts, and other uses of streets, sidewalks, public property, public rights-of-way, and other public places for private purposes, and to provide for enforcement.

(Ord. No. 3471, § 1, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3534, § 1, 12-5-00; Ord. No. 3713, § 6, 9-21-04.)


6.07.020 Definitions. Revised 1/20

The following words and phrases, wherever used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where otherwise defined and unless the context shall clearly indicate to the contrary: 

Abutting property means and includes property bordering upon and contiguous to a public place.

Applicant means any person or entity applying for the issuance or renewal of a street use permit or any person or entity that has been issued a street use permit.

Banner means any pliable canvas or cloth sign material or holiday or festival decor such as garland or similar decor stretched over or across any public place. 

Director means the director of public works or the director’s designee including Kent City Code enforcement officials. 

Driveway means that portion of a public place which provides vehicular access to abutting property through a depression in the constructed curb or, when there is no constructed curb, that area in front of such abutting property as is well-defined or that is designated by authorized signs or markings.

Motorist information follow through sign means a supplemental sign erected or installed to direct motorists to a qualifying business that provides services of specific interest to the traveling public.

Public place means and includes streets, avenues, ways, boulevards, drives, places, alleys, sidewalks, planting (parking) strips, squares, triangles, and other rights-of-way open to the use of the public, and the space above or beneath the surface of same. This definition specifically does not include streets, alleys, ways, planting strips, and sidewalks which have not been deeded, dedicated, or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use. 

Sidewalk cafe means a portion of a public sidewalk on which tables and chairs are placed for the use of patrons while consuming food and/or beverages, including liquor as defined in RCW 66.04.010, served by a cafe, restaurant, or tavern located on abutting property.

Sidewalk display means a display of goods and wares on a public sidewalk for retail sale to the public by the owner or manager of a business upon abutting property, which products are being offered for sale inside the business. 

Sidewalk vending unit or vending unit means a movable cart or similar device that is operated from a fixed location on a public way from which food, beverages (excluding liquor), flowers, plants, and/or merchandise are provided to the public with or without charge. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to mobile caterers, generally defined as person(s) engaged in the business of transporting food and beverages in motor vehicles to residential, business, and industrial establishments pursuant to prearranged schedules, and dispensing items from the vehicles for retail sale to the personnel of such establishments.

Sign means any medium, including its structure and component parts, which is used or intended to be used out of doors to attract attention to the subject matter for advertising, identification, or informative purposes.

Special events means carnivals, fairs, festivals, parades, and other similar short-term uses of public places.

Use means and includes, but is not limited to, the following types of uses: to conduct a parade or other similar event upon any public place; to operate any sidewalk display, cafe, or restaurant, or any food cart or other similar vending unit upon any public place; to construct, store, erect, place, maintain, or operate in, upon, over, or under any public place any sidewalk cafe, food cart, or restaurant, staging, scaffold, structure, or material, machinery, or tools used or to be used in connection with the erection, alteration, repair, or painting of any building; or to move any building across or along any public place; or to use or occupy any public place for the storage or placement of any material, equipment, or thing; or to allow any vehicle to be upon that portion of roadway designated as parking or curb space for purposes of selling or soliciting in addition to merely parking; or to open, excavate, or in any manner disturb or break the surface or foundation of any permanent pavement of a public place; or to alter the established grade of any street; or to disturb the surface of, dig up, cut, excavate, or fill in any public place; or to construct, reconstruct, maintain, or remove any sidewalk or crosswalk, pavement, sewers, water mains, grading, street lighting, or appurtenances thereto, except when permitted by ordinance; or to do any work in, or erect any structure under, along, or over, any public place and other such uses. 

Vending means the commercial sale of food, beverages (excluding liquor), flowers, plants, and/or merchandise only from a sidewalk vending unit upon public ways of the city of Kent. “Vending” does not include liquor as defined in RCW 66.04.010, tobacco, firearms, munitions, or any article which a minor is prohibited by law from purchasing, or any materials restricted by the fire code from direct access or handling by the public.

(Ord. No. 3471, § 1, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3534, § 1, 12-5-00; Ord. No. 4095, § 1, 12-10-13; Ord. No. 4340, § 1, 11-19-19)


6.07.030 Permit required.

It shall be unlawful for anyone to use any public place for private purposes without having first obtained a street use permit from the director as required in this chapter and without complying with all the provisions of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3471, § 1, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3534, § 1, 12-5-00)


6.07.040 Construction and property development. 

A. Generally. No person shall be issued a project, building, grading, or fill permit without first obtaining a separate street use permit from the city except as follows:

1. An application is made for a permit to make an addition, alteration, or repairs to a single-family residence; or

2. The director determines, in his or her discretion, that the issuance of a separate street use permit for each project, building, grading, or fill permit is not necessary to regulate the use on the public place.

B. Moving of structures. Prior to application and issuance of a street use permit for any building or structure to be moved across, along, or upon any public place within the city and sited within the city, the applicant shall first obtain a building permit for the siting of such building or structure.

(Ord. No. 3471, § 1, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3534, § 1, 12-5-00; Ord. No. 4019, § 7, 12-13-11)


6.07.050 Signs. Revised 1/20

The following provisions shall apply to the placement of signs on public places:

A. Motorist information signs may be placed in the public right-of-way, subject to the following conditions:

1. The city is authorized to permit erection of motorist information follow through signs, in conformance with the requirements of this chapter, adjacent to city streets or roads. The applicant is responsible for manufacturing the sign panel and submitting it to the city. Upon the director’s approval of an application for a street use permit the city shall erect and maintain the motorist information follow through sign. The applicant is responsible for the initial installation cost, and the city shall thereafter charge an annual administration and maintenance fee of $100.

2. The applicant must be a qualifying business eligible for specific information signs pursuant to the Washington State Department of Transportation Motorist Information Sign Program, Chapter 47.42 RCW, and Chapter 468-66 WAC, as the same may be amended, and must have a primary motorist information sign currently erected on a nearby state highway.

3. Motorist information follow through signs and their locations shall comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter; Sections 131 and 315 of Title 23, United States Code; Chapter 47.42 RCW; Chapter 468-66 WAC; and such regulations as may be adopted by the Washington State Department of Transportation, including but not limited to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.

4. Motorist information follow through signs shall be located no more than 500 feet in advance of any required turn.

5. The location of other traffic control devices shall take precedence over the location of a motorist information follow through sign.

6. The logo sign panel on a motorist information follow through sign shall be a duplicate of the logo sign panel displayed on the authorized motorist information sign erected on the nearby state highway.

7. Motorist information follow through signs for multiple qualifying businesses may be combined into one sign assembly; provided, that the assembly contain no more than four logo sign panels.

8. Appropriate legends, such as directional arrows or messages indicating direction, shall be displayed with the logo sign panel to provide property guidance. The directional legend and border shall be white and shall be displayed on a blue background.

9. The letter height for the service category indicated on the motorist information follow through sign shall not exceed six inches. The letter height used on the logo for the business name shall not exceed four inches.

B. Violations. In addition or as an alternative to the remedies provided in this chapter, the director may remove or relocate signs which are placed on a public place in violation of the provisions of this section, or which the director determines, in his or her discretion, constitute a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public or interfere with the use of the public place. 

(Ord. No. 3471, § 1, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3534, § 1, 12-5-00; Ord. No. 4095, § 2, 12-10-13; Ord. No. 4340, § 2, 11-19-19)


6.07.060 Street vendors.

No person shall sell, offer for sale, solicit orders, rent, lease, or otherwise peddle from a public place, using a mobile cart, using a vehicle, or by any other mobile method, without first obtaining a vending permit as follows:

A. Permit application. In addition to the information required by this chapter, the applicant must provide the following before a vending permit can be issued:

1. Submit the name and home and business addresses of the applicant, and the name and address of the owner, if other than the applicant, of the vending business or sidewalk vending unit to be used in the operation of the vending business.

2. Submit written approval for the vending by the abutting property owner and/or street level tenant; if the tenant and property owner disagree, the property owner’s decision controls. The street level retail occupant of the abutting property shall have the right of first refusal for a permit subject to the abutting property owner’s written approval.

3. Submit an accurate drawing showing the public area to be used, along with plans detailing the design and size of the vending unit to be used.

4. Procure and maintain liability insurance pursuant to KCC 6.07.140(E), naming the city of Kent and the abutting property owner as additional insureds in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000).

B. Location review. Upon receipt of an application for a permit or permit renewal, the director shall review the location to determine if it is suitable for vending. In making this determination, the director shall consider the following criteria:

1. A sidewalk vending unit is limited to one (1) assigned location.

2. No permit shall be issued for a location within ten (10) feet of a driveway, wheelchair ramp, bus stop sign, or crosswalk at any intersection or any location which unreasonably interferes with the public’s or city’s use of the right-of-way. The location of the vending unit shall not reduce or obstruct pedestrian passage on the sidewalk to less than four (4) feet to the nearest street trees, utility poles, traffic control signs and devices, parking meters, fire hydrants, buildings and other similar devices and structures.

3. The permit operating area must be within a commercial or industrial zone as such is defined in the Kent Zoning Code.

4. No permit for a vendor shall be issued for a proposed vending site located within two hundred (200) feet of an existing vendor or retail store in which the permit applicant’s product is the primary product of the existing vendor’s site or retail store without the written consent of said permitted vendor or retail store. This distance requirement shall not apply to applications for special events or festivals issued under a master use permit issued pursuant to KCC 6.07.100.

5. If a proposed vending site is located within two hundred (200) feet of a park or public school, the vendor must present written consent of the city’s director of parks and recreation or the school district, respectively; if a proposed vending site is located within two hundred (200) feet of a private school, the vendor must present written consent of the administrator or manager of the private school. This distance requirement shall not apply to applications for special events or festivals issued under a master use permit issued pursuant to KCC 6.07.100.

6. The use of vending devices must be compatible with and must not unreasonably interfere with the public interest in use of the public ways as public rights-of-way.

7. The location of the sidewalk vending unit shall not reduce or obstruct pedestrian passage on the sidewalk to less than four (4) feet to the nearest street trees, utility poles, traffic control signs and devices, parking meters, fire hydrants, buildings and other similar devices and structures. Furthermore, such placement shall be consistent with any applicable standards established by the Americans with Disabilities Act and shall not obstruct vehicular traffic or parking or the use of any crosswalk, wheelchair ramp, bus, or taxi zone.

8. No person or corporation shall either pay or accept payment for the written consent required for issuance or continued operation of a sidewalk vending permit.

9. In the event that two (2) or more applications for the same location are received, the earliest application, if approved, shall be awarded the location.

C. Health and safety standards.

1. Vendors of food and beverages shall comply with all standards established by the Seattle-King County health department.

2. All sidewalk vending units in which food or beverage preparation occurs shall be inspected and approved by the city fire department to assure compliance of any cooking or heating apparatus with the following provisions:

a. Deep fat, oil, or grease cooking processes employing heated liquid shall be protected by a fire extinguishing system approved by the fire department. Processes involving heated fat, oil, grease, or liquids other than water shall be shielded from the public.

b. Processes requiring flammable gas, liquid, or solid fuels shall not be permitted, unless approved by the fire department. LPG containers shall be limited to no more than five (5) gallons’ capacity, and no more than one (1) container per cart or vendor display.

c. Storage of extra fuel is prohibited in the area of vending, or in any buildings, except as permitted by the fire department.

d. Vendors using open-flame cooking where steaks, hamburgers, sausages, hot dogs, or other products producing grease-laden vapors are cooked shall not be stationed beneath the awning or canopy of a building. Exception may be made when evidence is presented satisfying the fire department that no special threat is imposed to the building or awning by virtue of vendor location.

e. Pressure-cooking appliances shall be prohibited.

f. A 40B:C fire extinguisher is required in all vending carts using open-flame cooking or cooking products producing grease-laden vapors.

D. Conditions. Any person with a valid vending license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the following conditions:

1. All vendors must display, in a prominent and visible manner, the license issued by the director under the provisions of this chapter.

2. Food and beverages sold must be capable of immediate consumption.

3. The height of the vending unit, excluding canopies, umbrellas, or transparent enclosures, which must be approved by the director, shall not exceed five (5) feet and the vending unit must be capable of being pushed by one (1) person.

4. The vending site must be clean and orderly at all times, and the vendor must provide a refuse container for use by patrons.

5. Soliciting or conducting business with persons in motor vehicles is prohibited.

6. No merchandise shall be displayed using street furniture (planters, street lights, trees, trash containers, etc.) or placed upon the sidewalk. In addition, sales of merchandise shall not be allowed from a vehicle. No use of any automatic coin-operated vending dispenser shall be allowed. Persons conducting a sidewalk business must use a sidewalk vending unit.

7. Vendors shall not hinder use of any phone booth, mailbox, parking meter, fire alarm, fire hydrant (including automatic sprinklers or standpipe connections), newspaper vending machine, waste receptacle, bench, transit stop, or traffic signal controllers.

8. Vendors shall obey any lawful order from a police officer or fire department official during an emergency or to avoid congestion or obstruction of the sidewalk.

9. No vendor shall make loud noises or use mechanical audio or noise-making devices or hawk to advertise his or her product.

10. No licensed sidewalk vending unit shall be left unattended on a sidewalk, nor remain on the sidewalk between midnight and 6:00 a.m.

11. Utility service connections are not permitted, except electrical, when provided by the owner of the abutting property. Electrical lines are not allowed overhead or lying in the pedestrian portion of the sidewalk.

12. Signs, banners and/or streamers may be attached to the vending unit for the purpose of advertising or identifying the vending unit, subject to approval of the abutting property owner (or representative or agent) and the director. As determined by the director, such signs, banners, and/or streamers shall be situated so as to not unreasonably obstruct views of neighboring property or create a public safety hazard. 

(Ord. No. 3471, § 1, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3534, § 1, 12-5-00)


6.07.070 Sidewalk cafes.

No person may operate a sidewalk cafe without a permit from the director as follows:

A. Permit application. In addition to the information required by this chapter, an applicant must provide the following before a sidewalk cafe permit can be issued:

1. The anticipated periods of use during the year and the proposed hours of daily use, including Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays;

2. Whether any liquor, as defined in RCW 66.04.010, will be sold or consumed in the area to be covered by the permit; and

3. Procure and maintain liability insurance pursuant to KCC 6.07.140(E), naming the city of Kent as additional insureds in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000).

B. Terms and conditions.

1. The director may issue a permit for use of a sidewalk for sidewalk cafe purposes in the event and to the extent that he or she determines that:

a. The applicant is the owner or occupant of the abutting property and operates a cafe, restaurant, or tavern thereon;

b. The location of the sidewalk cafe shall not reduce or obstruct pedestrian passage on the sidewalk to less than four (4) feet to the nearest street trees, utility poles, traffic control signs and devices, parking meters, fire hydrants, buildings and other similar devices and structures. Furthermore, such placement shall be consistent with any applicable standards established by the Americans with Disabilities Act and shall not obstruct vehicular traffic or parking or the use of any crosswalk, wheelchair ramp, bus or taxi zone; and

c. The proposed sidewalk cafe area is included within a food-service establishment permit issued by the Seattle-King County health department or has otherwise been authorized by said department.

2. The director may include such terms and conditions in the permit as the director may deem appropriate, including but not limited to:

a. Restrictions as to the number and placement of tables and chairs and as to the hours and dates of use;

b. A requirement that the area be cleared when not in use as a sidewalk cafe, or upon the order of the director or other appropriate city officer such as the chief of police or fire chief or their authorized representatives;

c. Provisions that the permittees shall maintain the sidewalk in a clean and safe condition for pedestrian travel;

d. A requirement that the applicant clear the sidewalk as may be necessary to accommodate deliveries to abutting or other nearby properties;

e. Regulations upon lighting and illumination of the sidewalk cafe, limitations upon noise, and restrictions upon the placement of furniture or equipment used in connection with the sidewalk cafe;

f. The posting of a surety bond or establishment of an escrow account in accordance with the provisions of this chapter;

g. If the sidewalk cafe causes a change in pedestrian travel patterns, appropriate modifications to the sidewalk in the immediate vicinity in order to accommodate the change or to assure compliance with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act;

h. Restoration of the sidewalk upon completion of the use.

3. Unless expressly authorized by the director, no pavement shall be broken, no sidewalk surface disturbed, and no permanent fixture of any kind shall be installed in or on sidewalk area in connection with a sidewalk cafe.

4. The director may suspend or revoke the permission granted if an applicant violates this chapter, any implementing rules, or the terms and conditions of the permit.

C. Liquor. Liquor, as defined in RCW 66.04.010, as now existing or hereinafter amended, may be used and sold at a sidewalk cafe when authorized in both the use permit and provided for in this chapter and by permit of the Washington State Liquor Control Board, and not otherwise.

D. Sidewalk condition. The applicant shall comply with the terms and conditions of the sidewalk cafe permit issued, shall maintain the sidewalk in a clean and safe condition for pedestrian travel, and shall immediately clear the sidewalk area when ordered to do so by the director or other appropriate city officer such as the chief of police, fire chief or their authorized representatives.

(Ord. No. 3471, § 1, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3534, § 1, 12-5-00)


6.07.080 Sidewalk displays.

The owner or manager of a business upon abutting property making retail sales to the public may, without a permit, display on a public sidewalk goods or wares that are being offered for sale inside the business. Sidewalk displays are subject to rules of the director, and the following criteria:

A. The location of the sidewalk display shall not reduce or obstruct pedestrian passage on the sidewalk to less than four (4) feet to the nearest street trees, utility poles, traffic control signs and devices, parking meters, fire hydrants, buildings, and other similar devices and structures. Furthermore, such placement shall be consistent with any applicable standards established by the Americans with Disabilities Act and shall not obstruct vehicular traffic or parking or the use of any crosswalk, wheelchair ramp, bus or taxi zone.

B. The display must be flush against the building of the abutting property, must leave entrances and driveways clear, and may not extend more than three (3) feet into the sidewalk.

C. The display must be removed during those hours that the business is closed. If the display is in place before sunrise or after sunset, the display must be lighted and readily visible to passing pedestrians on the sidewalk.

D. Sales of goods or merchandise displayed must occur on the abutting privately owned property.

E. The display may not contain liquor, tobacco, firearms, munitions, or any article which a minor is prohibited by law from purchasing, or any material restricted by the fire code from direct access or handling by the public.

F. The display must be removed any time the director, chief of police, or fire chief determines that a clear sidewalk is needed and requests removal for use of travel or transportation, street cleaning or maintenance, street utility work, a crowd control event or parade, or an emergency.

G. The city assumes no responsibility for the items on display, irrespective of whether the loss occurs through accident, collision, vandalism, theft or otherwise.

(Ord. No. 3471, § 1, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3534, § 1, 12-5-00)


6.07.090 Street closures.

A. The city may permit the closure of a portion of a street or road within the boundaries of the city. No closure of any street or road of any duration in time or length shall occur except in accordance with a permit issued by the director, and such other laws or regulations which may be applicable. 

B. The director may issue a permit for closure of such street or road if such closure is consistent with the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens. The director is authorized to require that issuance of the permit is dependent upon fulfillment of such conditions as are necessary to ensure the closure is carried out in a safe, uniform and reasonable manner, including but not limited to: 

1. The execution of a written agreement regulating access to the street by emergency vehicles and local residents during the closure;

2. Procurement and posting of a bond, cash and/or proof of insurance in an amount sufficient to ensure payment for damages and/or all cleanup costs associated with the closure, and an indemnity agreement and/or deposit as set forth in KCC 6.07.140 and 6.07.150;

3. Use of city-approved signs and barricades for the closure. 

(Ord. No. 3471, § 1, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3534, § 1, 12-5-00)


6.07.100 Master use permit.

The director may issue a master use permit for special events and other instances involving multiple uses and/or users under this chapter. In such case, the director shall have the discretion to determine the amount of insurance that will be required depending on the risks associated with the level of uses under the permit. The director shall also have the discretion to modify the conditions of this chapter for the use(s) applied for as deemed appropriate in order to consolidate uses or accommodate multiple users under a master use permit. 

(Ord. No. 3471, § 1, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3534, § 1, 12-5-00)


6.07.110 City development or use – Exemptions.

The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to: 

A. Street, drainage, water or sewer maintenance work performed by the city, including street, drainage, water or sewer installation and improvement work authorized by ordinance, or street, drainage, water or sewer improvement projects under contract with the city shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 

B. The city-initiated closure of any highway, street or road. 

(Ord. No. 3471, § 1, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3534, § 1, 12-5-00)


6.07.120 Permit application.

To obtain a permit under this chapter, the person shall file an application on a form furnished by the city for that purpose. Every application shall, where applicable: 

A. Identify the property by legal description and address for which a permit is being sought or an accurate description of the public place or portion thereof desired to be used. 

B. Provide the use desired to be made of such public place by the applicant. 

C. Identify the owner of the property abutting the public place for which the permit is sought.

D. For construction and property development, to the extent required by the director:

1. Provide the plans and specifications for any utility or structure desired to be constructed, erected or maintained by the applicant in or on a public place. 

2. Identify routes to be utilized to and from the property. 

3. Identify the contractor and subcontractor responsible for the development work. 

4. Include the state contractor’s number of such contractor or subcontractor. 

5. Include the city business license number of such contractor or subcontractor. 

6. Include a copy of any building permit as required by KCC 6.07.040(B) for any building or structure to be moved across, along or upon any public place, pursuant to a permit issued herein, and sited within the city. 

E. Provide other information as required to the director.

F. Be signed by the owner or the agent of the applicant.

(Ord. No. 3471, § 1, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3534, § 1, 12-5-00)


6.07.130 Processing of applications. 

A. The director shall examine each application submitted to determine if it complies with the provisions of this chapter. The director may also submit the application to other city departments such as the fire, police, and planning departments for review and comment. In order to ascertain any facts which may aid in determining whether a permit shall be granted, the director may inspect the premises which is desired to be used under the permit. 

B. If after review of the application the director finds that the application presented to him or her for approval conforms to the requirements of this chapter and that the proposed use of such public place will not unduly interfere with the rights of the public or unduly interfere or compete with uses on abutting public or private property or otherwise constitute a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public, then the director may approve such application. 

(Ord. No. 3471, § 1, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3534, § 1, 12-5-00)


6.07.140 Indemnity deposit – Surety bond – Liability insurance. 

A. The applicant shall provide a cash indemnity deposit to the city unless the director determines that there is not a probability of injury, damage or expense to the city arising from an applicant’s proposed use of any public place. The amount of the cash indemnity deposit shall be determined by the director; governed by the anticipated amount and extent of injury, damage or expense to the city; and determined at the time of application approval. Such indemnity deposit shall be used to pay the cost of plan review, inspections, surveys, and other administrative services performed by the city; of restoring the street and removing any earth or other debris from the street, the replacement of any utility interrupted or damaged, or the completion of any work left unfinished; the cost of filing of an indemnity agreement with the department, if such an agreement is required with the permit; and any other expense the city may sustain in conjunction with the permitted work. The balance of the cash indemnity deposit, if any, after the foregoing deductions, shall be returned to the applicant. If the indemnity deposit is insufficient, the applicant will be liable for the deficiency. If the director determines that engineering studies must be made prior to the approval of any application for permit, the cost of such study shall be paid for by the applicant, or deducted from his indemnity deposit. 

B. In lieu of or in addition to the cash indemnity deposit, the director may require the applicant to file with the public works department a surety bond which has been approved as to surety and as to form by the city attorney. The surety bond shall meet all the requirements provided in subsection (A) of this section relative to a cash indemnity deposit, shall run for the full period of the permit, shall be in an amount to be fixed by the director, and shall be conditioned such that the applicant shall faithfully comply with all the terms of the permit, all the provisions of this chapter, and all other ordinances of the city. 

C. If the application is for the construction, reconstruction, repair, maintenance, or removal of any sidewalk, pavement, sewers, water mains, grading, street lighting, or appurtenances thereto, the applicant shall file with the public works department a surety bond approved as to surety and as to form by the city attorney. The surety bond shall run for the full period of the permit and may be required by the director for a period of one (1) year after the acceptance of the permitted work by the city, and shall be in an amount fixed by the director. The surety shall be conditioned such that the applicant shall faithfully complete all portions of the work according to the standard plans and specifications of the city and the specific plans for the work as approved by the city engineer. 

D. The director may require any permit holder to post a surety bond in the calendar year following the period of a permit when the extent of possible damage to a public place cannot be completely determined. 

E. Subject to other requirements for insurance set forth in this chapter, the director may require an applicant to procure and maintain in full force and effect public liability insurance naming the city of Kent, in an amount sufficient to cover potential claims for bodily injury, death, or disability, property damage, and when appropriate, as determined by the director, products and/or completed operations which may arise from or in connection with the permit. The director shall establish the amount of such insurance, and a certificate of insurance shall be provided to the city for review prior to issuance of the permit. 

F. The director has the discretion to require one (1) or any combination of the above requirements prior to issuance of a permit as the director deems appropriate, considering the use proposed by the applicant, in order to reasonably protect the city’s interests and the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 

(Ord. No. 3471, § 1, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3534, § 1, 12-5-00)


6.07.150 Indemnity agreement.

The applicant shall be required to execute a written agreement supplied by the city attorney to forever hold and save the city free and harmless from any and all claims, actions, or damages of every kind and description which may accrue to or be suffered by any person by reason of the use of such public place or of the construction, existence, maintenance, use, or occupation of any such structure, services, fixtures, equipment, and/or facilities on or in a public place pursuant to this chapter. In addition, such agreement shall contain a provision that the permit is wholly of a temporary nature, that it vests no permanent right whatsoever, and that, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the permit may be revoked without cause upon thirty (30) days’ notice or the same may be suspended or revoked without such notice in the event the permitted use shall become dangerous or unsafe or is not being operated in accordance with the provisions of this title.

(Ord. No. 3471, § 1, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3534, § 1, 12-5-00)


6.07.160 Permit issuance, expiration, and renewal. 

A. Every permit issued under this chapter shall be issued conditioned upon and subject to the right of the city to restrict, suspend, or revoke the permit as provided in KCC 6.07.180.

B. Every permit issued by the director under provisions of KCC 6.07.040 shall expire in accordance with the expiration date of the respective building, grading, or fill permit. In no such case shall the life of the street use permit extend beyond twelve (12) months from date of issuance. 

C. Permits issued for special events or occurrences, such as festivals or street closures, shall expire on the date established by the director as the ending date of the event or occurrence.

D. All other permits issued pursuant to this chapter, except those permits for which a shorter term is herein specified, shall be effective as of the first day of the month of issuance, regardless of the actual date of issue, and shall expire twelve (12) months from the effective date thereof, unless sooner revoked in the manner provided in this chapter.

E. Unless suspended, revoked, or denied as provided in this chapter, and subject to a location review as set forth in this section, all permits issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be renewed on or before the date of expiration of such permit, upon payment for the ensuing term of the established fee, minus the application charge. A vendor renewing a permit for a business that has changed the size of the vending area or location, or who has added heating or cooking apparatus since the last application/renewal, must follow requirements for a new application. 

F. Street use permits are not transferable.

(Ord. No. 3471, § 1, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3534, § 1, 12-5-00)


6.07.170 Permit and inspection fees. 

A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the city council shall, by resolution, establish the fees to be assessed to implement and operate the regulations adopted in this chapter. This resolution may require that certain fees be pre-paid and/or nonrefundable because staff time and materials will be expended whether or not the permit applied for is approved by the city or pulled by the applicant. In the event of any conflict or ambiguity regarding any fees established by council resolution, the public works director is authorized to interpret the fee schedule(s) to resolve that conflict or ambiguity.

B. Where total inspection time exceeds two (2) hours, an extra charge shall be invoiced to the applicant at an hourly rate as established by council resolution.

C. When work for which a permit would be required by this chapter is commenced or performed without first obtaining that permit, the basic permit fee shall be doubled, but the payment for that fee shall not relieve that person or entity from full compliance with all of the requirements of this chapter in the execution of the work, nor from any other penalties which may be provided for by local, state, or federal law, including criminal penalties.

(Ord. No. 3471, § 1, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3534, § 1, 12-5-00; Ord. No. 3713, § 7, 9-21-04; Ord. No. 3819, § 2, 11-21-06; Ord. No. 4019, § 7, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 4095, § 3, 12-10-13)


6.07.180 Director’s decision to deny, revoke, suspend, or restrict.

A. Pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the director shall have the power and authority to deny the issuance or renewal of any permit applied for or to revoke, suspend, or otherwise restrict any permit issued under this chapter. The director shall notify such applicant or permittee in writing, by mail or personal delivery, of the denial of a permit application or the suspension or revocation of an existing permit and the grounds therefor.

B. The issuance of a permit for use on a public way is subject to the use and needs of the city and the general public, whether such needs are temporary or permanent and for public or private purposes (i.e., utility construction work in public way by private service provider), and is a grant of a temporary revocable privilege to use a portion of the public way to serve and benefit the general public. The applicant shall have the burden to prove that any proposed use will enhance and further the public interest consistent and not in conflict with the use of the public way by the general public and the city for other authorized uses and activities. All permits granted under the provisions of this chapter may be restricted, suspended, or revoked, without compensation by the director, upon thirty (30) days’ prior notice when the use and needs of the city and general public are paramount to the applicant’s use or the applicant’s use does not enhance and further the public interest or is in conflict with the use of the public way. The director shall have the discretion to determine priorities of conflicting uses of public places or may deny any or all such uses or proposed uses.

C. Any permit issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked immediately based on one or more of the following grounds:

1. Any other license or permit issued pursuant to this chapter has been suspended, revoked, or cancelled.

2. The applicant has violated or failed to meet any of the provisions of this chapter or is in violation of any other ordinances or regulation of the city relating to the use by applicant for which the permit is applied for or issued.

3. The applicant does not currently have in effect an insurance policy in the minimum amount as specified in this chapter.

4. The permit was procured by fraud or misrepresentation of fact or was issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied to the city.

5. The abutting property owner or legal representative withdraws consent in writing for a sidewalk vending unit.

6. Health department authorization for the sidewalk food or beverage vending unit is cancelled.

7. A sidewalk vending unit is not used within ninety (90) days of its issuance.

8. The applicant’s use is creating a health or safety hazard or constitutes a public nuisance.

D. For permits issued for construction and property development, the following shall also apply:

1. Streets/storm drains. The applicant shall continuously keep the streets and storm drain system free from all debris attributed to the work performed under the respective building, grading, or fill permit. If this is violated, the director may, without advance notice and by posting the work site, suspend or revoke a permit issued. No new permit will be issued or the suspension lifted until the conditions of this section have been met. Where the director determines that no immediate action has taken place to remedy the conditions or to obtain compliance with the conditions of this section, and the director determines in his or her judgment that it is in the best interest of the city that immediate action should be taken, the director can order the work done by city forces or other forces. The cost thereof shall be deducted from the indemnity fund at the actual cost plus fifteen (15) percent.

2. Permit not obtained. Any work which is commenced or performed prior to obtaining the permit required by this chapter shall be immediately suspended and shall not recommence until the requirements of this chapter have been fully satisfied.

3. Stop work order. In addition to any remedy provided for in this chapter, the director may issue a stop work order whenever a continuing violation of this section will materially impair the director’s ability to secure compliance, or when a continuing violation threatens the health or safety of the public.

(Ord. No. 3471, § 1, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3534, § 1, 12-5-00)


6.07.190 Appeals.

Upon denial of issuance or renewal, or revocation, suspension or restriction of a permit, notice of such action shall be delivered, in writing, to the applicant by personal service or certified mail at the address specified by the licensee in the application. Any person aggrieved by the action of the director on a permit may within ten (10) days after notice of said action appeal to the hearing examiner by filing with the hearing examiner a written notice of the appeal, clearly stating the grounds on which the appeal is based. The appeal before the hearing examiner will be processed and heard pursuant to Ch. 2.32 KCC. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be final and conclusive unless appealed to the superior court within twenty-one (21) days of the date of the hearing examiner’s decision. If appeal is taken as herein prescribed, a suspension or revocation of a permit shall be stayed, except for a health, fire, or other public safety violation, pending final action by the hearing examiner.

(Ord. No. 3471, § 1, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3534, § 1, 12-5-00)


6.07.200 Administrative policies.

The director may establish administrative policies deemed appropriate to implement the provisions of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3471, § 1, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3534, § 1, 12-5-00)


6.07.210 Violation – Penalties. 

A. Civil. Any violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a civil violation under Ch. 1.04 KCC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required and/or otherwise enforced as provided therein. 

B. Criminal. In addition or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both such fine or imprisonment.

(Ord. No. 3471, § 1, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3534, § 1, 12-5-00)


Chapter 6.09 STREET OR ALLEY VACATION*

Sections:

6.09.010    Initiation of proceeding – Fee. 

6.09.020    Notice of hearing – Objections prior to hearing. 

6.09.030    Hearing – Ordinance of vacation. 

6.09.040    Street vacations. 

6.09.050    Title to vacated street or alley. 

6.09.060    Compensation criteria.

*Cross reference(s) – Department of public works, ch. 2.28.

State law reference(s) – Abandonment, RCW 35A.58.020, 35.79.010 et seq.


6.09.010 Initiation of proceeding – Fee.

The owners of an interest in any real estate abutting upon any street or alley who may desire to vacate the street or alley or any part thereof may petition the city council to make such vacation, giving a description of the property to be vacated or the city council may itself initiate by resolution such vacation procedure. If the petition is signed by the owners of more than two-thirds of the property abutting upon the part of such street or alley sought to be vacated and is accompanied by a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150), the city council shall by resolution fix a time when the petition shall be heard and determined by them, which time shall not be more than sixty (60) days nor less than twenty (20) days after the date of the passage of such resolution.

(Ord. No. 1934, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.08.010)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 35.79.010 et seq.


6.09.020 Notice of hearing – Objections prior to hearing.

Upon the passage of the resolution, the city clerk shall give twenty (20) days’ notice of the pendency of the petition by a written notice posted in three (3) of the most public places in the city and a like notice in a conspicuous place on the street or alley sought to be vacated. The notice shall contain a statement that a petition has been filed to vacate the street or alley described in the notice, together with a statement of the time and place for the hearing of the petition. The city clerk shall direct a copy of the notice and of the resolution to the city planning director who shall solicit comments from city departments, from utility companies and from such other as he believes to have a special interest in the vacation. If the proceeding is initiated by resolution of the city council without a petition having been signed by the owners of more than two-thirds of the property abutting upon the part of the street or alley sought to be vacated, in addition to the notice hereinabove required, there shall be given by mail at least fifteen (15) days before the date fixed for the hearing a similar notice to the owners or reputed owners of all lots, tracts or parcels of land or other property abutting upon any street or alley or any part thereof sought to be vacated, as shown on the rolls of the county assessor, directed to the address thereon shown. If the owners of fifty (50) percent of the property abutting upon the part of such street or alley sought to be vacated file written objection to the proposed vacation with the city clerk prior to the time of hearing, the city shall not proceed with the resolution.

(Ord. No. 1934, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.08.020)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 35.79.020.


6.09.030 Hearing – Ordinance of vacation.

A. The hearing on the petition or resolution shall be held before the city council on the date fixed by resolution or at the time to which the hearing may be continued. The city planning manager shall report his or her findings at the hearing. If the city council determines to grant all or part of the requested street vacation, it shall by ordinance vacate all or part of the street, or alley. The ordinance may provide that it shall not become effective until the petitioners have compensated the city for the area vacated in accordance with this chapter. The ordinance may also provide that the city retain an easement or the right to exercise or grant easements in respect to the vacated property for the construction, operation, repair, and maintenance of public utilities and services. The city clerk shall record a certified copy of the ordinance with the King County Recorder’s Office. The one-hundred-fifty-dollar ($150) fee shall not be refunded, whether or not the petition is granted.

B. The city shall not vacate a street or alley or any parts thereof if any portion abuts on a body of water unless the vacation seeks to enable the city, port district, or state to acquire the property for port purposes, boat moorage, or launching sites, park, viewpoint, recreational, or education purposes, or other public use. This provision shall not apply to industrial zoned property.

(Ord. No. 1934, § 3; Ord. No. 3634, § 1, 2-4-03. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.08.030)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 35.79.030.


6.09.040 Street vacations.

Street vacations shall be subject to the limitations set forth in RCW 35.79.035 pertaining to vacation of streets abutting bodies of water.


6.09.050 Title to vacated street or alley.

If any street or alley is vacated by the city council, the property within the limits vacated shall belong to the abutting property owners, one-half (1/2) to each.

(Ord. No. 1934, § 4. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.08.040)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 35.79.040.


6.09.060 Compensation criteria.

A. If the city council vacates all or part of any street or alley, the ordinance may provide that the vacation shall not become effective until the petitioners have compensated the city for the area vacated in an amount which does not exceed one-half (1/2) the appraised value of the area vacated. In the event, however, that the street or alley has been part of a dedicated public right-of-way, whether opened or unopened, for twenty-five (25) years or more, or if the property or portions thereof were acquired at public expense, the city may require the petitioners to compensate the city in an amount that does not exceed the full appraised value of the area vacated.

The amount of compensation required for the vacation of all city streets or alleys as of the effective date of the vacation, for the purposes of this section, shall be determined by the public works department. The city council shall have authority to accept real property of equal value in lieu of cash compensation where the value of the street or alley to be vacated is not more than the value of the real property to be acquired by such exchange. 

B. When a street or alley is vacated for a governmental agency, compensation shall be based on the administrative costs of the vacation and may, in the discretion of the city council, be based on original cost of acquisition.

C. When determining the value of the vacated street or alley, the public works department may require that an appraisal be performed. The petitioner shall pay the cost of the appraisal and the monies for the same shall be deposited with the city prior to the city authorizing an appraisal be prepared.

D. The compensation determined to be paid shall be a condition precedent to the passage of the specific ordinance pertaining to the street or alley proposed for vacation, and the petitioner will pay the city within ninety (90) days of the passage of the motion directing the city attorney to prepare the specific vacation ordinance. If the petitioner fails to pay the required sum within ninety (90) days, the petition shall be denied.

E. In accordance with state law, the city must dedicate one-half (1/2) of the revenue received as compensation for the area vacated for the acquisition, improvement, development, and related maintenance of public open space or transportation capital projects within the city.

(Ord. No. 2333, § 4, 1-18-82; Ord. No. 3634, § 2, 2-4-03)


Chapter 6.10 STREET TREES*

Sections:

6.10.010    Definitions. 

6.10.020    Street tree and planting list. 

6.10.030    Street tree planting plans and standards. 

6.10.040    Property owner requests. 

6.10.050    Street tree maintenance, inspection and removal. 

6.10.060    Protection of street trees. 

6.10.070    Nonliability of city. 

6.10.080    Violations and penalties. 

*Cross reference(s) – Department of public works, ch. 2.28; landscaping, ch. 15.07; preservation of trees, § 15.08.240; planting of certain trees prohibited, § 7.04.200.

State law reference(s) – Authority to require landscaping, RCW 35.43.040.


6.10.010 Definitions.

The following words and phrases when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning is clearly required by the context:

Director shall mean the director of the parks and recreation department of the city.

Maintain or maintenance shall mean the entire care of trees in planting strips, as well as the preparation of ground, fertilizing, mulching, planting, spraying, trimming, pruning, topping and root control, but not watering, unless specifically so stated.

Planting shall mean planting and replacement in planting strips.

Planting strip shall mean the area available for planting between the street curb, the edge of the traveled portion of roadway and the property line.

(Ord. No. 1703, § 1; Ord. No. 2567, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.12.010)

Cross reference(s) – Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.01.030.

 


6.10.020 Street tree and planting list.

A. The director shall have full advisory authority as to the selection, planting and maintenance of all trees, plants and shrubs planted and growing upon any and all of the public streets and public planting areas of the city.

B. The director shall approve the official tree planting list and street tree planting plans. The director in evaluating such plans prior to approval shall call upon the resources of the department of public works to furnish him with facts concerning trees and planting strips in the city.

C. The director shall approve or disapprove the adding or removal of trees to the official tree planting list. The list as approved shall be submitted to the city council for its adoption, by resolution, as the official tree planting list of the city which is on file in the city clerk’s office.

D. All new plantings on the streets of the city shall be confined to trees from the latest adopted official tree planting list. Replacement planting may conform to existing trees in the planting strip by approval of the director.

(Ord. No. 1703, § 2; Ord. No. 2567, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.12.020)


6.10.030 Street tree planting plans and standards.

A. The planting of street trees in the city shall be governed by general and specific tree planting plans approved by the director. The plans shall be based upon the policies indicated in this chapter and upon the following standards:

1. The director shall evaluate types and varieties of trees on the tree planting list and nature of the particular area to be planted and shall determine in his opinion the best tree planting for the area.

2. The director shall approve the general or specific plan. The director, in evaluating the plan prior to approval, may call upon the resources of the department of public works to furnish it with facts concerning the matter.

B. The director shall be guided by and apply the following standards in formulating and approving a street tree plan.

1. Trees listed on the official tree planting list are to be used, except that other trees may be planted on an experimental basis in selected areas with specific approval of the director.

2. The prime purpose of beauty shall always be observed.

3. The location of specific trees shall be at suitable intervals with consideration given to avoiding or minimizing interference by the trees with existing or planned utilities, driveway approaches, street intersections and building exposures.

4. Selection of a particular species of tree for a specific block, street or section of the city shall be based upon the nature of the species and the width of the planting strip, soil conditions, zoning regulations, street patterns, building setbacks, utilities, future underground wiring proposals and availability of the particular species.

(Ord. No. 1703, § 3; Ord. No. 2567, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.12.030)


6.10.040 Property owner requests.

A. A majority of the abutting property owners in a given block, street or area of the city where tree planting is required may petition for the uniform planting of a tree variety of their own choice. Such petition shall be approved by the director, provided the tree selection is made from the official street tree list and the selection does not conflict with the standards in this chapter.

B. A petition to the director bearing the signatures of not less than ninety (90) percent of the property owners of any block may be filed with the director requesting a change in the variety of trees in the planting strip adjacent to their properties. Such petition shall be approved by the director, provided the tree selection is made from the official street tree list and the selection does not conflict with the standards of KCC 6.10.030. All expenses of such change will be borne by the property owners requesting the change, the work to be done under the supervision of the director.

(Ord. No. 1703, § 4; Ord. No. 2567, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.12.040)


6.10.050 Street tree maintenance, inspection and removal.

A. It shall be the consistent purpose of the city to provide proper maintenance according to good municipal forestry practices for all trees growing along the city arterials, and in business and industrial districts.

B. It shall be the responsibility of the city to provide preparation of ground, planting, trimming, pruning, topping, root control, and removal of dead or dying trees in residential districts.

C. The director shall conduct a continual inspection program of the trees along the streets of the city. All trees found by the director to be dead, dying or in a dangerous condition likely to cause damage shall be removed. The city at its own cost and expense, and in accordance with the provision of this chapter, will replace all trees so removed.

(Ord. No. 1703, § 5; Ord. No. 2567, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.12.050)


6.10.060 Protection of street trees.

A. No person shall plant, install or maintain shrubs, low growing trees, vines, fences, signs or stakes or any other object, except temporary protection for newly planted lawns, or cause or create conditions or uneven ground, holes or hazards in planting strips along the streets of the city. When determined by the director that any such plantings or installations are a hazard to the public or detrimental to the approved tree planting plan, the director shall have full authority to cause such hazard or detriment to be removed or eliminated.

B. No person shall, without a written permit from the director, plant, remove, trim, prune or cut any tree between the property line and the curb. Upon permission being granted to any person, the work shall be done under the supervision of the director.

C. No person without lawful authority shall interfere or cause or permit any person to interfere with employees of the city who are engaged in the planting or maintaining, treating or removing of any tree or plant in the planting strips or in the removing of any stone, cement or any substance in any such street, sidewalk, planting strip, alley or other public place.

D. No person shall wilfully injure or destroy any tree on the street or public planting areas of the city by any means.

(Ord. No. 1703, § 6; Ord. No. 2567, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.12.060)


6.10.070 Nonliability of city.

Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the city, or upon any of its officers or employees. The owner and occupant of any private property shall have the duty to maintain sidewalks, trees and shrubs upon private property, or property under his control including sidewalks and planting strips in front of such private property.

(Ord. No. 1703, § 7; Ord. No. 2567, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.12.070)


6.10.080 Violations and penalties.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or by imprisonment for a period of not more than one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(Ord. No. 1703, § 8; Ord. No. 2567, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.12.080)


Chapter 6.12 COMMUTE TRIP REDUCTION*

Sections:

6.12.010    Short title.

6.12.020    CTR program goals.

6.12.030    Definitions.

6.12.040    Responsible city officials.

6.12.050    Applicability.

6.12.060    Requirements for employers.

6.12.070    Record keeping.

6.12.080    Schedule and process for CTR program description and report.

6.12.090    Compliance.

6.12.100    Program modification criteria.

6.12.110    Violations.

6.12.120    Penalties.

6.12.130    Exemptions and goal modifications.

6.12.140    Appeal of administrative decisions.

*Cross reference(s) – Traffic code, ch. 9.36; environmental management, title 11.


6.12.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be known as the Commute Trip Reduction (CTR) Ordinance, and may be cited as such.

(Ord. No. 3474, § 2, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 3917, § 2, 6-2-09)


6.12.020 CTR program goals.

The city’s goals for reductions in the proportions of drive alone commute trips and vehicle miles traveled per employee by affected employers in the city’s jurisdiction, major employment installations, and other areas designated by the city are set forth in the city’s CTR plan adopted herein by this reference. These goals establish the desired level of performance for the CTR program in its entirety in Kent, including drive alone and VMT goals for affected employers and newly affected employers.

(Ord. No. 3917, § 2, 6-2-09)


6.12.030 Definitions.

The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:

A. Affected employee means a full-time employee who is scheduled to begin his or her regular work day at a single worksite covered by the commute trip reduction plan between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. (inclusive) on two (2) or more weekdays for at least twelve (12) continuous months who is not an independent contractor. Seasonal agricultural employees, including seasonal employees of processors of agricultural products, are excluded from the count of affected employees.

B. Affected employer means an employer that employs one hundred (100) or more full-time employees at a single worksite covered by the commute trip reduction plan who are scheduled to begin their regular work day between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. (inclusive) on two (2) or more weekdays for at least twelve (12) continuous months. Construction worksites, when the expected duration of the construction is less than two (2) years, are excluded from this definition. (Also see definition of “employer.”)

C. Alternative mode means any means of commute transportation other than that in which the single-occupant motor vehicle is the dominant mode, including telecommuting and compressed work week schedules if they result in reducing commute trips.

D. Alternative work schedules means programs that eliminate work trips for affected employees.

E. Base year means the twelve (12) month period which commences when a major employer is determined by the jurisdiction to be participating within the CTR program. The city uses this twelve (12) month period as the basis upon which it develops commute trip reduction goals.

F. Base year survey or baseline measurement means the survey, during the base year, of employees at a major employer worksite to determine the drive alone rate and vehicle miles traveled per employee at the worksite. The jurisdiction uses this measurement to develop commute trip reduction goals for the major employer. The baseline measurement must be implemented in a manner that meets the requirements specified by the city.

G. Carpool means a motor vehicle, including a motorcycle, occupied by two (2) to six (6) people of at least sixteen (16) years of age traveling together for their commute trip, resulting in the reduction of a minimum of one (1) motor vehicle commute trip.

H. City means the city of Kent.

I. Commute trips means trips made from a worker’s home to a worksite on any weekday.

J. Commute trip reduction (CTR) plan means the city of Kent’s Commute Trip Reduction Local Plan 2008-2011. The CTR plan is referenced in the Kent Transportation Master Plan adopted by Ordinance No. 3883, which is an element of the Kent Comprehensive Plan. It is adopted by this reference in this chapter.

K. Commute trip reduction (CTR) program means an employer’s strategies to reduce employees’ drive alone commutes and average VMT per employee.

L. Commute trip vehicle miles traveled per employee means the sum of the individual vehicle commute trip lengths in miles over a set period divided by the number of full-time employees during that period.

M. Compressed work week means an alternative work schedule, in accordance with employer policy, that regularly allows a full-time employee to eliminate at least one (1) work day every two (2) weeks by working longer hours during the remaining days, resulting in fewer commute trips by the employee. This definition is primarily intended to include weekly and bi-weekly arrangements, the most typical being four (4) ten (10) hour days or eighty (80) hours in nine (9) days, but may also include other arrangements.

N. Custom bus/buspool means a commuter bus service arranged specifically to transport employees to work.

O. Dominant mode means the mode of travel used for the greatest distance of a commute trip.

P. Drive alone means a motor vehicle occupied by one (1) employee for commute purposes, including a motorcycle.

Q. Drive alone trips means commute trips made by employees in single-occupant vehicles.

R. Employee means anyone who receives financial or other remuneration in exchange for work provided to an employer, including owners or partners of the employer.

S. Employee transportation coordinator (ETC) means a person who is designated as responsible for the development, implementation and monitoring of an employer’s CTR program.

T. Employer means a sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, unincorporated association, cooperative, joint venture, agency, department, district, or other individual or entity, whether public, nonprofit, or private, that employs workers.

U. Exemption means a waiver from any or all CTR program requirements granted to an employer by the city based on unique conditions that apply to the employer or employment site.

V. Flex time means an employer that provides work schedules allowing individual employees flexibility in choosing the start and end time, but not the number of their working hours.

W. Full-time employee means a person, other than an independent contractor, whose position is scheduled on a continuous basis for fifty-two (52) weeks for an average of at least thirty-five (35) hours per week.

X. Good faith effort means that an employer has met the minimum requirements identified in RCW 70.94.531 and this chapter, and is also working collaboratively with the city to continue its existing CTR program or is developing and implementing program modifications likely to result in improvements to its CTR program over an agreed-upon length of time. 

Y. Implementation means active pursuit by an employer of the CTR goals of RCW 70.94.521 through 70.94.555 and this chapter as evidenced by appointment of an ETC, distribution of information to employees regarding alternatives to drive alone commuting, and commencement of other measures according to its approved CTR program and schedule.

Z. Major employer means a private or public employer, including state agencies, that employs one hundred (100) or more full-time employees at a single worksite who are scheduled to begin their regular work day between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekdays for at least twelve (12) continuous months.

AA. Major employer worksite or affected employer worksite or worksite means the physical location occupied by a major employer, as determined by the local jurisdiction.

BB. Major employment installation means a military base or federal reservation, excluding tribal reservations, or other locations as designated by the city, at which there are one hundred (100) or more affected employees.

CC. Mode means the type of transportation used by employees, such as single-occupant motor vehicle, rideshare vehicle (carpool, vanpool), transit, bicycle, walking, compressed work week schedule and telecommuting.

DD. Newly affected employer means an affected employer either moving into the boundaries outlined in the CTR plan or growing in employment at a worksite to one hundred (100) or more affected employees.

EE. Notice means written communication delivered via the United States Postal Service with return receipt requested. Service shall be deemed sufficient three (3) days following the day on which the notice was deposited with the Postal Service unless the third day falls on a weekend or legal holiday, in which case the notice is deemed accepted the day after the weekend or legal holiday.

FF. Peak period means the hours from 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. (inclusive), Monday through Friday, except legal holidays.

GG. Peak period trip means any commute trip that delivers the employee to begin his or her regular workday between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. (inclusive), Monday through Friday, except legal holidays.

HH. Proportion of drive alone trips or drive alone rate means the number of commute trips over a set period made by affected employees in single-occupancy vehicles divided by the number of potential trips taken by affected employees working during that period.

II. Ride matching service means a system which assists in matching commuters for the purpose of commuting together.

JJ. Telecommuting or teleworking means the use of telephones, computers, or other similar technology to permit an employee to work from home, eliminating a commute trip, or to work from a work place closer to home, reducing the distance traveled in a commute trip by at least half.

KK. Transit means a multiple-occupant vehicle operated on a for-hire, shared-ride basis, including bus, passenger, ferry, rail, shared-ride taxi, shuttle bus, or vanpool.

LL. Transportation demand management (TDM) means a broad range of strategies that are primarily intended to reduce and reshape demand on the transportation system.

MM. Transportation management association (TMA) means a group of employers or an association representing a group of employers in a defined geographic area. A TMA may represent employers within specific city limits or may have a sphere of influence that extends beyond city limits.

NN. Vanpool means a vehicle occupied by from five (5) to fifteen (15) people traveling together for their commute trip, resulting in the reduction of a minimum of one (1) motor vehicle trip.

OO. Vehicle miles traveled (VMT) per employee means the sum of the individual vehicle commute trip lengths in miles made by affected employees over a set period divided by the number of affected employees during that period.

PP. Week means a seven (7) day calendar period starting on Monday and continuing through Sunday.

QQ. Weekday means any day of the week except Saturday or Sunday.

RR. Writing, written or in writing means original signed and dated documents. Facsimile (fax) transmissions are a temporary notice of action that must be followed by the original signed and dated document via mail or delivery.

(Ord. No. 3474, § 2, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 3917, § 2, 6-2-09. Formerly 6.12.020)


6.12.040 Responsible city officials. 

The public works director, or his/her designate(s), is hereby authorized to implement this chapter, the CTR plan and the city CTR program.

(Ord. No. 3474, § 2, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 3917, § 2, 6-2-09. Formerly 6.12.030)


6.12.050 Applicability.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any affected employer at any single worksite within the limits of the city of Kent.

A. Notification of applicability.

1. In addition to the city’s established public notification for adoption of an ordinance, a notice of availability of a summary of the ordinance codified in this chapter, a notice of the requirements and criteria for affected employers to comply with the ordinance, and subsequent revisions shall be published at least once in the city’s official newspaper not more than thirty (30) days after passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter or revisions.

2. Affected employers are to receive written notification that they are subject to this chapter. Such notice shall be addressed to the company’s chief executive officer, senior official, or ETC of the worksite or upon the registered agent for the affected employee. Such notification shall provide ninety (90) days for the affected employer to perform a baseline measurement consistent with the measurement requirements specified by the city.

3. Affected employers that, for whatever reason, do not receive notice within thirty (30) days of passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter and are either notified or identify themselves to the city within ninety (90) days of the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter will be granted an extension to assure up to ninety (90) days within which to perform a baseline measurement consistent with the measurement requirements specified by the city.

4. Affected employers that have not been identified or do not identify themselves within ninety (90) days of the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter and do not perform a baseline measurement consistent with the measurement requirements specified by the city within ninety (90) days from the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter are in violation of this chapter.

5. If an affected employer has already performed a baseline measurement, or an alternative acceptable to the city, under previous iterations of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the employer is not required to perform another baseline measurement.

6. Any existing employer of seventy-five (75) or more employees who obtains a business license in the city shall be required to complete an employer assessment form, provided to the employer by the city, to determine whether or not that employer will be deemed affected, or nonaffected, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B. New affected employers. 

1. Employers that meet the definition of “affected employer” in this chapter must identify themselves to the city within ninety (90) days of either moving into the boundaries outlined in the CTR plan or growing in employment at a worksite to one hundred (100) or more affected employees. Employers who do not identify themselves within ninety (90) days are in violation of this chapter.

2. Newly affected employers identified as such shall be given ninety (90) days to perform a baseline measurement consistent with the measurement requirements specified by the city. Employers who do not perform a baseline measurement within ninety (90) days of receiving written notification that they are subject to this chapter are in violation of this chapter.

3. Not more than ninety (90) days after receiving written notification of the results of the baseline measurement, the newly affected employer shall develop and submit a CTR program to the city. The program will be developed in consultation with the city staff appointed by the public works director to be consistent with the goals of the CTR plan. The program shall be implemented not more than ninety (90) days after approval by the city. Employers who do not implement an approved CTR program according to this schedule are in violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties outlined in KCC 6.12.120.

C. Change in status of an affected employer. Any of the following changes in an employer’s status will change the employer’s CTR program requirements:

1. If an employer initially designated as an affected employer no longer employs one hundred (100) or more affected employees and expects not to employ one hundred (100) or more affected employees for the next twelve (12) months, that employer is no longer an affected employer. It is the responsibility of the employer to notify the city that it is no longer an affected employer. The burden of proof lies with the employer.

2. If the same employer returns to the level of one hundred (100) or more affected employees within the same twelve (12) months, that employer will be considered an affected employer for the entire twelve (12) months and will be subject to the same program requirements as other affected employers.

3. If the same employer returns to the level of one hundred (100) or more affected employees twelve (12) or more months after its change in status to an unaffected employer, that employer shall be treated as a new affected employer and will be subject to the same program requirements as other new affected employers.

(Ord. No. 3474, § 2, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 3917, § 2, 6-2-09. Formerly 6.12.060)


6.12.060 Requirements for employers.

An affected employer is required to make a good faith effort, as defined in RCW 70.94.534(2) and this chapter, to develop and implement a CTR program that will encourage its employees to reduce VMT per employee and drive alone commute trips. The CTR program must include the following mandatory elements: 

A. Mandatory program elements and implementation requirements. Employers are required to make a good faith effort to achieve the goals identified in KCC 6.12.020. Each employer’s CTR program shall include the following mandatory elements:

1. Employee transportation coordinator. The employer shall designate an employee transportation coordinator (ETC) to administer the CTR program. The ETC’s name, location, and telephone number must be prominently displayed, physically or electronically, at each affected worksite. The ETC shall oversee all elements of the employer’s CTR program and act as liaison between the employer and the city. 

2. Information distribution. Information about alternatives to drive alone commuting as well as a summary of the employer’s CTR program shall be provided to employees at least once a year and to new employees at the time of hire. The summary of the employer’s CTR program at the time of hire shall also be submitted to the city with the employer’s program description and regular report.

B. Additional program elements. In addition to the specified program elements described above, the employer’s CTR program shall include additional elements as needed to meet the CTR goals. Employers are encouraged to consider innovative strategies and combine program elements in a manner that will best suit their location, site characteristics, business type, and employees’ commuting needs. Employers are further encouraged to cooperate with each other to implement program elements. Elements may include, but are not limited to, one (1) or more of the following:

1. Preferential parking for high-occupancy vehicles;

2. Reduced parking charges for high-occupancy vehicles;

3. Increasing parking charges for drive alone commuters;

4. Commuter ride matching services to facilitate employee ridesharing for commute trips;

5. Subsidies for rail, transit, or vanpool fares and/or transit passes;

6. Vans or buses for employee ridesharing;

7. Subsidies for carpools, walking, bicycling, teleworking, or compressed schedules;

8. Incentives for employees that do not drive alone to work;

9. Use of the employer’s vehicles for carpooling or vanpooling;

10. Flexible work schedules to facilitate employees’ use of transit, carpools, or vanpools;

11. Additional regular or express service to the worksite, in cooperation with transit service providers;

12. Special loading and unloading facilities for transit, carpool, and vanpool users;

13. Bicycle parking facilities, lockers, changing areas, and showers for employees who bicycle or walk to work;

14. A program of parking incentives such as a rebate for employees who do not use the parking facilities;

15. Program(s) to permit employees to work part- or full-time at home or at an alternative worksite closer to their homes, which reduces commute trips;

16. Program(s) of alternative work schedules, such as a compressed work week, which reduces commute trips;

17. Other measures designed to facilitate the use of high-occupancy vehicles, such as on-site day care facilities, emergency taxi services, or guaranteed ride home programs;

18. Elimination of free parking; and

19. Other measures that the employer believes will reduce the number and length of commute trips made to the site.

C. CTR program report and description. Affected employers shall review their program and file a regular program report and description on the forms provided by the city.

1. General. The CTR program report and description outlines the strategies to be undertaken by an employer to achieve the commute trip reduction goals for the reported period.

2. Minimum requirements. At a minimum, the employer’s CTR program report and description must include:

a. A general description of the employment site location, transportation characteristics, employee parking availability, on-site amenities, and surrounding services;

b. The number of employees affected by the CTR program and the total number of employees at the site;

c. Documentation on compliance with the mandatory CTR program elements (as described in subsection (A) of this section);

d. Description of any additional elements included in the employer’s CTR program (as described in subsection (B) of this section); and

e. A statement of organizational commitment to provide appropriate resources to the program to meet the employer’s established goals.

D. Biennial measure of employee commute behavior. In addition to the baseline measurement, employers shall conduct a program evaluation as a means of determining worksite progress toward meeting CTR goals. As part of the program evaluation, the employer shall distribute and collect commute trip reduction program employee questionnaires (surveys) at least once every two (2) years, and strive to achieve at least a seventy (70) percent response rate from employees at the worksite.

(Ord. No. 3474, § 2, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 3917, § 2, 6-2-09. Formerly 6.12.070)


6.12.070 Record keeping.

Affected employers shall maintain a copy of their approved CTR program description and report, their CTR program employee questionnaire results, and all supporting documentation for the descriptions and assertions made in any CTR report to the city for a minimum of forty-eight (48) months or until authorized by the city to dispose of such records.

(Ord. No. 3474, § 2, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 3917, § 2, 6-2-09. Formerly 6.12.080)


6.12.080 Schedule and process for CTR program description and report.

A. Document review. CTR program reports must be approved by the city. The city shall provide the employer with written notification if a CTR program does not meet the minimum program requirements (KCC 6.12.060). The city may extend the review period up to ninety (90) days. The implementation date for the employer’s CTR program will be extended an equivalent number of days.

B. Schedule. Upon review of an employer’s initial CTR program, the city shall establish the employer’s regular reporting date. This report will be provided in a form provided by the city consistent with KCC 6.12.060(C).

C. Modification of CTR program elements. Any affected employer may submit a request to the city for modification of CTR requirements. Such request may be granted if one (1) of the following conditions exist:

1. The employer can demonstrate it would be unable to comply with the CTR program elements for reasons beyond the control of the employer; or

2. The employer can demonstrate that compliance with the program elements would constitute an undue hardship.

The city may ask the employer to substitute a program element of similar trip reduction potential rather than grant the employer’s request. 

D. Extensions. An employer may request additional time to submit a CTR program description and report, or to implement or modify a program. Such requests shall be via written notice at least thirty (30) days before the due date for which the extension is being requested. Extensions not to exceed ninety (90) days shall be considered for reasonable causes. The city shall grant or deny the employer’s extension request by written notice within ten (10) working days of its receipt of the extension request. If there is no response issued to the employer, an extension is automatically granted for thirty (30) days. Extensions shall not exempt an employer from any responsibility in meeting program goals. Extensions granted due to delays or difficulties with any program element(s) shall not be cause for discontinuing or failing to implement other program elements. An employer’s regular reporting date shall not be adjusted permanently as a result of these extensions. An employer’s annual reporting date may be extended at the discretion of the city. Modifications shall be made in accordance with subsection (C) of this section.

E. Implementation of employer’s CTR program. Unless extensions are granted, the employer shall implement its approved CTR program, including approved program modifications, not more than ninety (90) days after receiving written notice from the city that the program has been approved.

(Ord. No. 3474, § 2, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 3917, § 2, 6-2-09. Formerly 6.12.090)


6.12.090 Compliance.

For purposes of this chapter, compliance shall mean:

A. Fully implementing in good faith all mandatory program elements as well as provisions in the approved CTR program description and report;

B. Providing a complete CTR program description and report on the regular reporting date; and

C. Distributing and collecting the CTR program employee questionnaire during the scheduled survey time period.

(Ord. No. 3917, § 2, 6-2-09)


6.12.100 Program modification criteria.

The following criteria for achieving goals for VMT per employee and proportion of drive alone trips shall be applied in determining requirements for CTR program modifications:

A. If an employer meets either or both goals, the employer has satisfied the objectives of the CTR plan and will not be required to modify its CTR program;

B. If an employer makes a good faith effort as defined in RCW 70.94.534(2) and this chapter, but has not met the applicable drive alone or VMT goal, no additional modifications are required.

C. If an employer fails to make a good faith effort as defined in RCW 70.94.534(2) and this chapter, and fails to meet the applicable drive alone or VMT reduction goal, the city shall direct the employer to revise its program within thirty (30) days to come into compliance with the measures defined by RCW 70.94.534(2), including specified recommended program modifications. In response to the recommended modifications, the employer shall submit a revised CTR program description and report, including the requested modifications or equivalent measures, within thirty (30) days of receiving written notice to revise its program. The city shall review the revisions and notify the employer of acceptance or rejection of the revised program. If a revised program is not accepted, the city will send written notice to that effect to the employer within thirty (30) days and, if necessary, require the employer to attend a conference with program review staff for the purpose of reaching a consensus on the required program. A final decision on the required program will be issued in writing by the city within ten (10) working days of the conference.

(Ord. No. 3474, § 2, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 3917, § 2, 6-2-09)


6.12.110 Violations.

Any one or more of the following constitute violations of this chapter:

A. Failure to self-identify as an affected employer and/or to provide the baseline measurement as required by Sections 6.12.050(A) and (B).

B. Failure to develop and/or submit, on time, a complete CTR program.

C. Failure to implement an approved CTR program, unless the program elements that are carried out can be shown through quantifiable evidence to meet or exceed VMT and drive alone goals as specified in this chapter.

D. Submission of false or fraudulent data in response to survey requirements.

E. Failure to make a good faith effort, as defined in RCW 70.94.534 and this chapter.

F. Failure to revise a CTR program as required by RCW 70.94.534(4) and this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3474, § 2, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 3917, § 2, 6-2-09)


6.12.120 Penalties.

A. No affected employer with an approved CTR program which has made a good faith effort may be held liable for failure to reach the applicable drive alone or VMT goals.

B. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation and shall be subject to penalties in the amount assessed for Class 1 civil infractions set forth in RCW 7.80.120(1)(a).

C. An affected employer shall not be liable for penalties if failure to implement an element of a CTR program was the result of an inability to reach agreement with a certified collective bargaining agent under applicable laws where the issue was raised by the employer and pursued in good faith. Unionized employers shall be presumed to act in good faith compliance if they:

1. Propose to a recognized union any provision of the employer’s CTR program that is subject to bargaining as defined by the National Labor Relations Act; and

2. Advise the union of the existence of the statute and the mandates of the CTR program approved by the city and advise the union that the proposal being made is necessary for compliance with state law RCW 70.94.531.

(Ord. No. 3474, § 2, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 3917, § 2, 6-2-09)


6.12.130 Exemptions and goal modifications.

A. Worksite exemptions. An affected employer may request the city to grant an extension from all CTR program requirements or penalties for a particular worksite. The employer must demonstrate that it would experience undue hardship in complying with the requirements of this chapter as a result of the characteristics of its business, its work force, or its location(s). An exemption may be granted if and only if the affected employer demonstrates that it faces extraordinary circumstances, such as bankruptcy, and is unable to implement any measures that could reduce the proportion of drive alone trips and VMT per employee. Exemptions may be granted by the city at any time based on written notice provided by the affected employer. The notice should clearly explain the conditions for which the affected employer is seeking an exemption from the requirements of the CTR program. The city shall grant or deny the request within thirty (30) days of receipt of the request. The city shall review annually all employers receiving exemptions, and shall determine whether the exemption will be in effect during the following program year.

B. Employee exemptions. Specific employees or groups of employees who are required to drive alone to work as a condition of employment may be exempted from a worksite’s CTR program. Exemptions may also be granted for employees who work variable shifts throughout the year and who do not rotate as a group to identical shifts. The city will use the criteria identified in the CTR board administrative guidelines to assess the validity of employee exemption requests. The city shall grant or deny the request within thirty (30) days of receipt of the request. The city shall review annually all employee exemption requests, and shall determine whether the exemption will be in effect during the following program year.

C. Modification of CTR program goals.

1. An affected employer may request that the city modify its CTR program goals. Such requests shall be filed in writing at least sixty (60) days prior to the date the worksite is required to submit its program description or annual report. The goal modification request must clearly explain why the worksite is unable to achieve the applicable goal. The worksite must also demonstrate that it has implemented all of the elements contained in its approved CTR program.

2. The city will review and grant or deny requests for goal modifications in accordance with procedures and criteria identified in the CTR board guidelines. 

3. An employer may not request a modification of the applicable goals until one (1) year after city approval of its initial program description or annual report.

(Ord. No. 3917, § 2, 6-2-09)


6.12.140 Appeal of administrative decisions.

A. Affected employers shall be notified in writing of the city’s decision regarding unacceptable programs, exemptions, modification of goals, modification of CTR program elements, and violations.

B. Employers shall have thirty (30) days following notification by the city to file an appeal of these decisions with the Kent hearing examiner.

C. Hearings before the hearing examiner shall be held according to the procedures set forth in Ch. 2.32 KCC. The hearing examiner’s decision shall represent final action by the city, unless an appeal is made to the superior court of King County within ten (10) working days after issuance of such decisions.

(Ord. No. 3917, § 2, 6-2-09)


Chapter 6.14 COMPLETE STREETS

Sections:

6.14.010    Vision.

6.14.020    Policy.

6.14.030    Applicability.

6.14.050    Plans and standards.

6.14.100    Exemptions.

6.14.120    Intergovernmental cooperation.


6.14.010 Vision.

The city endorses the concept of complete streets, which promotes roadways that are safe, convenient, and attractive for all users regardless of age and ability, including pedestrians, bicyclists, transit riders, freight haulers, and motor vehicle drivers. The vision of complete streets is a community in which all residents and visitors can safely and efficiently use the public right-of-way to meet their transportation needs regardless of their preferred mode of travel.

(Ord. No. 4207, § 1, 7-5-16; Ord. No. 4247, § 1, 6-6-17)


6.14.020 Policy.

A. The city will plan for, design, construct, operate, and maintain an appropriate and integrated transportation system that will meet the needs of pedestrians, bicyclists, wheelchair users, transit riders, freight haulers, motorists, emergency responders, and residents of all ages and abilities.

B. Transportation system facilities that support the concept of complete streets shall include, but are not limited to: pavement markings and signs; street and sidewalk lighting; sidewalk and pedestrian safety improvements; Americans with Disabilities Act (“ADA”) and Title VI compliance; street trees; transit accommodations; bicycle accommodations, including signage and markings; and, as appropriate, streetscapes that appeal to and promote all modes of travel. The system’s design will be consistent with and supportive of local neighborhoods, recognizing that transportation needs vary and must be balanced in a flexible, safe, and cost-effective manner. Projects will therefore be assessed holistically to include the many considerations outlined above, as well as the future need for conduit for city-owned fiber optics communications, given the budgetary implications for provision of facilities.

(Ord. No. 4207, § 1, 7-5-16; Ord. No. 4247, § 1, 6-6-17)


6.14.030 Applicability.

The city will plan for, design, and construct all new city transportation improvement projects to provide appropriate and safe accommodation for pedestrians, bicyclists, transit riders, freight haulers, motor vehicles, and persons of all abilities. Those city employees involved in the planning and design of projects within the public right-of-way will give consideration to all users and modes of travel from the start of planning and design work consistent with approved plans and standards. Transportation system improvements shall be viewed as opportunities to create safer, more accessible streets for all users, and as opportunities to improve city communication processes between relevant personnel, such as consulting city arborists on designs including street trees. This shall apply to new construction, reconstruction, and rehabilitation. The city may create a checklist that will assist in considering modes of travel in the planning and design of transportation system improvements. ADA-specific projects, such as the installation of ramps or other improvements required for improved accessibility, are exempt from complete streets consideration, as are ordinary maintenance activities such as mowing, sweeping, spot repair, joint sealing, pothole filling, and installation of raised pavement markers.

(Ord. No. 4207, § 1, 7-5-16; Ord. No. 4247, § 1, 6-6-17)


6.14.050 Plans and standards.

As city plans, guidelines, and standards are updated, consideration shall be given to complete streets concepts to ensure that new regulations and practices comply with this chapter and the latest in applicable complete streets research and best practices. Examples of plans and standards include, but are not limited to, the design and construction standards and the Transportation Master Plan. Resources to be referenced in developing these standards and plans shall include, but not be limited to, the latest editions of National Association of City Transportation Officials’ Urban Street Design Guide, Urban Bikeway Design Guide, Transit Street Design Guide, and the Federal Highway Administration’s Department of Transportation Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.

(Ord. No. 4207, § 1, 7-5-16; Ord. No. 4247, § 1, 6-6-17)


6.14.100 Exemptions.

A. The mayor, after consultation with the public works director, the economic and community development director, and the parks and human services director, may determine that a project is exempt from any or all of the requirements of this chapter, based on the following circumstances:

1. The project would require the accommodation of street uses that are prohibited by law;

2. The accommodation of a specific use is expected to have adverse impacts on environmental resources such as streams, wetlands, or floodplains, or on historic structures or sites (eligible for listing in national, state, or local preservation registers), above and beyond the impacts of currently existing infrastructure;

3. Topographic challenges make accommodation of a specific use infeasible;

4. The establishment of complete streets facilities would be contrary to public safety;

5. The cost would be excessively disproportionate to the need or probable future use; or

6. The inclusion of complete streets facilities would create a disconnected section (less than 300 feet) of improvements where additional improvements at either end are unlikely to occur within 10 years.

B. Where the above exemptions allow complete streets facilities to be omitted from a roadway project, the city shall consider whether bicyclists, pedestrians, transit users, and persons of all abilities can be accommodated by nearby facilities, and shall strive to provide complete streets connections to those facilities.

(Ord. No. 4207, § 1, 7-5-16; Ord. No. 4247, § 1, 6-6-17)


6.14.120 Intergovernmental cooperation.

The city will cooperate with other transportation agencies, including the Washington State Department of Transportation, King County Metro, and Sound Transit, to ensure the principles and practices of complete streets are embedded within their planning, design, construction, and maintenance activities. The city will specifically cooperate to ensure the transportation network flows seamlessly between jurisdictions in accordance with local and regional road, transit, bicycle, and pedestrian plans.

(Ord. No. 4207, § 1, 7-5-16; Ord. No. 4247, § 1, 6-6-17)


Chapter 6.15 FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS FOR USE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY

Sections:

6.15.010    Purpose.

6.15.020    Conflicting provisions.

6.15.030    Definitions.

6.15.040    Applications – Process.

6.15.050    Applications – Contents.

6.15.060    Applicant representatives.

6.15.070    Administrative application review fee.

6.15.080    Completeness.

6.15.090    Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal.

6.15.100    Public comment.

6.15.110    Subject to authority.

6.15.130    Enforcement.


6.15.010 Purpose. 

This chapter establishes application requirements for a franchise or limited license agreement for the use of the public right-of-way, an initial review fee and requirements for determining the completeness of applications for a franchise. This chapter does not apply to the operation of cable systems and cable operators and their use of city right-of-way. In addition, this chapter does not apply to the use of city right-of-way by special purpose water, sewer or combination water-sewer districts. 

(Ord. No. 4304, § 1, 1-15-19)


6.15.020 Conflicting provisions. 

In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter, the terms of any issued franchise, limited license agreement, or any federal law or federal regulation, it is intended that the stricter standard shall apply unless the context clearly evidences a contrary intent, or unless the city is preempted on the issue by applicable law. Should any franchise, limited license agreement or other applicable law be silent on the issue of conflict, this section shall control.

(Ord. No. 4304, § 1, 1-15-19)


6.15.030 Definitions.

The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Director means the city of Kent economic and community development director, or his or her designee.

Franchise refers to the authorization granted by the city to a utility or other service provider for the nonexclusive right to occupy city rights-of-way to provide service within a designated franchise area. A franchise shall be authorized by ordinance and must be accepted by the franchisee to become effective. A franchise shall not include or be a substitute for:

1. Any other permit or authorization required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on business within the city, including without limitation a business license; or

2. Any permit, agreement, or authorization required in connection with operations on or in public streets or property, including without limitation a street cut permit, a street use permit, or other construction permit or approval; or

3. Any permits or agreements for occupying any other property in the city for which access is not specifically granted by the franchise, including without limitation permits and agreements for placing devices on or in poles, conduits, other structures, or railroad easements, whether owned by the city or any other public or private entity, or for providing any service.

Franchise area means the geographical area of the city that a franchisee is authorized to serve by the terms of its franchise or by operation of law.

Limited license agreement means the authorization granted by the city to a utility or other service provider for the nonexclusive right to occupy specified city rights-of-way. A limited license agreement shall not grant the authority to use or occupy rights-of-way within the entire city. A limited license agreement shall not include or be a substitute for:

1. Any other permit or authorization required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on business within the city, including without limitation a business license; or

2. Any permit, agreement, or authorization required in connection with operations on or in public streets or property, including without limitation a street cut permit, a street use permit, or other construction permit or approval; or

3. Any permits or agreements for occupying any other property in the city for which access is not specifically granted by the limited license agreement, including without limitation permits and agreements for placing devices on or in poles, conduits, other structures, or railroad easements, whether owned by the city or any other public or private entity, or for providing any service.

Rights-of-way (singular right-of-way) as used in this chapter means the surface of, and the space above and below, any public street, highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk, way, lane, public way, drive, circle, pathway, space, or other public right-of-way, and over which the city has authority to grant permits, licenses or franchises for use thereof, or has regulatory authority thereover. Rights-of-way for the purpose of this chapter do not include railroad rights-of-way, airports, harbor areas, buildings, parks, poles, conduits, open spaces, nature trails, dedicated but unopened right-of-way, undedicated streets and/or right-of-way, environmentally sensitive areas and any land, facilities, or property owned, maintained, or leased by the city in its governmental or proprietary capacity or as an operator of a utility.

(Ord. No. 4304, § 1, 1-15-19)


6.15.040 Applications – Process. 

Any utility or service provider who desires a franchise or limited license agreement pursuant to this chapter shall file an application with the city in accordance with this chapter. 

A. A franchise application shall be filed by any utility or other service provider for the nonexclusive right to occupy city rights-of-way to provide service within a designated franchise area. 

B. A limited license agreement application shall be filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter for the authorization granted by the city to a utility or other service provider for the nonexclusive right to occupy specified city rights-of-way for the sole purpose of providing service to persons or areas outside the city.

(Ord. No. 4304, § 1, 1-15-19)


6.15.050 Applications – Contents.

The director is authorized to establish an application form or forms appropriate for public utilities and other qualified service providers to apply for a franchise or limited license agreement. The form shall contain at a minimum: 

A. Information identifying the applicant, its corporate or other organizational structure, and the contact agent.

B. Property and facility information including, but not limited to: 

1. The nature of the request – as an application for a new franchise, an application for renewal or amendment or an application for the transfer of a franchise.

2. A description of the specific services that the applicant expects to provide within the city including whether the services will be provided to the general public, to commercial and/or residential customers or to other utilities and service providers. 

3. A description of the facilities to be located in the right-of-way including, but not limited to, telecommunications service facilities, small cell equipment, conduits, fiber, pipelines, and other facilities appropriate to the specific utility or service providers’ utilization of the right-of-way. Small cell equipment designs shall be submitted with the application. The director may require designs of other facilities. 

4. A statement that the necessary pole attachment or lease agreements with the owners of other facilities located in the right-of-way have been obtained. 

5. Estimated beginning and end dates for construction.

6. A statement that any licenses, certificates or authorizations required from the Federal Communications Commission, the Washington Utilities and Transportation Commission and any other federal or state agency with jurisdiction over the proposed activities to be conducted in the right-of-way have been obtained. 

7. A description of the services provided and any and all state and local taxes which may apply. 

8. The service area for which the franchise is requested, including a map of the area to be covered by the franchise and specific locations of the initial build out and, if known, proposed future build out locations including which proposed facilities will be underground, ground based, and/or aerial. 

9. Upon request from the city, financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant’s financial ability to construct, operate, maintain, relocate, and remove its telecommunications facilities. This provision shall not apply when prohibited by the federal Telecommunications Act. 

10. A detailed description of the applicant’s previous experience in providing the intended service which includes a list identifying, by place and date, other franchises obtained by the applicant, its parent, or subsidiary. 

11. Such other information as the director determines would be relevant in considering the application. 

(Ord. No. 4304, § 1, 1-15-19)


6.15.060 Applicant representatives.

Any person or entity who submits an application under this chapter shall have a continuing obligation to notify the city, in writing, of the names, addresses, and occupations of all persons who are authorized to represent or act on behalf of the applicant in those matters pertaining to the application. The requirement to make such disclosure shall continue until the city has approved or disapproved an applicant’s application or until an applicant withdraws its application. 

(Ord. No. 4304, § 1, 1-15-19)


6.15.070 Administrative application review fee.

An initial administrative application review fee of $500.00 shall be paid by the applicant at the time the application is submitted to the city. 

(Ord. No. 4304, § 1, 1-15-19)


6.15.080 Completeness.

A. Completeness of the application shall be determined in accordance with this section and the requirements of KCC 6.15.050, Applications – Contents. 

B. The director shall notify the applicant within 10 days of submission if the application is materially incomplete; provided, however, that an applicant may consent to a different completeness review period. 

C. The notification that an application is incomplete shall be in writing, specifically identifying the missing documents or information, and shall refer to the code section creating the obligation to submit the documentation. 

D. A service provider may submit information required to complete the application within 60 days of notice by the director. Failure to provide such information in a timely manner shall be deemed a withdrawal of that application. 

(Ord. No. 4304, § 1, 1-15-19)


6.15.090 Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal.

No franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the franchisee’s performance of the franchise agreement, or of the requirements of this chapter, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the franchisee has been approved in writing by the city. 

(Ord. No. 4304, § 1, 1-15-19)


6.15.100 Public comment.

The city shall provide notice of a complete application for a franchise on the city’s website with a link to the franchise application. The applicant is encouraged to host informational meetings for the public regarding the deployment. These meetings are for the public’s information and are neither hearings nor part of any land use appeal process.

(Ord. No. 4304, § 1, 1-15-19)


6.15.110 Subject to authority.

A grantee shall, at all times during the term of a franchise or limited license agreement, be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the city and to such lawful regulations as the city shall hereafter enact. A grantee shall construct, operate, and maintain all equipment, facilities, or other improvements in full compliance with all other applicable rules and regulations now in effect or hereafter adopted by the United States, the state of Washington, the city, or any agency of these governments with jurisdiction over these activities.

(Ord. No. 4304, § 1, 1-15-19)


6.15.130 Enforcement.   

The requirements of this chapter shall be enforced by the director in accordance with KCC 6.15.080 through 6.15.090. The penalty provisions set forth in KCC 1.01.140 shall not apply. This shall not limit the city’s ability to pursue other remedies at law or in equity.

(Ord. No. 4304, § 1, 1-15-19)

 


Chapter 6.16 UTILITY DESIGN STANDARDS IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY

Sections:

6.16.010    Purpose.

6.16.020    Conflicting provisions.

6.16.030    Definitions.

6.16.040    General requirements.

6.16.050    Small cell equipment design standards and aesthetic requirements on utility poles.

6.16.060    Small cell equipment design standards and aesthetic requirements on city-owned infrastructure.

6.16.070    Permits.


6.16.010 Purpose.

A. The city council, as trustee of the city’s public right-of-way, has the authority to authorize right-of-way use by utilities and other entities in order to serve the public if an agreement consistent with state and federal law and the best interests of the city and its residents can be reached. The purpose of the design standards set forth within this chapter is to locate small cell equipment, utility poles, and other infrastructure in the city’s rights-of-way in a manner that minimizes potential incompatibilities with adjacent uses, addresses traffic safety, limits bulk, and minimizes aesthetic impacts.

B. The design standards within this chapter shall be considered concealment features when considering whether a proposed modification is a substantial change under Section 6409(a) of the Spectrum Act, 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a).

(Ord. No. 4318, § 1, 4-2-19)


6.16.020 Conflicting provisions.

In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter, the terms of any issued franchise, or any federal law or federal regulation, it is intended that the stricter standard shall apply unless the context clearly evidences a contrary intent, or unless the city is preempted on the issue by applicable law. Should any franchise or other applicable law be silent on the issue of conflict, this section shall control.

(Ord. No. 4318, § 1, 4-2-19)


6.16.030 Definitions.

The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

A. City-owned infrastructure means poles, street light standards, or other street-related appurtenances located in rights-of-way and owned by the city of Kent.

B. Combination pole means a pole which includes both a streetlight and small cell equipment or facilities that replaces existing city-owned infrastructure.

C. Director means the city of Kent public works director, or his or her designee.

D. Franchise refers to the authorization granted by the city to a utility or other service provider for the nonexclusive right to occupy city rights-of-way to provide service within a designated franchise area. A franchise shall be authorized by ordinance and must be accepted by the franchisee to become effective. A franchise shall not include or be a substitute for:

1. Any other permit or authorization required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on business within the city, including without limitation a business license; or

2. Any permit, agreement, or authorization required in connection with operations on or in public streets or property, including, without limitation, a street cut permit, a street use permit, or other construction permit or approval; or

3. Any permits or agreements for occupying any other property in the city for which access is not specifically granted by the franchise, including, without limitation, permits and agreements for placing devices on or in poles, conduits, other structures, or railroad easements, whether owned by the city or any other public or private entity, or for providing any service.

E. Rights-of-way (singular right-of-way) means the surface of, and the space above and below, any public street, highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk, way, lane, public way, drive, circle, pathway, space, or other public right-of-way, and over which the city has authority to grant permits, licenses, or franchises for use thereof, or has regulatory authority thereover. Rights-of-way for the purpose of this chapter do not include railroad rights-of-way, airports, harbor areas, buildings, parks, poles, conduits, open spaces, nature trails, dedicated but unopened right-of-way, undedicated streets and/or right-of-way, environmentally sensitive areas, and any land, facilities, or property owned, maintained, or leased by the city in its governmental or proprietary capacity or as an operator of a utility.

F. Small cell equipment or facilities means wireless telecommunications facilities attached, mounted, or installed on a proprietary or leased pole, excluding monopole towers, that is located in right-of-way and used to provide personal wireless service.

G. Traffic control signal system means traffic signal poles, mast arms, luminaires, and associated mast arms, ancillary poles, and related appurtenances.

H. Utility pole means a pole or vertical structure owned by a utility company or other third party with the right either pursuant to state law or a franchise to place such facilities in the right-of-way. An original utility pole is a pole that has not been replaced to accommodate small cell facilities, but that is capable of accommodating small cell facilities. A replacement utility pole means a pole that replaces an original utility pole to accommodate small cell facilities and does not result in an increase in the total number of utility poles. Each reference to a utility pole herein includes any original utility pole and any replacement utility pole.

(Ord. No. 4318, § 1, 4-2-19)


6.16.040 General requirements.

A. All poles and small cell equipment or facilities shall be constructed or installed according to applicable federal, state, and city regulations and standards, including the City of Kent Design and Construction Standards.

B. Ground-mounted equipment in the rights-of-way is prohibited, unless such facilities are placed underground.

C. Small cell equipment or facilities are not permitted on traffic control signal systems.

D. All poles shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act (“ADA”), City of Kent Design and Construction Standards, and state and federal regulations in order to provide clear passage within the rights-of-way. The location of any replacement or new utility or combination pole must not interfere with utility or safety fixtures (e.g., fire hydrants, traffic control devices), and not adversely affect public health, safety, or welfare.

E. In order to minimize negative visual impact to the surrounding area and to avoid excessive overhead clutter, the director may deny a request for proposed small cell equipment where the proposed location is deemed inappropriate due to the extent of existing aboveground wireless telecommunications or other electrical or cable facilities existing within a 150-foot radius of the proposed small cell equipment location. The director may also deny a request for proposed small cell equipment on a utility pole already containing more than one electrical transformer.

F. The use of any city-owned infrastructure or utility pole for the siting of small cell equipment shall be considered secondary to the primary function of the pole. If the primary function of a pole serving as the host for small cell equipment becomes unnecessary, the pole shall not be retained for the sole purpose of accommodating the small cell facility, and the small cell facility and all associated equipment shall be removed.

G. Replacement poles shall be located as near as possible to the existing pole, while meeting the current City of Kent Design and Construction Standards. The abandoned pole must be removed.

H. Replacement and combination poles shall match the color and material of the original or adjacent poles. Replacement and combination poles shall be located in a location that minimizes the appearance from existing adjacent residential structures to the maximum extent feasible. For example, locations where new poles or replacement poles would be close to windows, in front of historically or architecturally significant buildings, or in locations where the equipment would disturb views of significance should be avoided.

I. The number of conduits shall be minimized to the number necessary to accommodate the facilities or equipment on the utility pole. The color of external cables, wires, and conduits shall match the color of the utility pole or be a neutral color such as black, brown, beige, off-white, or light gray. The conduit shall be mounted as closely as possible to the pole, while still meeting the required safety clearances.

J. All cables and wiring on utility poles shall also be concealed to the maximum extent feasible. Any wires outside the conduit shall be consolidated and pulled as tight as technically feasible. Loops of excess wires shall not be lashed to the pole, to electrical wires supported by the pole, or to any pole-mounted equipment.

K. Ancillary equipment and facilities, including conduit and cable, shall not dominate the structure or utility pole upon which these things are attached.

L. Antennas and related equipment shall not be illuminated except for security reasons, required by a federal or state authority, or unless approved as part of a concealment element plan.

M. Side arm mounts and strand mounts for antennas or equipment are prohibited.

N. The city may consider the cumulative visual effects of small cell equipment mounted on poles within the rights-of-way when assessing proposed siting locations so as not to adversely affect the visual character of the area. This provision shall neither be applied to limit the number of permits issued when no alternative sites are reasonably available nor to impose a technological requirement on the service provider.

O. These design standards are intended to be used solely for the purpose of concealment and siting. Nothing herein shall be interpreted or applied in a manner which dictates the use of a particular technology. When strict application of these requirements would unreasonably impair the function of the technology chosen by the applicant, alternative forms of concealment or deployment may be permitted which provide similar or greater protections from negative visual impacts to the streetscape.

P. No equipment on any utility or combination pole may be operated so as to produce noise in excess of ambient noise levels.

(Ord. No. 4318, § 1, 4-2-19)


6.16.050 Small cell equipment design standards and aesthetic requirements on utility poles.

A. Locations.

1. Small cell equipment on utility poles shall be located in a location that minimizes the appearance of small cell equipment from existing adjacent residential structures to the maximum extent feasible. For example, best efforts shall be used to avoid locations where small cell equipment would be close to windows, in front of historically or architecturally significant buildings, or in locations where the equipment would disturb views of significance.

2. A utility pole shall not contain more than one small cell facility.

B. Replacement utility poles. The height of any replacement utility pole including antennas shall be: 50 feet or less; or not extended to a height of more than 10 percent above its preexisting height as a result, whichever is greater.

C. Small cell equipment design. Small cell equipment shall comply with the design standards set forth within this section.

1. Color. Small cell equipment antennas, conduit, mounting hardware, and equipment cabinets shall be painted a neutral color to match the color of the utility pole, or, at the city’s preference, small cell equipment shall be painted any color of the city’s choosing, so long as the paint is reasonably commercially available.

2. Mount. Small cell equipment shall be mounted as closely to the utility pole as possible, and shall not extend out more than three feet from the pole. Ground-mounted equipment is prohibited.

3. No illumination. Except as otherwise required by applicable law, small cell equipment shall not be illuminated.

4. Concealed wires. Small cell equipment’s external cables and wires shall be enclosed in a conduit so that wires are protected and not visible or visually minimized to the maximum extent feasible. The number of conduits shall be minimized to the number necessary to accommodate the small cell facility, and the conduits shall be mounted as closely to the pole, while still meeting the required safety clearances necessary for the pole to remain climbable. The color of external cables and wires and conduits shall match the color of the utility pole or be a neutral color such as black, brown, beige, off-white, or light gray. All cables shall be also be concealed to the extent feasible.

5. Bulk.

a. Primary small cell equipment enclosures shall not exceed 12 cubic feet in volume.

b. Multiple antennas are permitted; provided, that the cumulative total antenna volume shall not exceed 12 cubic feet.

c. If, due to technological reasons, the proposed equipment enclosures do not comply with this subsection, the director may approve primary small cell equipment enclosures up to 28 cubic feet in volume following a submission to the director demonstrating that the proposal includes the smallest small cell equipment enclosure that is technologically feasible for the specific small cell facility.

6. Stickers. The use of stickers on utility poles should be minimized to the extent feasible.

(Ord. No. 4318, § 1, 4-2-19)


6.16.060 Small cell equipment design standards and aesthetic requirements on city-owned infrastructure.

A. General considerations.

1. In order to install small cell equipment on city-owned infrastructure, the existing city-owned pole must be removed and replaced with a combination pole meeting the requirements of KCC 6.16.040, General requirements, and this section. Alternatively, the director may approve the installation of a combination pole in a location where it has been identified that a streetlight is necessary and if the installation of the combination pole complies with the lighting criteria set forth in the City of Kent Design and Construction Standards.

2. Three types of combination poles are allowed: (a) combination pole with a canister or shrouded antenna; (b) combination pole with equipment shroud; and (c) combination pole with canister or shrouded antenna and equipment shroud, as depicted in Exhibit A at the end of this section.

B. Requirements for all combination poles.

1. The design of a combination pole shall match the existing city-owned infrastructure installed adjacent to the proposed combination pole and substantially conform to the depictions in Exhibit A at the end of this section or those subsequently adopted in the City of Kent Design and Construction Standards. The same combination pole shall be used in the same corridor, in a defined area with adopted design standards or guidelines, or within a neighborhood to maintain a cohesive appearance.

2. The height of any combination pole replacing city-owned infrastructure including antennas shall be: 50 feet or less; or not extended to a height of more than 10 percent above its preexisting height as a result, whichever is less. The height of a combination pole installed at a new location pursuant to subsection (A)(1) of this section shall be approved by the director.

3. The diameter of the combination pole shall be no larger than 16 inches. The director may approve a diameter up to 20 inches if an applicant can demonstrate that more space is needed.

4. No horizontal flat spaces greater than one and one-half inches shall exist on the combination pole to prevent cups, trash, and other objects from being placed on the pole.

5. All wiring and cabling shall be internal to the combination pole.

6. Any antenna or equipment shroud shall be colored to match the combination pole.

7. Any splicing of wiring and cabling shall be underground.

8. The luminaire shall be mounted at the same height as surrounding luminaires.

9. All mounting brackets, anchor bolts, and other hardware connections shall be concealed.

C. Requirements for specific combination pole types.

1. Combination pole with canister or shrouded antenna.

a. The antenna shall be a canister or shrouded antenna and mounted at the top of the combination pole. There shall be a smooth transition between the upper part of the pole and the antenna and the antenna shall be integrated so that it appears as a continuation of the original pole. Antennas shall be scaled to be a maximum of 1.25 times the diameter of the pole at the antenna-mounting location.

b. The canister antenna or antenna shroud shall be colored to match the combination pole.

2. Combination pole with equipment shroud.

a. In place of an antenna at the top of the combination pole, a single external shroud containing the antenna and other equipment mounted to the pole will be allowed.

b. The shroud shall be attached near the top of the pole in such a way that the wiring, cables, and equipment is hidden from view.

3. Combination pole with canister or shrouded antenna and equipment shroud.

a. This type of combination pole is allowed when various small cell technologies (e.g., LTE and 5G) provided by a single carrier are installed on the same pole. The applicant must demonstrate that the additional technology cannot be integrated into the equipment cabinet or the canister antenna.

b. The equipment shroud shall be attached near the top of the pole in such a way that the wiring, cables, and equipment are hidden from view.

Exhibit A

Combination Pole with Canister or Shrouded Antenna – KCC 6.16.060(C)(1)
[IMAGE]


Combination Pole with Equipment Shroud – KCC 6.16.060(C)(2)
[IMAGE]


Combination Pole with Canister or Shrouded Antenna and Equipment Shroud – KCC 6.16.060(C)(3)
[IMAGE]


(Ord. No. 4318, § 1, 4-2-19)


6.16.070 Permits.

Permits approved pursuant to this section shall be subject to the following findings by the director: (A) that the applicant has an executed franchise or limited license agreement with the city; and (B) the applicant has an executed master license agreement with the city if any component of the proposed small cell equipment or facility involves use of city-owned infrastructure.

(Ord. No. 4318, § 1, 4-2-19)


Title 7 UTILITIES

Chapters:

7.01    Utility Service Billing

7.02    Water

7.03    Solid Waste, Recyclable Materials, and Yard Waste

7.04    Sanitary Sewers

7.05    Storm and Surface Water Utility

7.06    Combined Sewer and Storm and Surface Water Utility

7.07    Surface Water and Drainage Code

7.08    Repealed

7.09    Wastewater Facilities Plan

7.10    Underground Installation of Electrical or Communication Facilities

7.11    Utility Service Outside the City

7.12    Cable Systems – Franchise and Administration

7.13    Water Shortage Emergency Regulations

7.14    Illicit Discharges


Chapter 7.01 UTILITY SERVICE BILLING*

Sections:

7.01.010    Administration of utility billing.

7.01.020    Utility service applications.

7.01.030    Utility accounts.

7.01.040    Payments received.

7.01.050    Utility bills – Due date – Collection.

7.01.060    Remedies cumulative.

7.01.070    Lifeline utility rate.

*Cross reference(s) – Utility tax levied on telephone, gas, electric, garbage, water, sewer and drainage utilities, ch. 3.18; utilities clearing fund, § 3.40.1000.

State law reference(s) – Lien for utility services shall be as provided in RCW 35.21.290 et seq., RCW 35A.21.100; authority to provide utility service inside or outside city, RCW 35A.80.010; water and sewer facilities utilities act, RCW 35.91.010 et seq.; municipal utilities, RCW 35.92.010 et seq.; authority to charge for utility connections, RCW 35.92.025; environmental policies, RCW 43.21C.010 et seq.


7.01.010 Administration of utility billing.

The customer service manager of the city’s finance department shall be responsible for the billing of utility services and the administration and enforcement of utility accounts.

(Ord. No. 2371, § 2; Ord. No. 3181, § 1, 8-2-94; Ord. No. 3864, § 1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 4280, § 1, 6-19-18)


7.01.020 Utility service applications.

All requests for utility service on established accounts shall be made to the customer service division of the finance department. The request shall be made by the owner or authorized agent of the property where service is requested. For new utility service, the application shall be made to the public works department for approval and then to the customer service division of the finance department. Whenever an application for utility service is made by an agent, the agent shall submit written authority from the property owner authorizing such agent to receive the utility service requested. An acknowledgment that the owner remains legally liable for all service shall be included in this written authority.

(Ord. No. 2371, § 1; Ord. No. 3181, § 1, 8-2-94; Ord. No. 3864, § 1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 4280, § 1, 6-19-18)


7.01.030 Utility accounts.

All accounts for utility service shall be kept in the name of the property owner. As provided in RCW 35.21.217, a property owner or their designee may request that the account be billed to the tenant or property manager, and may also request that the owner receive a duplicate bill or any notice of a residential tenant’s delinquency. If the city provides a property owner or the owner’s designee with duplicates of the residential tenant utility service bills or notice that a tenant’s utility account is delinquent, the city shall notify the tenant that such duplicates have been provided to the owner. However, the owner remains liable for payment of all utility service as provided by law.

(Ord. No. 2371, § 1; Ord. No. 3864, § 1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 4280, § 1, 6-19-18)


7.01.040 Payments received.

All money for the payment of utility bills shall be received by the finance customer service manager or designee.

(Ord. No. 2371, § 1; Ord. No. 3181, § 1, 8-2-94; Ord. No. 3864, § 1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 4280, § 1, 6-19-18)


7.01.050 Utility bills – Due date – Collection.

A. Due date. All utility bills are due and payable in the office of the finance customer service manager within 15 days after the billing date appearing on the bill. Bills not paid within 21 days of the billing date shall be considered delinquent. If the twenty-first day falls on a legal holiday, Saturday, or Sunday, the first business day thereafter shall be considered the twenty-first day. 

B. Delinquency – Water or sewerage service.

1. Initial delinquency notice. The city will provide written notice of initial delinquency in the customer’s subsequent monthly utility bill.

2. Shutoff notice. When a charge for water service or sewerage service, in accordance with subsection (C) of this section, is delinquent and has been provided an initial delinquency notice, water service shall be subject to shutoff upon seven calendar days’ notice to the customer. The city will provide written notice of pending shutoff to the customer by mail, door hanger, or other form, and a delinquent notice fee in the amount of $10 will be assessed against the account. The notice shall advise the customer of possible shutoff of utility service and the assessment of late payment or related fees added to the utility account if it remains delinquent. A fee schedule is on file with the customer service division of the finance department.

3. Multifamily rental units. As provided in RCW 35.21.217, if an occupied multiple residential rental unit receives utility service through a single utility account, if the utility account’s billing address is not the same as the service address of a residential rental property, or if the city has been notified that a tenant resides at the service address, the city shall make a good faith and reasonable effort to provide written notice to the service address of pending shutoff for nonpayment at least seven calendar days prior to disconnection.

4. Procedure. Water shutoff shall occur in accordance with this section and any regulations the finance customer service manager may promulgate consistent with this chapter. The following provisions apply to any shutoff of water service and shall be included in any shutoff notice:

a. The total payment due on the account to avoid shutoff of water service.

b. A shutoff charge of $45 will be assessed against all delinquent accounts appearing on the city’s final shutoff report. 

c. Water service may not be restored until full payment of the delinquent account is received, including the shutoff fee. 

d. A utility customer or property owner may appeal any charges included in a utility bill to the finance customer service manager. If an appeal to a water or sewerage bill is received by the customer service manager prior to the water shutoff date identified in the notice, water service will not be turned off during the appeal process. An appeal must be made in writing, must set forth the reasons why the bill is incorrect or otherwise not properly due and owing, and must be delivered to the customer service division of the finance department. The customer service manager should provide written notice of his or her decision on the appeal within 10 business days of the manager’s receipt of the appeal. That decision is final, and no additional appeal is available. If still applicable, that decision will identify the date on which water service will be shut off if the account is not brought current in a manner consistent with the decision.

5. Notice to property owner. Whenever water service is in the name of a tenant or property manager, and is subject to shutoff for delinquency, the finance customer service division will attempt to provide a duplicate delinquency notice to the owner of record shown on the account. Although a duplicate delinquent notice may be sent in accordance with this subsection, the $10 delinquent notice charge will not be assessed against the account a second time.

C. Sewerage – Delinquency.

1. System of sewerage. Pursuant to RCW 35.67.331 and KCC 7.06.010, the city’s sanitary sewage collection and disposal system (sewage) and the storm and surface water utility (drainage) are combined as a “system of sewerage” as that term is defined in RCW 35.67.010. In addition to the provisions of this chapter, delinquent and unpaid rates and charges for sewage and drainage service shall be subject to Chapter 35.67 RCW and subsection (C)(2) of this section.

2. Delinquent sewer service rates and charges – Lien and interest.

a. When a charge for sewerage service is delinquent, the city shall have a lien for delinquent and unpaid charges, plus penalties, which lien shall be made in accordance with RCW 35.67.210. Liens for sewerage service shall be effective for a period not to exceed 12 months of delinquent charges without the necessity of any writing or recording. In order to make such a lien effective for more than 12 months, the finance customer service manager shall file for recording in the office of the King County recorder a notice setting forth the amount of the delinquency, the name of the owner or reputed owner who owes the bill and the description of the lot, tract, or parcel to which such lien shall attach. For each lien recorded or released, the city shall assess against the sewerage account a fee in accordance with the fee schedule on file with the customer service division as payment of the city’s costs incurred in preparing and recording each lien or lien release. This fee is in addition to the actual fees charged to the city by King County to record or release a lien, which fees will also be assessed against the account. This lien may be foreclosed in an action filed in superior court pursuant to RCW 35.67.220.

b. Interest may be added to any delinquent and unpaid charge for sewer service in the maximum amount allowed by RCW 35.67.200.

3. Alternate collection procedure for delinquent sewerage service – Water shutoff. As an additional method of collecting the delinquent charges and concurrent method of enforcing the lien authorized by RCW 35.67.200, and in accordance with the provisions of this section, the city may shut off water service to the premises to which such sewerage service was furnished until the charges are paid and the delinquent account is brought current. The right to enforce the lien by cutting off and refusing water service shall be exercised in accordance with Chapter 35.67 RCW.

(Ord. No. 2547, § 3; Ord. No. 2657, § 1; Ord. No. 3181, § 1, 8-2-94; Ord. No. 3864, § 1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 4280, § 1, 6-19-18)


7.01.060 Remedies cumulative.

The remedies set forth in KCC 7.01.050 are not meant to be exclusive and the city may use any alternate method of collecting delinquent charges that is available under common law or the laws of the state.

(Ord. No. 2547, § 3; Ord. No. 3864, § 1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 4280, § 1, 6-19-18)


7.01.070 Lifeline utility rate.

A utility rate reduction is available to low-income citizens who are 62 years of age or older, are unable to work due to a total and permanent disability, or provide care to their child that has a total and permanent disability.

A. Definitions.

1. For purposes of this section, “low-income” means a household of one or more individuals, the adjusted gross personal income for which all individuals living in the household does not exceed the income limits set annually by the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”) for housing assistance in Kent.

2. For purposes of this section, “disabled” means a person who has been determined to be permanently and totally disabled as defined by the Social Security Administration and who receives Social Security benefits or any other benefits for that disability from any governmental source.

B. Limitations. The following limitations apply to the lifeline utility rate program:

1. The rate reduction shall only apply to utility charges for service to residences served by a separate city meter. The residence for which the rate reduction is requested must be the applicant’s principal place of residence.

2. The utility account must be in the name of the applicant, the applicant’s spouse, or the applicant’s landlord. Where the utility account is in the name of the applicant’s landlord, the applicant may be required to provide proof of tenancy at the property.

3. No person may claim a rate reduction for more than one dwelling unit during the same billing period.

4. Only one rate reduction per utility will be given for each property.

C. Application process. To qualify for the lifeline rate reduction, persons eligible under this section must file an application with the customer service division of the city’s finance department. Applications may be made on behalf of a senior citizen by a family member or an authorized representative, and applications based on a permanent and total disability may be made on behalf of a child by a parent, legal guardian, or other authorized representative. The customer service manager may require applications and accompanying documentation to be submitted annually.

D. Processing and approval. Determination of eligibility shall be made by the city’s customer service manager, or his or her designee, based upon the information given in the eligible customer’s application. The customer service manager may determine acceptable forms of proof of tenancy, income, or disability, and such forms may include, but are not limited to, tax documents and Social Security documents. If timely received, and upon approval of the application, the applicant’s household will receive the reduced utility rate for water and sewerage utilities beginning the first day of the month following approval.

(Ord. No. 3779, § 1, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 3864, § 1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 4280, § 1, 6-19-18)


Chapter 7.02 WATER*

Sections:

Part 1. Water Utility and Water Service Generally

7.02.010    Water to be metered.

7.02.020    Rates for water connection.

7.02.030    Using water in excess of meter capacity.

7.02.040    Maintenance of water system.

7.02.050    Separate meters required – Exceptions.

7.02.060    Existing service to more than one building.

7.02.070    Connection with other water supply.

7.02.080    Connections outside of city limits.

7.02.090    Installation and connection charges inside city limits, permits, and inspection fees.

7.02.100    Installation and connection charges outside city.

7.02.110    Temporary water meters.

7.02.120    Stop cocks.

7.02.130    Turn on and off service by water utility employees.

7.02.140    Special stop and waste cock.

7.02.150    Replacement – Permit credit.

7.02.160    Connections from stop cock at owner’s expense and care.

7.02.170    Plumber’s permit for turn on and off.

7.02.180    Water turned on by owner or tenant prohibited.

7.02.190    Vacant premises – Water supply.

7.02.200    Size of water main.

7.02.210    Turn off and turn on charges.

7.02.220    Prohibited uses.

7.02.230    Water rates.

7.02.240    Water billing adjustments.

7.02.250    Billing for service.

7.02.260    Charges when meter is out of order.

7.02.270    Request for meter check.

7.02.280    Fire protection service.

7.02.290    Emergency shutoff without notice.

7.02.300    Penalty for violation.

Part 2. Cross-Connection Restrictions

7.02.310    Cross-connection restrictions – Purpose.

7.02.320    Cross-connection restrictions – Definitions.

7.02.330    Adoption of state regulations.

7.02.340    Unprotected cross-connection declared unlawful.

7.02.350    Cross-connection restrictions – Administration.

7.02.360    Cross-connection restrictions – Service connection.

7.02.370    Entry onto premises.

7.02.380    Approved backflow preventers required.

7.02.390    Inspection and testing procedures of approved backflow preventers.

7.02.400    Approved backflow preventers administrative fee and permit.

7.02.410    Cross-connection restrictions – Enforcement.

*Cross reference(s) – Department of public works, ch. 2.28; utility tax levied on telephone, gas, electric, garbage, water, sewer and drainage utilities, ch. 3.18; utilities clearing fund, § 3.40.1000; street occupation permit, ch. 6.07; water shortage regulations, ch. 7.13; environmental policy, ch. 11.03; requirements and standards for subdivisions, § 12.04.235; fire hydrants, ch. 13.01; plumbing code, ch. 14.01.

State law reference(s) – Public water supply systems, RCW 70.119A.010 et seq.

Part 1. Water Utility and Water Service Generally


7.02.010 Water to be metered. 

All water of the water utility of the city shall be sold by use of a water meter that measures the amount of water used by a consumer.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.020 Rates for water connection.

The city council shall fix rates to be paid by a consumer for water procured from the water utility of the city, and for the amount of cost to be charged to and paid by the applicant for a water connection to a water main including the water meters. Water connection shall be of various sizes as specified in this chapter. All water connections and water meters shall be installed by the water utility of the city or by a contractor approved by the director of public works. All connections shall be made under the supervision of the director of public works or his authorized representative and shall meet or exceed the standards and specifications approved by the director of public works.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.030 Using water in excess of meter capacity.

The water utility will not install a water meter on a service which demands water in excess of the rated capacity of the meter. The water utility of the city shall have the right to discontinue water service to any consumer when the demand of the service exceeds the following meter capacities:

	Meter size (inches)	 	Gallons per minute

	5/8 x 3/4	 	20

	3/4	 	30

	1	 	50

	1 1/2	 	100

	2	 	160 

	3	 	300

	4	 	500

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.040 Maintenance of water system. 

All tanks, reservoirs, water meters, water mains, pipes, couplings, shutoff valves, stop cocks, and every other kind of equipment or material in use or in place as a part of the water system of the city and located in any street, alley, city park, city property, or in any easement or franchise belonging to the city, or located upon private property from a water main of the water system to and including the water meter, are the property of the city and are subject to the exclusive control and regulations of the city. All pipes and connections from the water meter to the premises or building served by the city water are the property and the sole responsibility of the owner or lessee of the premises or building.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.050 Separate meters required – Exceptions.

Except as provided in this chapter, each separate building occupied as a dwelling or as a place of business must have a separate water service and water meter. Where the applicant desires to have two or more service pipes on the same premises, he shall state in his application for a water connection, and separate service pipes shall be run with individual stop cocks to each water meter. Each mobile home park and each condominium may be served by one water meter. The city council may enter into agreements with commercial and industrial users to allow more than one building to be served by a single meter.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.060 Existing service to more than one building.

At the time of the adoption of this chapter where more than one building is served through one meter, the consumption of water for each billing period shall be divided by the number of buildings served and the charge will then be calculated as if each building were a separate account.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.070 Connection with other water supply. 

A. No service connection shall be allowed from the city mains to any premises supplied by water from any other source, unless special permission is given by the director of public works, which special permission may be terminated at any time if in the judgment of the director of public works the public interest requires it.

B. No cross-connection shall be made or maintained between any city service connection and pipe supplying water from any other source unless the water supplied from the other source, by tests by the State Board of Health, is shown to conform with the United States bacteriological standard for drinking water. Such tests must be made by a professional tester and submitted to the city at least once each month.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.080 Connections outside of city limits. 

A. Whenever any person outside the limits of the city, not already furnished with water by the city, shall desire the system to be extended, such person shall apply to the city council to have such water service extended. Such application shall designate the premises to be supplied and the number of services desired. If a permit is granted by the city council, the applicants shall, at their own expense, install all necessary mains or pipes in accordance with the requirements of the city engineer and the comprehensive water plan of the city which is on file in the office of the director of public works. All regulations concerning the size of service and meter shall apply.

B. Whenever any water district desires to purchase water from the city, it shall make application to the city council and, if accepted, install all mains and services in accordance with the rules and regulations of the city. An individual contract will be negotiated for the purchase of water. Whenever any portion of a water district is annexed to the city, the ownership of the mains, meters, and services shall become the property of the city in accordance with RCW 35.13A.020.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.090 Installation and connection charges inside city limits, permits, and inspection fees.

A. Tap charge – Connection by water utility. Any property owner within the city limits applying for water service shall pay in full a tap charge and a permit review and inspection fee, plus a system development charge prior to issuance of the water service permit. The tap charge will include the cost of connection and laying the pipe from the city water main to the property line of the property to which service is desired, or at a distance of 60 feet from the main toward such property line, whichever is shorter. The minimum tap charge so established for service installed by the water utility is as follows:

1. Two hundred seventy-five dollars for each five-eighth-inch by three-quarter-inch connection.

2. Three hundred twenty-five dollars for each three-quarter-inch connection.

3. Three hundred fifty dollars for each one-inch connection.

4. Six hundred dollars for each one-and-one-half-inch connection.

5. Eight hundred dollars for each two-inch connection.

On any connection over two inches, the minimum tap charge shall be the actual cost of the meter and installation, plus 25 percent.

B. Tap charge – Connection by licensed contractor. If the workload of the water utility as determined by the director of public works is such that the installation of the water connection would interfere with the proper operation and maintenance of the water system, the director of public works may require that the property owner employ a licensed contractor to make the connection and install the necessary line and materials except the water meter. All such water services shall meet or exceed the standards and specifications approved by the director of public works. The minimum tap charge is as follows:

1. One hundred dollars for each five-eighth-inch by three-quarter-inch connection.

2. One hundred twenty-five dollars for each three-quarter-inch connection.

3. One hundred seventy-five dollars for each one-inch connection.

4. Three hundred sixty dollars for each one-and-one-half-inch connection.

5. Five hundred dollars for each two-inch connection.

All such contractor-installed connections shall be guaranteed by the contractor for a period of one year.

C. System development charge. The system development charge is as follows:

	Meter Size (inches)	Charge Effective Through March 31, 2009	Charge Effective April 1, 2009

	Less than 1	$2,600	$5,949

	1	$4,627	$14,872

	1-1/2	$10,400	$29,743

	2	$18,486	$47,589

	3	$41,594	$95,179

	4	$73,933	$148,717

	5	$115,528	$222,932

	6	$166,376	$297,434

	8	$295,786	$475,894

	10	$462,162	$654,354

After April 1, 2009, this system development charge will increase annually, on the first day of each calendar year, by an amount equal to the percentage increase in the Construction Price Index for Seattle-Tacoma-Bremerton for the 12 months, October 31st through September 30th, of the previous calendar year.

However, if (1) the city’s fire marshal has required that, in conjunction with the city’s issuance of a single-family residential building permit, the applicant must install a fire sprinkler system, and (2) the need for a meter size greater than three-quarters of an inch is based solely on the fire marshal’s requirement that the sprinkler system be installed, the single-family residential permit applicant shall pay only the system development charge listed above for a meter less than one inch in diameter. It is not the city’s intent to require an applicant to pay a higher system development charge when the larger meter size is needed only in the unusual event of a fire demand rather than for normal daily user demand.

D. Permit and inspection fee. The city council shall, by resolution, establish the permit, inspection, and other related fees to be assessed to implement and operate the regulations adopted in this chapter. In the event of any conflict or ambiguity regarding any fees established by council resolution, the public works director is authorized to interpret the fee schedule(s) to resolve that conflict or ambiguity.

E. Installation of undersized meter. If an undersized meter is installed, a deduction will be allowed from the above charges, including system development charges, which will reflect the difference in cost between the undersized meter and the regular size meter. All service material (including water meter) will remain the property of the city.

F. Tap change. If the tap is changed to one of a larger size, the cost and expense of such charge must be paid before the larger size tap is installed.

G. Paving replacement – Charge. If it becomes necessary during the installation of such connection on a time and material basis to break and replace either concrete or blacktop paving, then in each instance an additional charge shall be made to cover the cost of such repair.

H. Fee deferral. Until December 31, 2013, at the time of issuance of any single-family residential building permit for a dwelling unit that is being constructed for initial sale, the owner of the subject real property may defer payment of the water system development charge in subsection (A) of this section, executing a first position lien in favor of the city in the amount of the water system development charge. The city shall record the lien against the real property and the lien amount shall be paid by the seller to the city at the time of closing of the sale of the real property and single-family residence. An owner who chooses to defer the water system development charge must combine the lien with a lien deferring the transportation improvement fee in KCC 12.11.090 or Chapter 43.21C RCW, and drainage system development charge in KCC 7.05.165.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.100 Installation and connection charges outside city.

Any property owner outside the city limits applying for water service shall pay in full the tap charge and a permit review and inspection fee, plus a system development charge prior to the issuance of a water service permit. The minimum charge established shall be the cost as established for inside the city limits plus 50 percent, except the system development charge. The system development charge shall be the same as for inside city limits.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.110 Temporary water meters.

A. When water service is required for a specific short-term duration, upon approval of the director of public works, a temporary water meter may be obtained from the water utility.

B. Such meters shall only be used for a designated project and shall be promptly returned to the water utility upon completion of the project or at the end of 60 days, whichever comes first. The meters are to be returned in the same condition as when rented, and the user shall be held responsible for any damage thereto including paying all repair or replacement costs. While in the user’s possession, the user shall be solely responsible for the meter and as such, should it be lost or stolen, the user shall pay the water utility the cost of its replacement.

C. The director of public works shall require that a cash bond be deposited with the city prior to receipt of a temporary meter. The amount of the bond shall equal the replacement cost of the respective meter. Upon return of the meter, the payment of all outstanding charges including any meter repair or replacement costs, the cash bond shall be released back to the user.

D. Temporary meters may be moved from one hydrant to another within the same project; provided, the water utility is notified in advance of the proposed relocation and that hydrant wrenches are used to make all connections and disconnections.

E. For each 100 cubic feet of water used with a temporary water meter, the rate charged will be $4.73 per 100 cubic feet of water used. All rates are also subject to a one-time temporary meter charge as follows:

1. Up to one-and-one-half-inch meter, $50;

2. Two-inch and larger meter, $100.

Payment shall be made in full upon return of the meter. If a meter is lost or stolen, payment for water used shall be based on an estimate made by the director of public works.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.120 Stop cocks.

All service pipes must come directly from the street main and shall be laid at such depth and at such point as the water utility shall designate. All stop cocks and connections thereto shall be maintained by and under the control of the water utility.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.130 Turn on and off service by water utility employees. 

No person except employees of the water utility or the finance department will be allowed to turn the water on or off at the city’s stop cock after the plumbing has been completed and the water turned on by the water utility, except to repair the special stop and waste cock or the pipe between it and the city’s stop cock.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.140 Special stop and waste cock. 

A special stop and waste cock with a key attached thereto shall be placed on the pipe leading from the city’s stop cock outside of the building or inside if basement is available. No branch pipe, bibb, or fixture of any kind shall be placed between this stop cock and the city’s main. If this stop cock does not thoroughly drain all pipes throughout the premises, additional ones shall be placed in all sags, bends, and traps that cannot otherwise be drained. If the service is to a business building adjacent to a city sidewalk, a valve type stop and waste cock in a cast iron valve box, with traffic type lid, shall be installed near the outside wall of the building.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.150 Replacement – Permit credit. 

If a property owner, lessee, or occupant requests a change in meter size and/or water line size, an application shall be made to the city engineer. The city engineer shall review the application for compliance with KCC 7.02.030. If the request results in an increase flow capability to the property, the charge for this service shall include the respective system development charge, otherwise, the charge shall be limited to a time and material basis. In all cases a credit on this charge will be made for the meter removed. This credit will be based on a depreciation schedule of 20 percent per year for the number of years the meter has been in service, with a minimum credit of $2.50. No credit will be allowed for the valves, meter box, or pipe originally installed. Where a system development charge is included, a credit will also be given for that previously paid system development charge.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.160 Connections from stop cock at owner’s expense and care.

All pipes and connections from the city’s adapter or coupling located on or near the property line or near the meter box shall be put in at the expense of the property owner, who shall be responsible for all damages resulting from leaks and breaks.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.170 Plumber’s permit for turn on and off. 

No plumber or other person will be allowed to make connection with the city mains or make alterations in conduit, pipe, or other fixture connecting therewith, or to connect pipes when they have been disconnected, or to turn water off or on, upon any premises at the city’s stop cock without a permit from the director of public works.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.180 Water turned on by owner or tenant prohibited. 

If the water is turned on to the premises by anyone other than an employee of the water utility or the finance department after it has been turned off at the city stop cock, it will be turned off again at the city stop cock and locked, and will not be turned on again until the charges as prescribed in this chapter have been paid. These charges are based on the actual cost per hour, including overhead, of sending water utility employees to return service to the account, plus a turn on charge of $30. In no case will the charge be less than $30.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.190 Vacant premises – Water supply. 

If it is decided to discontinue the use of water supply to vacant premises for a period of 30 days or more, notice in writing must be given to the finance department. The water will be turned off and will be turned on again upon written application at a charge of $30 for such turn on. No remission of charges will be made for a lesser period than 30 days or without receipt of notice by the finance department.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.200 Size of water main. 

No water main shall be installed unless it is at least six inches in diameter and is the size indicated in the comprehensive water plan.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.210 Turn off and turn on charges.

A. For the purpose of paying the expense to the water utility or finance department, a charge as set forth in this chapter is hereby fixed and made to turn off or turn on the water service to any building for the making within the building of any inspection, repair, maintenance, enlargement, replacement, addition, or change in or to the water line or lines, or plumbing, or plumbing fixtures, or for the purpose of connecting any kind of machine, appliance, toilet, or bath facilities, or any kind of plumbing in or to the water system located within the building when the building does not have stop and waste cock as required in this section.

B. The charge shall be $45 if the turn off or turn on is done within a period of 48 hours of the initial customer request, which charge shall be paid to the finance department before any water service is turned off or turned on for any of the purposes set forth in this section.

C. If the turn off and turn on is not done within a period of 48 hours from the time of the initial consumer request, the charge is $30 to turn off the water service and $30 to turn on the service. The charge shall be paid to the finance department before any water service is turned off or turned on for any of the purposes set forth in this section.

D. If more than one turn off and turn on request occurs in any 12-month period, a charge in the amount of $45 shall be assessed against the account for each additional service turn off.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.220 Prohibited uses. 

No person shall:

A. Use water from the city water system for sprinkling or irrigating when requested by a police officer or firefighter of the city to cease such use during a fire which the fire department is seeking to control or when use of water for sprinkling or irrigation is forbidden by the city council;

B. Bathe in, fish in, or throw any substance into any reservoir or water tank or standpipe or into any pipe or connection to the city water system, or upon the premises where any reservoir, water tank or standpipe is located;

C. Obstruct the access to any fire hydrant or place lumber, dirt, rubbish, or other material upon public right-of-way or city owned property within 20 feet of a fire hydrant or to open or operate a fire hydrant except a member of a fire department or employee of the city in pursuance of his employment or duty;

D. Break or deface the seal of a water meter or tamper with, damage, obstruct, or alter a water meter in service;

E. Make any connection with a water main, water pipe, or fire hydrant for delivery of water from the city water system to a consumer without a permit from the water utility and a means of measuring the quantity of water taken prior to consumption;

F. Turn on or turn off a water service at the water box or any place between the water meter and the water main of the city water system other than by an employee of the water utility or finance department who is authorized to either turn on or turn off a water service;

G. Interfere with, obstruct, or prevent free or safe access to any water meter or water service for purpose of reading, inspection, repair, removal, or installation by any employee of the water utility or finance department in pursuit of his employment;

H. Tamper with, destroy, break, or interfere with any part of the water system; or

I. Make, construct, buy, sell, or in any way dispose of to any person any curb cock key or hydrant wrench that fits or may be used on any part of the city water system without permission of the director of public works of the city.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.230 Water rates.

A. Water rates. The following monthly rates apply to all water customers served by the city of Kent. The lower rate applies per 100 cubic feet of water used up to or equal to 800 cubic feet per month, and the higher rate applies per 100 cubic feet of any water used in excess of 800 cubic feet:

WATER USE/CONSUMPTION 

Winter/Summer 

	≤ 800cf:	$2.40

	> 800cf:	$4.73

All customers are also subject to a monthly demand charge for potable water service, dedicated fireline service, and water meters. For purposes of this chapter, a dedicated fireline constitutes the pipe(s) and appurtenances on private property that only supply water to the system riser for water-based fire protection systems, private hydrants, monitor nozzles, fire pump suctions, and tanks. The dedicated fireline begins after the property isolation device, and it contains water that will be used only when needed for fire protection purposes and so will become stagnant and nonpotable. The fees for these monthly demand services are as follows:

	Meter Size or, for Dedicated Fireline, Pipe Size (inches)	Residential Charge Effective January 1, 2017	Commercial Charge Effective January 1, 2017	Dedicated Fireline Charge Effective January 1, 2017

	≤3/4	$23.15	$29.10	$2.75

	1	$36.25	$42.20	$3.21

	1-1/4	 	 	$4.81

	1-1/2	$69.00	$74.95	$6.42

	2	$108.30	$114.25	$10.27

	3	$173.80	$179.75	$25.67

	4	$265.50	$271.45	$51.33

	6	 	$402.45	$102.67

	8	 	$533.45	$173.25

	10	 	$664.45	$256.67

Beginning January 1, 2018, and on the first day of each calendar year thereafter, the total water rate for consumption, meters, and dedicated fireline usage will adjust by the Consumer Price Index (CPI), specifically the CPI-W Seattle-Tacoma-Bremerton, measured from June 1st through June 1st of the previous calendar year, if the CPI-W reflects an upward adjustment from the previous annual June to June period. For the years 2018 through 2022 the adjustment will not exceed 2.4 percent of the total water rate, but after that, beginning January 1, 2023, any increase in the CPI will not be subject to this 2.4 percent limit. In order to simplify the rate-making structure, the finance director is authorized to amend the rate each year to reflect the CPI adjustment.

B. Lifeline customers. Through Chapter 7.01 KCC, the city council has established eligibility criteria for lifeline customers. For lifeline-qualified water service customers, the following fees apply for monthly demand services, and water consumption per 100 cubic feet:

	Effective Date	Demand Service Charge	Water Rate per 100 cf

	01/01/2017	$13.10	$0.61

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.240 Water billing adjustments. 

A. Subject to the right of access and inspection by a representative of the city, a property owner receiving water service from the city may apply for adjustment of a city water bill under the following circumstances:

1. A water leak has been discovered on the subject property; or

2. A water line failure has occurred on the subject property; or

3. An inadvertent error on the part of the occupant of the subject property caused excessive water usage; or

4. An unexplained, abnormal water meter reading has occurred on the subject property.

This adjustment shall not exceed 100 percent of the difference between the total amount charged by the city for the billing period for which adjustment has been requested, and the average water usage at the subject property. For purposes of this subsection, “inadvertent error” does not include actions constituting knowing or willful neglect. Furthermore, the average water usage shall be computed by determining the total volume of water consumed, under normal use conditions, during the preceding 12 months and dividing that total volume by the number of times the city reads the customer’s water meter. If there is insufficient usage history by the owner at the subject property, the city may use additional consumption history before an adjustment can be made. This additional consumption history may include, but is not limited to: the owner’s prior usage at another location receiving water service from the city; the previous owner’s consumption history; and historical water consumption at comparable properties within the city.

B. This water bill adjustment can be applied to no more than two consecutive billing periods. Any bill submitted for adjustment must exceed two times the average usage in the preceding 12 months prior to the earliest billing period for which the adjustment is requested. The property owner must submit a signed application for adjustment, on a form prescribed by the finance director, within 90 days of the last day of the billing period for which an adjustment is requested, in order to be eligible for the adjustment.

C. Following receipt of an application for a water bill adjustment, the city’s customer services manager, or the manager’s designee, shall review the application and determine whether or not to adjust the water bill based on the criteria listed in this section. In order to make a proper and fair determination, city staff shall be entitled to enter upon and inspect the subject property, if necessary, and shall verify that the water meter serving the subject property does not indicate that excessive water usage is continuing. The customer services manager shall not approve an application for water bill adjustment if the city determines that the water meter shows the continued existence of abnormally high water usage.

D. If approved, the customer services manager shall adjust the water bill by issuing a credit to the water service billing account. In the alternative, if the owner no longer owns the subject property or is otherwise no longer legally responsible for the water bill, the city may, upon approval of the finance director, issue a check to the owner in an amount not to exceed what would have been credited to the water service billing account.

E. The owner may request reconsideration of the decision of the city’s customer services manager by the city’s finance director. This request must be in writing and delivered to the city no later than 30 days after the customer services manager’s decision is delivered to the property owner. For purposes of this subsection, delivery is deemed complete upon the third day following the day upon which the written determination or request for consideration is placed in the mail, unless the third day falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, in which event service shall be deemed complete on the first day other than a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday following the third day. This request for reconsideration must contain all relevant facts and circumstances pertaining to why the owner believes that the decision of the customer service manager was incorrect. The finance director shall issue a written decision to the requestor within 45 days of receipt of the request for reconsideration. The finance director’s determination cannot be appealed to the hearing examiner or the city council, and any further appeals may only be made pursuant to applicable state law.

F. A property owner may submit an application for adjustment of a water bill only once every 12 months; provided, however, that this does not prohibit an owner from submitting an application for adjustment of two billing periods simultaneously, pursuant to subsection (B) of this section. If a property owner has previously submitted an application for adjustment of a water bill to the city for the same property, the customer services manager will reject any subsequent application that does not also include tangible proof that repair work to correct the leak has already been completed, such as original or certified copies of invoices for parts and/or labor. The city may also enter onto the subject property to confirm that necessary repairs have been made, prior to granting a subsequent request for a water bill adjustment.

G. Subsection (F) of this section notwithstanding, a property owner submitting an application pertaining to a property for which that owner has not previously submitted a request for a water bill reduction, or a new owner applying for a water bill reduction pertaining to a property for which a water bill reduction was previously requested by a prior owner, shall be treated as a first-time applicant under this section. The finance director shall not consider an heir, devisee, person related by blood or marriage, an affiliated corporate entity or an entity under common control with a prior owner of the subject property to be treated as a “first-time applicant” for purposes of this subsection.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.250 Billing for service. 

All billing for water shall be made to the nearest $0.05.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.260 Charges when meter is out of order.

If a meter fails to register the amount of water used, the customer will be charged at the average rate of monthly consumption as shown by the meter when the meter was in working order.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.270 Request for meter check. 

A customer may request a meter check. If it is found that the meter is registering less than or more than the requirements of the state for meter accuracy, no charge will be made. If it is found that the meter is registering in accordance with state regulations, a charge which is on file in the city clerk’s office will be made. This charge will be added to the next water billing.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.280 Fire protection service.

A. Pipes for fire protection purposes must be fitted with such fixtures as are needed for fire protection and such fixtures shall be sealed by the water utility. In no case shall such seal be broken, except in case of fire or by the fire chief for the purpose of testing the pipes, fixtures or hose.

B. When seals are broken in case of fire, it shall be the duty of the owner or tenant of the premises to notify the water utility within 24 hours after its occurrence, and the seal will be replaced by the water utility.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.290 Emergency shutoff without notice.

A. The water may at any time be shut off from the mains without notice for repairs, extensions, or other necessary purposes and persons having boilers supplied by direct pressure from the mains are cautioned against danger of explosion or collapse. Where meters are in use, a safety valve shall be placed between the boiler on such service and the meter at the owner’s expense, and the owner shall be held responsible to the city for any and all damages to meters caused by hot water.

B. The city will not be responsible for the safety of boilers or other fixtures on the premises of any water consumer.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.300 Penalty for violation.

A. Except as set forth in KCC 7.02.310 through 7.02.400, any violation of this chapter constitutes a civil violation under Chapter 1.04 KCC, for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required as provided therein.

B. In addition to, or as an alternative to, any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalties provided for in KCC 1.04.030.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)

Part 2. Cross-Connection Restrictions


7.02.310 Cross-connection restrictions – Purpose.

The purpose of this part is to protect the city’s public water system from contamination via cross-connections.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.320 Cross-connection restrictions – Definitions.

A. Definitions in WAC 246-290-010, as they presently exist and as they may be amended, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by this reference as if set forth in full, including, but not limited to the following terms. 

1. Backflow means the undesirable reversal of flow of water or other substances through a cross-connection into the public water system or consumer’s potable water system.

2. Consumer’s water system means any potable or industrial water system that begins at the point of delivery from the public water system and is located on the consumer’s premises. The consumer’s water system includes all auxiliary sources of supply, storage, treatment, and distribution facilities, piping, plumbing, and fixtures under the control of the consumer.

3. Cross-connection means any actual or potential physical connection between a public water system or the consumer’s water system and any source of nonpotable liquid, solid, or gas that could contaminate the potable water supply by backflow.

4. High health cross-connection hazard means a cross-connection involving any substance that could impair the quality of potable water and create an actual public health hazard through injury, poisoning, or spread of disease.

5. Premises isolation means a method of protecting a public water system by installation of approved air gaps or approved backflow prevention assemblies at or near the service connection or alternative location acceptable to the purveyor to isolate the consumer’s water system from the purveyor’s distribution system.

6. Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC) means the code adopted under RCW 19.27.031 and implemented under Chapter 51-56 WAC. This code establishes statewide minimum plumbing standards applicable within the property lines of the consumer’s premises. 

B. In addition to those definitions contained within WAC 246-290-010, when used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context indicates otherwise:

1. Approved backflow preventer means an approved air gap, an approved backflow prevention assembly, or an approved atmospheric vacuum breaker relied upon by the purveyor for the protection of the public water system. The requirements of this chapter do not apply to backflow preventers installed for other purposes.

2. Approved backflow prevention assembly means a reduced pressure backflow assembly, reduced pressure detector assembly, double check valve assembly, double check detector assembly, pressure vacuum breaker assembly, or spill resistant vacuum breaker assembly of make, model, and size that is approved by the Washington State Department of Health (Department of Health). 

3. Authority having jurisdiction means the building services division of the city of Kent economic and community development department, which is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of the UPC. 

4. Auxiliary water supply means water supplied by wells or by cisterns or some other type of water not supplied by the city.

5. Consumer means the owner or operator of a water system connected to a public water system through a service connection.

6. Director means the director of the public works department or his/her designee. 

7. Public water system means all the public water treatment, storage, and distribution facilities, beginning at the water supply sources and ending at the point of delivery to the consumer’s water system, which begins at the downstream end of the service connection or water meter located on the public right-of-way or utility-held easement.

8. Purveyor means the city of Kent public works department water utility, which operates the public water system.

9. Substantial alteration means any upgrades, additions, repairs, or alterations to any site in exceedance of $100,000. 

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.330 Adoption of state regulations.

The provisions of WAC 246-290-490, as they presently exist and as they may be amended, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by this reference as if set forth in full. 

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.340 Unprotected cross-connection declared unlawful.

The installation or maintenance of an unprotected cross-connection is hereby declared to be unlawful. The control and elimination of cross-connections by the public works department shall be in accordance with the applicable sections of the Washington Administrative Code, the Kent City Code and the policies and procedures of the city’s cross-connection control program. 

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.350 Cross-connection restrictions – Administration.

The public works department shall be responsible for administering KCC 7.02.310 through 7.02.410, including the development of the necessary procedures and practices that are consistent with the standards in this code and Chapter 246-290 WAC.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.360 Cross-connection restrictions – Service connection.

A. No water service connection from the public water system to any consumer shall be installed or maintained unless the public water system is protected by an approved backflow preventer commensurate with the degree of hazard.   

B. Water service may be discontinued to any consumer for failure to comply with this chapter. Service may not be reestablished until the public works department has verified compliance with this chapter pertaining to cross-connections.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.370 Entry onto premises. 

With the consent of the consumer or owner/operator of any premises, through permissions granted in a water service agreement or pursuant to a lawfully issued warrant, public works department staff may enter any premises at any reasonable time to perform the duties imposed by this chapter. No consent, warrant, or permission is required to enter those areas open to the public generally or to which no reasonable expectation of privacy exists. 

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.380 Approved backflow preventers required.

A. Approved backflow preventers shall be installed at the city’s water service connection commensurate with the assessed degree of hazard. The consumer shall install and maintain all approved backflow preventers deemed necessary by the standards established by the city. 

B. Premises isolation is required for the following service connections:

1. Severe and high health cross-connection hazard premises listed in WAC 246-290-490(4)(b), Table 9;

2. New commercial multi-tenant facilities;

3. Single-family dwellings with access to an auxiliary water supply;

4. Commercial fire lines;

5. Commercial irrigation systems;

6. Residential irrigation systems (per the UPC);

7. Residential fire sprinkler systems, excluding the flow-through type (per the UPC).

C. Premises isolation may be required after an assessment by the public works department of the following service connections: 

1. New commercial facilities;

2. Commercial facilities after a substantial alteration;

3. Facilities with complex plumbing arrangements that make it impracticable to assess whether cross-connection hazards exist;

4. Facilities with cross-connection hazards that are unavoidable or not correctable, such as, but not limited to, facilities which are more than two stories. 

D. Commercial fire lines with single check valve backflow preventers are subject to the following requirements:

1. Where an existing fire line and/or private fire hydrant system is altered or extended, the existing fire line, fire hydrant(s) and/or yard hydrant and all related backflow protection assemblies shall be upgraded to comply with current city codes. The upgrade requires a backflow permit and all upgrades shall be completed prior to final inspection and permit approval.

2. When single check valve backflow preventers are discovered, the public works department will issue a notice requiring replacement with an approved backflow prevention assembly. The replacement shall be completed within one year of the notice or other timeframe acceptable to the public works department. 

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.390 Inspection and testing procedures of approved backflow preventers. 

A. Approved backflow preventers shall be inspected and tested:

1. At the time of initial installation;

2. Annually after initial installation; 

3. After the approved backflow preventer is repaired;

4. After the approved backflow preventer is moved, relocated, reinstalled or reinstated;

5. After the approved backflow preventer fails testing or inspection and the cause of the failure has been corrected;

6. After installation or replumbing of an air gap;

7. After a backflow incident;

8. More often if tests indicate repeated failures.

B. The consumer shall have all required inspections and tests performed by a backflow assembly tester certified by the Washington State Department of Health. The results shall be delivered to the city on a form acceptable to the city.

C. If any required inspection and/or test is not performed, or if the approved backflow preventer does not successfully pass the required tests, the city may initiate enforcement as set forth in KCC 7.02.410. 

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.400 Approved backflow preventers administrative fee and permit.

A. Administrative fee assessed. An administrative fee per approved backflow preventer has been established by council resolution and is assessed annually. This fee is used to pay for costs incurred by the city to administer the cross-connection control program, including educational outreach, inspections, water-use surveys, and recordkeeping mandated by the Washington State Department of Health and the UPC. 

B. Backflow prevention permit. The installation of any approved backflow preventer requires a backflow prevention permit. An inspection fee for the backflow prevention permit shall be established by council resolution and assessed at the time of permit issuance. The director is authorized to interpret the fee schedule(s) to resolve any conflict or ambiguity. 

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


7.02.410 Cross-connection restrictions – Enforcement.

A. Any violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced as provided for in this section. 

B. Water service shutoff and monetary penalties. If the public works department determines that an unlawful cross-connection exists and/or that the consumer has failed to meet the inspection and testing requirements for approved backflow preventers, the consumer may be subject to the following penalties:

1. Residential consumers.

a. Warning. Written notice will be sent to the consumer or, alternatively, a copy of such written notice will be posted on the premises involved. The notice shall provide that the unlawful cross-connection shall be corrected by testing or installation within 30 days of the date the notice is mailed or posted on the premises.

b. First violation. If the consumer does not correct the violation by testing or installation within 30 days of the first written notice, the consumer may receive a $100 penalty and notice that water service to the premises may be shut off after 30 days. The notice shall include the actions necessary to avoid water service shutoff.

c. Second violation. If the consumer does not correct the violation by testing or installation within 30 days of the issuance of the first penalty, the consumer may receive an additional $100 penalty and water service to the premises may be shut off immediately. Water service will not be restored until the consumer corrects the violations and fully pays the penalty and water shutoff fee.

2. Commercial consumers.

a. Warning. Written notice will be sent to the consumer or, alternatively, a copy of such written notice will be posted on the premises involved. The notice shall provide that the unlawful cross-connection shall be corrected by testing or installation within 30 days of the date the notice is mailed or posted on the premises.

b. First violation. If the consumer does not correct the violation by testing or installation within 30 days of the first written notice, the consumer may receive a $500 penalty and notice that water service to the premises may be shut off after 30 days. The notice shall include the actions necessary to avoid water service shutoff.

c. Second violation. If the consumer does not correct the violation by testing or installation within 30 days of the issuance of the first penalty, the consumer may receive an additional $500 penalty and water service to the premises may be shut off immediately. Water service will not be restored until the consumer corrects the violations and fully pays the penalty and water shutoff fee.

3. Appeal of water service shutoff and monetary penalties. A consumer may appeal the water service shutoff and/or the assessment of a monetary penalty to the director. An appeal must be made in writing and must set forth the reasons and include any evidence of why the consumer is not in violation of this chapter. The director will provide written notice of his or her decision on the appeal within 10 business days of the director’s receipt of the appeal. That decision is final, and no additional appeal is available. 

C. Recovery of costs incurred by the city. In addition to any penalty provided for in subsections (B) through (F) of this section, a consumer who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for all costs incurred by the city as a result of the violation. The city will issue an invoice to the consumer for the violation advising of the amount of costs incurred by the city as a result of the violation. The consumer must respond within 14 days of service of notice by: (1) paying the invoice, (2) requesting a hearing before the city’s hearing examiner to mitigate the amount of the invoice, or (3) requesting a hearing before the city’s hearing examiner to contest the amount of the invoice. Failure to timely respond shall result in the invoice being deemed valid and the city may seek collection of the invoice through the process provided for in Chapter 3.10 KCC, including the use of a collection agency. Payment of any invoice issued shall not alleviate the consumer for the violation from complying with this chapter.

1. Service of notice. Service of an invoice issued under this subsection (C) shall occur and is deemed complete in the same manner and under the same provisions as provided for in KCC 1.04.060.

2. Process to mitigate or contest invoice. The process through which a consumer may request a hearing to contest or mitigate an invoice issued to him or her as a person responsible for the violation is the same as that provided for notices of violation under KCC 1.04.120 through 1.04.190. The hearing examiner’s decision as to any invoice issued under this subsection (C) is final and may not be further appealed.

3. Failure to pay – Civil infraction. The failure to timely pay an invoice issued under this subsection (C), or any mitigated invoice amount set by the hearing examiner, is a separate violation that may be enforced through the issuance of a civil infraction pursuant to subsection (D) of this section.

D. Civil infraction. A person who violates any provision of this chapter may be issued a class 1 civil infraction as set forth in RCW 7.80.120, as currently enacted or hereafter amended. An infraction issued pursuant to this section shall be filed in the Kent municipal court and processed in the same manner as other infractions filed in the Kent municipal court. In addition, a civil code enforcement action may be instituted in accordance with subsection (E) of this section to effectuate any abatement or corrective action required by the person as a result of the violation.

E. Civil code enforcement. In addition to, or as an alternative to, any other penalty provided for in this chapter or by law, a civil code enforcement action may be instituted under the provisions provided for in Chapter 1.04 KCC to effectuate any abatement or corrective action required as a result of a violation of this chapter, including the issuance of a stop use or stop work order under KCC 1.04.090 through 1.04.110. The process through which the person responsible for the violation may contest a stop use or stop work order is the same as that provided for notices of violation under KCC 1.04.120 through 1.04.190. Failure to timely abate the violation or take the required corrective action will result in the issuance of a fine in accordance with KCC 1.04.080 and 1.04.200, which fine will be separate and apart from any fine that may have been issued under subsection (B) of this section.

F. Criminal offense. Except as may otherwise be provided, a person who:

1. Negligently violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by up to the maximum penalty established in RCW 9A.20.021(3) as now enacted or hereafter amended; or who

2. Knowingly violates a provision of this chapter, or commits a repeated violation of this chapter, is guilty of a gross misdemeanor, punishable by up to the maximum penalty established in RCW 9A.20.021(2), as now enacted or hereafter amended.

a. For purposes of this section repeated violation means, as evidenced by either a prior committed finding by the Kent municipal court of an infraction issued under this chapter, or a committed finding by the hearing examiner of a notice of violation issued under Chapter 1.04 KCC, or a committed finding by operation of law under KCC 1.04.130, that a violation of this chapter has occurred on the same property or that a person responsible for the violation has committed a violation of this chapter elsewhere within the city of Kent. To constitute a “repeat violation,” the violation need not be the same violation as the prior violation.

3. If a person is found guilty of a criminal offense as provided for in this subsection (F), or pleads guilty to another offense on recommendation of the prosecutor, the court shall order the defendant pay restitution to the city of Kent, or any other victim of the offense, for the total suffered loss or damage by reason of the commission of the crime.

(Ord. No. 4288, § 2, 11-20-18)


Chapter 7.03 SOLID WASTE, RECYCLABLE MATERIALS, AND YARD WASTE*

Sections:

7.03.010    Definitions.

7.03.020    Solid waste collection.

7.03.030    Regulations regarding collection companies – Business license required.

7.03.040    Recyclable materials – Collection.

7.03.045    Yard waste materials – Collection – Prohibition on commingling yard waste with other solid waste or recyclables.

7.03.050    Solid waste handling service.

7.03.060    Hours of collection.

7.03.070    Special regulations.

7.03.080    Location of containers.

7.03.085    Recycling space requirements.

7.03.090    King County system designated.

7.03.100    King County comprehensive solid waste management plan adopted.

7.03.110    Lien for utility services.

7.03.120    Violation, penalty.

*Cross reference(s) – Department of public works, ch. 2.28; utility tax levied on telephone, gas, electric, garbage, water, sewer and drainage utilities, ch. 3.18; utilities clearing fund, § 3.40.1000; cleanup activities at hazardous waste or solid waste sites, § 11.02.030 et seq.; environmental policy, ch. 11.03.

State law reference(s) – Solid waste, liens authorized, RCW 35A.21.060, 35.21.130; compliance with RCW 70.95.010 et seq.; required, RCW 35.92.023; solid waste incinerator and landfill operators, RCW 70.95D.010 et seq.; solid waste management, RCW 70.95.010 et seq.; solid waste management, recovery and recycling, RCW 70.95.010 et seq.


7.03.010 Definitions.

The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Collection company means the persons, firms, or corporations, or combination thereof, operating under a contract for solid waste, recyclables, or yard waste collection with, or under the direction of, the city, including an authorized contractor for the collection of recyclable materials under this chapter.

Commercial means all customers, that are not included within the definition of “residential” set forth below, which are within the city of Kent. “Commercial” includes “commercial multifamily” as defined below.

Commercial multifamily means multifamily residences containing more than four (4) dwelling units.

Director means the director of the department of public works.

Garbage means solid waste.

Garbage, recycle, or yard waste container(s) means a watertight, fully covered can, container, cart, dumpster, or drop box of various sizes and weights, when full, as approved by the director or collection company. The director or collection company may approve the use of alternative containers or require appropriate features for the various containers such as type of material, handles, wheels, or compatibility with collection equipment.

Garbage unit(s) means secure and tight bundles, none of which shall exceed four (4) feet in the longest dimension and shall not exceed sixty (60) pounds in weight. “Garbage units” may also mean small discarded boxes, barrels, or bags, or securely tight cartons or other receptacles not intended for recycling under this chapter and able to be reasonably handled and loaded by one (1) person onto a collection vehicle.

Person means every person, firm, partnership, business, association, institution, or corporation in the city accumulating solid waste requiring disposal or generating, accumulating, and collecting recyclable materials. The term shall also mean the occupant and/or the owner of any premises for which service mentioned in this section is rendered.

Recyclable materials means waste materials generated in the city capable of reuse from a waste stream as designated by the director, including but not limited to sorted or unsorted newsprint, glass, aluminum, ferrous and nonferrous cans, plastic materials, mixed paper, and cardboard accumulated and intended for recycling or reuse and collection by a collection company or authorized contractor. This term excludes all dangerous wastes and hazardous wastes as defined in Chapters 70.105 and 70.105A RCW, and solid wastes intended for disposal in a landfill, incinerator, or solid waste disposal facility under Chapter 173-304 WAC. All recyclable materials intended for collection by a city-authorized collection company or contractor shall remain the responsibility and ownership of participants until such materials as contained in designated recycle containers are placed out for collection for the authorized contractor. Such materials then become the responsibility and property of the collection company or authorized contractor subject to the right of the participant to claim lost property of value.

Residential means customers dwelling in one-unit houses, mobile homes, and multifamily residences containing no more than four (4) dwelling units such as duplexes, triplexes, and fourplexes which are within the city of Kent.

Solid waste shall be as defined by RCW 70.95.030 and WAC 173-304-100(73), with the exception of sludge from wastewater treatment plants and septage from septic tanks, extremely hazardous waste, hazardous waste, dangerous waste, and problem wastes as defined in Chapters 173-303 and 173-204 WAC, and Chapters 70.105 and 70.105A RCW.

Solid waste utility shall be the city system of solid waste handling under Chapters 35.21 and 35.21A RCW and this code.

Yard waste means plant material including leaves, grass clippings, prunings, branches, brush, garden material, weeds, tree limbs, and other biodegradable waste that may be designated by the director. Rocks, dirt, and sod, except incidental amounts, are unacceptable. Materials may be bundled with cotton or other similar organic string only. Yard waste does not include demolition debris such as concrete, wallboard, lumber, or roofing materials.

(Ord. No. 2814, § 2(7.08.010), 11-1-88; Ord. No. 2841, § 2(7.08.010), 3-21-89; Ord. No. 2870, § 4 (7.08.010), 8-22-89; Ord. No. 3031, § 2, 2-19-92; Ord. No. 3183, § 1, 9-6-94; Ord. No. 3541, § 1, 2-6-01; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 3-20-07)

Cross reference(s) – Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.01.030.




7.03.020 Solid waste collection.

A. Solid waste – Collection required. Solid waste collections shall be made by collection companies as authorized by the city. Except as provided in subsections (B) and (C) of this section, all persons and properties within the city are required to use the solid waste collection system of the city and it shall be unlawful for any person, other than those duly authorized by the city, to haul solid waste through the streets of the city. It is unlawful to dump or store solid waste, recyclable, or yard waste materials in violation of Ch. 8.04 KCC. All persons and occupied property shall use and be responsible for at least the minimum level of solid waste collection service and associated charges for residential or commercial service, as applicable, unless exempted from such requirement under this subsection or subsection (B) of this section. The city or collection company will automatically bill the residential or commercial customer for such minimum level of service if the customer does not sign up for service within thirty (30) days of occupying a property in the city. Upon satisfactory evidence on an annual basis that a person or property produces no solid waste, or a residential customer owns a business in the city of Kent that has commercial solid waste collection service, the director may approve an exemption from the mandatory solid waste collection service and payment requirements of this section.

B. Commercial permitted haulers. Those commercial and industrial business establishments having prior established permits to haul their own solid waste may continue to haul such solid waste by annual permit. Renewal permits shall be issued upon application and payment of the annual permit fee. The annual permit fee shall be as follows:

1. Permit holders hauling less than one hundred fifty (150) tons of solid waste per month, one hundred dollars ($100);

2. Permit holders hauling greater than one hundred fifty (150) tons of solid waste per month, seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500).

Any permit holder, as provided for in this subsection, shall haul garbage at least once a week for public health reasons.

C. Self-haul. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the limited and occasional hauling of solid waste, recyclable materials, or yard wastes by a customer from its specific property to an approved King County solid waste, recyclable materials, or yard waste collection site. Occasional haulers are not exempt from the mandatory solid waste collection service and payment requirements and are responsible for any associated fees for such collection site services, as applicable.

(Ord. No. 2841, § 2(7.08.020(A) – (C)), 3-21-89; Ord. No. 2870, § 4(7.08.020(A) – (C)), 8-22-89; Ord. No. 3253, § 1, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 3289, § 1, 4-3-96; Ord. No. 3541, § 1, 2-6-01; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 3-20-07)


7.03.030 Regulations regarding collection companies – Business license required.

A. To provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare, collection companies operating within the city under contract for services for the city’s solid waste utility shall, at no additional cost to the city or its residents:

1. Comply with all provisions of the city code and amendments thereof, and applicable federal, state, and county laws and regulations pertaining to the collection, handling, transportation, and disposal of solid waste, recyclable materials, and yard waste. The city shall be entitled, during regular business hours, to inspect the books and records of collection companies operating within the city;

2. Pick up Christmas trees each January;

3. Provide for a semiannual residential cleanup in the spring and fall of each year to allow for disposal of accumulated solid waste. The director of public works shall promulgate administrative rules, following consultation with collection companies, for the implementation of this subsection;

4. Provide service to public buildings and facilities, as designated by the director of public works. Upon consultation with collection companies, the director of public works may add or delete public facilities from such designation in the interests of public health and safety;

5. Extend the lifeline utility rate for solid waste, recyclable materials, and yard waste collection as adopted by the city under KCC 7.01.080 to eligible customers who have filed an approved application with the city.

B. Collection companies operating pursuant to and in compliance with this chapter shall be issued, upon application, a business license pursuant to Ch. 5.01 KCC, without the payment of license fees, permit fees as provided in KCC 7.03.020(B), or other fees related to solid waste handling established by the city. This subsection shall not be construed as a waiver of the utility tax imposed by Ch. 3.18 KCC.

(Ord. No. 2814, § 2(7.08.020(D), (E)), 11-1-88; Ord. No. 2841, § 2(7.08.020(D), (E)), 3-21-89; Ord. No. 2870, § 4(7.08.020(D), (E)), 8-22-89; Ord. No. 3541, § 1, 2-6-01; Ord. No. 3779, § 4, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 3-20-07)

State law reference(s) – Garbage collectors, Chapter 81.77 RCW.


7.03.040 Recyclable materials – Collection.

A. Collection companies shall collect recyclable materials from residential and commercial multifamily customers in the city who request curbside recycling at no extra cost as part of their solid waste collection service, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Collection companies shall collect recyclable materials from commercial customers in the city who request commercial recycling service in accordance with the collection company’s rates and applicable regulations. Subject to terms and conditions of any collection contract and regulations, such collection companies are solely responsible for all costs of removal and disposal of recyclable materials placed out for collection by the residential or commercial customers. The requirements of this section do not prohibit the customary collection and sale of recyclable and reusable materials by persons or private recyclers or affect the right of waste generators to continue to accumulate, buy, sell, or give recyclable materials to persons other than the collection companies.

B. Designated recycle containers shall be placed at curbside, alleyside, or other locations as determined by the director or collection company with the concurrence of the director. Back yard collection of recycle containers shall not be required of the collection company except under special circumstances determined by the director, including disabled or elderly participants.

(Ord. No. 2814, § 2(7.08.030), 11-1-88; Ord. No. 3541, § 1, 2-6-01; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 3-20-07)


7.03.045 Yard waste materials – Collection – Prohibition on commingling yard waste with other solid waste or recyclables.

A. Collection companies shall collect yard waste materials (cut to less than four (4) feet and under four (4) inches in diameter) from residential or commercial customers in the city who request yard waste collection service at rates in accordance with the collection company’s contract and pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Subject to terms and conditions of any such collection contract and regulations, such collection companies are solely responsible for all costs of removal, marketing, and disposal of yard waste materials placed out for collection by customers. The requirements of this section do not prohibit customers from the customary collection and sale of yard waste materials or self-hauling yard waste materials to approved King County disposal sites.

B. Designated yard waste containers shall be placed at curbside, alleyside, or other locations as determined by the director or collection company with the concurrence of the director. Back yard collection of yard waste containers shall not be required of the collection company except under special circumstances determined by the director, for example, for disabled or elderly participants.

C. All persons and residences within the territorial limits of the city are prohibited from disposing any yard waste in any solid waste or recycle container other than a designated yard waste container.

(Ord. No. 3183, § 2, 9-6-94; Ord. No. 3541, § 1, 2-6-01; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 3-20-07)


7.03.050 Solid waste handling service.

A. All persons accumulating solid waste in the city shall place and accumulate solid waste in garbage containers or units as required by this chapter. 

B. It shall be unlawful to deposit, throw, or place any solid waste in any land, alley, street, or other public place, or to deposit, throw, or place any solid waste on any private property regardless of ownership, unless the solid waste is placed in garbage containers, the covers of which shall not be removed except when necessary for the depositing or removing of solid waste. Boxes, small barrels, cartons, scraps of wooden crates and boxes, broken-up household furniture and equipment, paper, hollowware, and rubbish in general may be broken up or cut up and placed in garbage containers or units, consistent with this chapter or as approved by the director.

C. Any garbage, recycle, or yard waste container, when filled, shall not weigh more than the allowable weight for its size as determined by the director or collection company for the safety of collection personnel and protection of property. Garbage, recycle, and yard waste containers shall be packed so that the contents thereof will dump out readily when the container is inverted. All garbage, recycle, and yard waste containers and garbage units shall be placed at curbside or alley for collection before 7:00 a.m. or in convenient, accessible locations upon the ground level or ground floor and as near as practicable to the approximate rear of the building or near the alley, street, or road at which collection trucks are to be loaded as approved by the director or collection company. All containers shall be removed from such locations as soon as possible after collection, but no later than the end of the collection day. All walks, paths, and driveways to the place of loading shall have an overhead clearance of not less than eight (8) feet.

D. Any person accumulating solid waste in the downtown or suburban business areas whose location requires the placing of garbage, recycle, or yard waste containers or garbage units on a sidewalk or alley for collection shall not place the same on a sidewalk or alley until the close of each business day, and shall remove containers from the sidewalk or alley immediately after the opening for business each morning.

E. Dangerous and other waste.

1. No hot ashes or other hot material, dirt, sand, rocks, gasoline, solvents, oil, paint, or dangerous or hazardous wastes shall be placed in any garbage, recycle, or yard waste container or garbage unit for collection or removal. All kitchen, table, and cooking waste, before being deposited in garbage containers or units, shall be drained and wrapped in paper or other material in such a manner as to prevent as nearly as possible moisture from such solid waste from coming in contact with sides or bottoms of the containers.

2. As used in this section, “dangerous or hazardous wastes” means any solid waste designated as dangerous or hazardous waste by the State Department of Ecology, and such wastes shall be disposed of consistent with Department of Ecology rules and regulations.

F. Duty to prevent spillage and overflow of garbage and other waste.

1. A sufficient number and size of approved containers must be utilized at each residential and commercial site to ensure the proper collection of all waste as defined in this chapter. If a site repeatedly generates an amount of solid waste that requires more than the minimum level of service, the city may require service to that site be increased above the minimum level until such time that a higher level of service is no longer regularly required. Either the landlord or the tenant may be held responsible for the cost of the increased service.

2. Each container must be capable of being secured so as to prevent wind, birds, or animals from removing the contents of the container. Covers shall be kept secured on each container at all times, except as necessary to deposit waste in the container or to empty the container.

3. The immediate area around garbage, recycle, and yard waste containers must be kept clean and free of loose waste at all times, except for items properly bundled into units as allowed by this chapter.

4. The landlord and tenant shall share legal responsibility for assuring that a commercial property or residence complies with the requirements of this section.

G. Certain garbage, recycle, and yard waste containers shall be provided by the collection company for the health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the residences and their occupants. All garbage, recycle, and yard waste containers provided by the collection company shall remain the property of the collection company. The containers shall not be damaged, destroyed, or removed from the premises by any person. Markings and identification devices on the containers, except as placed or specifically permitted by the collection company, are expressly prohibited and shall be regarded as damage to the containers.

H. It shall be unlawful, except as authorized by the owner, collection company, or the city, to deposit any solid waste or other material in any private garbage, recycle, or yard waste container or garbage unit or to remove the covers therefrom.

I. Yard waste collected by collection companies shall be deposited in containers provided or approved by collection companies or by the director, and disposed of as provided for in this chapter or authorized by the director. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit persons from composting yard waste on property owned or leased by such persons. Compost facilities shall be operated and maintained consistent with other applicable laws and regulations.

(Ord. No. 2814, § 2(7.08.040), 11-1-88; Ord. No. 2841, § 2(7.08.040), 3-21-89; Ord. No. 3031, § 3, 2-19-92; Ord. No. 3183, § 3, 9-6-94; Ord. No. 3541, § 1, 2-6-01; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 3-20-07; Ord. No. 3851, § 1, 8-7-07)


7.03.060 Hours of collection.

All solid waste, recyclable materials, and yard waste will be collected within the boundaries of the city as follows:

A. Residential pick-ups shall be made Monday through Friday from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. unless otherwise approved by the director in writing. Solid waste pick-ups shall be made at least once per month (minimum level of service) or once per week (regular service), unless otherwise approved by the director. If complaints are received or problems arise with accumulated solid waste for customers with once per month service, the city may require once per week service. Recyclable materials and yard waste may be picked up less frequently as approved by the director. Residential collection shall be at curbside unless otherwise approved by the director or collection company.

B. Commercial pick-ups may begin at 4:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, and may be made as often as required, but no less than once per month; provided, however, that in commercial areas abutting residential neighborhoods, pick-ups shall be limited to days and times set forth in subsection (A) of this section.

(Ord. No. 2841, § 2(7.08.060), 3-21-89; Ord. No. 3541, § 1, 2-6-01; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 3-20-07)


7.03.070 Special regulations.

The city reserves the right to prescribe special regulations for the collection of solid waste from the construction or repair of buildings, waste products from manufacturing plants, refuse of peculiar quality, or solid waste which may be thoroughly offensive or dangerous to haul through the streets or alleys of the city. The requirements for solid waste, recyclable materials, and yard waste collections, as set forth in the provisions of this chapter, may be modified by contract with the collection companies when approved by the city council and the affected collection company.

(Ord. No. 2841, § 2(7.08.120), 3-21-89; Ord. No. 3541, § 1, 2-6-01; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 3-20-07)


7.03.080 Location of containers.

A. The location of garbage, recycle, or yard waste containers or garbage units of commercial, industrial, or multifamily dwellings shall be subject to inspection by the fire department and must be relocated in areas with a reduced or a nonexistent fire hazard as necessary.

B. The location of the garbage, recycle, or yard waste containers or garbage units in conjunction with the residential pick-ups shall be at curbside. Persons with physical disabilities who are unable to bring solid waste, recycle, or yard waste containers to the curbside for collection may be eligible for special walk-in or drive-in services upon approval by the director and pursuant to the collection contract.

(Ord. No. 2841, § 2(7.08.140), 3-21-89; Ord. No. 3541, § 1, 2-6-01; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 3-20-07)


7.03.085 Recycling space requirements.

A. Storage space and collection points for recyclables. Developments shall provide storage space for the collection of recyclables as follows:

1. The storage space for residential uses shall be provided at the rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) square feet per dwelling unit in apartment and condominium developments except when the development is subject to a city/county sponsored or approved direct collection program.

2. The storage space for nonresidential uses shall be provided at the following rate:

a. Two (2) square feet per every one thousand (1,000) square feet of building gross floor area in office, educational, and institutional developments;

b. Three (3) square feet per every one thousand (1,000) square feet of building gross floor area in manufacturing and other nonresidential developments;

c. Five (5) square feet per every one thousand (1,000) square feet of building gross floor area in retail developments.

B. Collection points for recyclables. Developments shall provide collection points for recyclables as follows:

1. The storage space for residential developments shall be apportioned and located in collection points as follows:

a. The required storage area shall be dispersed in collection points throughout the site when a residential development comprises more than one (1) building.

b. There shall be one (1) collection point for every thirty (30) dwelling units.

c. No dwelling unit within the development shall be more than two hundred (200) feet from a collection point.

d. Collection points shall be located in a manner so that hauling trucks do not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle traffic onsite, or project into any public right-of-way.

2. The storage space for nonresidential development shall be apportioned and located in collection points as follows:

a. Storage space may be allocated to a centralized collection point.

b. Outdoor collection points shall not be located in any required setback areas.

c. Collection points shall be located in a manner so that hauling trucks do not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle traffic onsite, or project into any public right-of-way.

d. Outdoor collection points serving more than one (1) building within any single development are subject to the prior approval of the city’s director of public works.

C. Collection point design. The collection points shall be designed as follows:

1. Dimensions of the collection points shall be of sufficient width and depth to enclose recycle containers.

2. Architectural design of any structure enclosing an outdoor collection point or any building primarily used to contain a collection point shall be consistent with the design of the primary structure(s) on the site.

3. Collection points shall be identified by signs not to exceed two (2) square feet.

4. A six (6) foot wall or fence shall enclose any outdoor collection point, excluding collection points located in industrial developments that are greater than one hundred (100) feet from residentially zoned property.

5. Access to collection points may be limited, except during regular business hours and/or specified collection hours.

6. Enclosures for outdoor collection points and buildings used primarily to contain a collection point shall have gate openings at least twelve (12) feet wide for haulers. In addition, the gate opening for any building or other roofed structure used primarily as a collection point shall have a vertical clearance of at least twelve (12) feet.

7. Weather protection of recyclables shall be ensured by using weatherproof containers or by providing a roof over the storage area.

8. Collection points shall be located in a manner so that hauling trucks do not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle traffic onsite, or project into any public right-of-way.

(Ord. No. 3084, § 1(7.08.160), 1-19-93; Ord. No. 3541, § 1, 2-6-01; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 3-20-07)


7.03.090 King County system designated.

A. All solid waste generated within the corporate limits of the city shall be disposed at a King County solid waste disposal facility.

B. King County is authorized to designate disposal sites for the disposal of all solid waste generated within the city.

C. No solid waste may be diverted from the disposal sites designated by King County without King County approval.

D. The provisions of this section shall not apply and shall not affect the disposal of solid waste which is eliminated through waste reduction or waste recycling activities which have been coordinated with King County pursuant to the agreement between King County and the city concerning use of King County solid waste disposal facilities.

E. King County regulations or ordinances regarding levels and types of service for any aspect of solid waste handling shall not apply within the limits of the city except as provided in this chapter.

(Ord. No. 2841, § 2(7.08.200), 3-21-89; Ord. No. 2870, § 5(7.08.200), 8-22-89; Ord. No. 3541, § 1, 2-6-01; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 3-20-07)


7.03.100 King County comprehensive solid waste management plan adopted.

A. The city hereby adopts the King County comprehensive solid waste management plan with addenda as recommended by the solid waste interlocal forum through Resolution 89005 (hereinafter “plan”). The plan as adopted in this section is further designated for the exercise of substantive authority under the State Environmental Policy Act rules pursuant to RCW 43.21C.060.

B. Pursuant to RCW 70.95.160, the city hereby determines that King County shall not exercise any powers regarding the levels and types of service for any aspect of solid waste handling in the city. King County regulations and ordinances regarding levels and types of service for any aspect of solid waste handling shall not apply within the corporate limits of the city as may be now or hereafter determined by the city.

C. Pursuant to RCW 70.95.030, the city hereby designates the following materials as recyclable materials:

1. Container glass;

2. Paper;

3. Aluminum;

4. Tin cans;

5. Plastic.

Other materials may be designated as recyclable as markets become available and as the net cost of collecting and recycling that material becomes equal to or less than the cost of collection, transfer, long haul, and disposal. Items in the above list may be removed due to market or other variation.

D. The city shall determine solid waste collection rates, if any, by ordinance or through collection contracts and not as set forth in the plan.

E. The director of public works is hereby authorized to implement such administrative procedures as may be necessary to carry out the directions of this section.

(Ord. No. 2906, §§ 1 – 5, 2-20-90; Ord. No. 3541, § 1, 2-6-01; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 3-20-07)


7.03.110 Lien for utility services.

A. Pursuant to Chapter 35.21 RCW, liens are authorized by this code against property for which solid waste, recyclable materials, or yard waste collection services have been provided by collection companies operating under contract with the solid waste utility.

B. Applicable charges for solid waste, recyclable, and yard waste materials collection and disposal services are set by collection companies consistent with solid waste utility contracts with the city or applicable regulations. Upon failure to pay the applicable charges within the time provided for in invoices or bills issued by the city or collection companies, the amount thereof shall become a lien against the property for which the solid waste, recyclable material, or yard waste collection service is rendered.

C. A notice of the lien authorized by this section shall specify the charges, the period covered by the charges, and the legal description of the property sought to be charged. The notice shall be filed with the county auditor within the time required and shall be foreclosed in the manner and within the time prescribed for liens for labor and material.

D. Liens authorized by this section shall be prior to all liens and encumbrances filed subsequent to the filing of the notice of lien with the county auditor, except the lien of general taxes and local improvement assessments whether levied prior or subsequent thereto.

E. Collection companies seeking to exercise rights under this section shall have current, executed contracts for solid waste handling with the city authorizing the rights herein and providing for the method of such lien enforcement.

(Ord. No. 3031, § 4, 2-19-92; Ord. No. 3541, § 1, 2-6-01; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 3-20-07)


7.03.120 Violation, penalty.

A. Any violation of any provision of this chapter is a civil violation as provided for in Ch. 1.04 KCC, for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required as provided therein.

B. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided in this chapter, anyone violating or failing to comply with KCC 7.03.020 through 7.03.050 shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000) or by imprisonment for a period of not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(Ord. No. 3031, § 5(7.08.240), 2-19-92; Ord. No. 3541, § 1, 2-6-01; Ord. No. 3832, § 1, 3-20-07. Formerly § 7.03.170)


Chapter 7.04 SANITARY SEWERS

Sections:

7.04.010    Purpose.

7.04.020    Definitions.

7.04.030    Powers and authority of the director, inspectors, and assistants – Discretion of the director.

7.04.040    Connection with public sanitary sewer.

7.04.050    Permit required to construct, extend, or repair sewer.

7.04.060    Permits for additional work required.

7.04.070    Permit and inspection fees.

7.04.080    Issuance of temporary permit.

7.04.090    Display of permits.

7.04.100    Permit time limit – Extension.

7.04.110    Permits to install or repair onsite sewage systems.

7.04.120    Construction standards.

7.04.130    Use of public sanitary sewer required.

7.04.140    Privy wells or vaults, cesspools – Prohibited.

7.04.150    Onsite sewage systems – Responsibilities of owner and occupant.

7.04.160    City may connect and assess costs.

7.04.170    Side sewer and private sewer pipes – Maintenance and repair – Violation.

7.04.180    Use of public sanitary sewer.

7.04.190    Damage to sewage works.

7.04.200    Planting of certain trees and shrubbery prohibited.

7.04.210    Property not assessed for sanitary sewer construction under a local improvement district to pay sum in lieu of assessment.

7.04.220    Schedule of charges for service.

7.04.230    Water meters for METRO billing.

7.04.240    Exemption meters.

7.04.250    Certification of sewer meters.

7.04.260    Sewer service to customers obtaining water from sources other than the city water utility.

7.04.270    Violations and enforcement – Penalties.


7.04.010 Purpose.

This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the city; is deemed expedient to maintain the peace, good government, and welfare of the city and its trade, commerce, and manufactures, and to ensure greater protection to life and health; and all of its provisions shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of such purposes.

(Ord. No. 4210, § 2, 8-16-16)


7.04.020 Definitions.

The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

A. Best management practices or BMP means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to the stormwater system or waters of the state. BMPs also include treatment practices, structural methods, and operating procedures and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. BMPs are determined by reference to standard industry practice or applicable state, county, and local government design and pollution prevention manuals.

B. Building department means the building services division of the city’s department of economic and community development.

C. Building sewer means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a sewer drainage system that receives the discharge of soils, wastes, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of a building and carries that waste from the building’s outside wall to the public sanitary sewer or to an onsite sewage system.

D. Clarifier means an oil/water separator as that term is defined in this section.

E. Day or days means calendar days unless expressly stated otherwise in a given section or subsection. In addition, any portion of a 24-hour day shall constitute one full calendar day.

F. Director means the city of Kent public works director, or his or her designee.

G. Fats, oils, and grease or FOG means organic compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that are used in, or are a byproduct of, the cooking or food preparation process, and that turns or may turn viscous or solidify with a change in temperature or other conditions.

H. Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) generating facility means any food processing establishment, food service establishment, oil generating facility, and any other facility that discharges either polar FOG or nonpolar FOG into the public sanitary sewer.

I. Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) removal device means any gravity grease interceptor, hydromechanical grease interceptor, or oil/water separator that is designed to separate and retain either polar FOG or nonpolar FOG from liquid waste prior to the wastewater entering the public sanitary sewer.

J. Food processing establishment means a commercial establishment in which food or drink is manufactured, processed, or packaged.

K. Food service establishment means an establishment primarily engaged in the activity of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available food or drink for consumption by the public, including without limitation: a restaurant; bakery; butcher; tavern; coffee shop; food truck or vending vehicle; ice cream, smoothie, or yogurt shop; commercial kitchen; caterer; hotel; school; hospital; prison or correctional facility; and care institution.

L. Gravity grease interceptor means a structure or device designed to separate and retain polar FOG from wastewater prior to the wastewater exiting the grease interceptor and entering the public sanitary sewer. These devices are often below-ground units in outside areas and are built as two- or three-chamber baffled tanks.

M. Grease interceptor means a gravity grease interceptor as that term is defined in this section.

N. Grease trap means a hydromechanical grease interceptor as that term is defined in this section.

O. Hydromechanical grease interceptor means a device designed to separate and retain polar FOG from wastewater prior to the wastewater exiting the device and entering the public sanitary sewer and is identified by flow rate, separation, and retention efficiency. For purposes of this chapter, this term also includes a “FOG disposal system” or an “alternative engineered design” as may be provided for by the Uniform Plumbing Code, adopted by reference through KCC 14.01.010.

P. Industrial process means procedures involving chemical, physical, electrical, or mechanical steps to aid in the manufacturing, processing, or packaging of products.

Q. Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes generated from manufacturing operations, food processing, or other industrial processes.

R. Interceptor means a gravity grease interceptor or a grease interceptor as those terms are defined in this section.

S. Nonpolar FOG means mineral- or petroleum-based oils and grease.

T. Oil generating facility means any facility that generates wastewater containing nonpolar FOG from the use of mineral or petroleum oil and grease products and discharges oily or sediment-laden wastewater to the public sanitary sewer, including without limitation: quick-lube stations, transportation fueling facilities, vehicle/heavy equipment repair, businesses using steam or pressure washers, and commercial car wash facilities.

U. Oil/water separator means a large-capacity vault, either a baffle-type or coalescing plate-type separator, that is designed to separate and retain sediments; oils; deleterious, hazardous, or undesirable matter; and floating nonpolar FOG from wastewater before it is discharged into a public sanitary sewer.

V. Onsite sewage system is as defined by King County in King County Code Section 13.08.280, as currently enacted or hereafter amended or recodified. The definition of onsite sewage system effective at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter was adopted is:

An integrated system of components, located on or nearby the property it serves, that conveys, stores, treats or provides subsurface soil treatment and dispersal of sewage. It consists of a collection system, a treatment component or treatment sequence, and a soil dispersal component. An on-site sewage system also refers to a holding tank sewage system or other system that does not have a soil dispersal component.

W. Person means any individual, firm, business, association, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity, public or private, however organized. Because person shall include both human and nonhuman entities, any of the following pronouns may be used to describe a person: he, she, or it.

X. Person responsible for the violation means any of the following: a person who has titled ownership or legal control of the premises that is subject to the regulation; an occupant or other person in control of the premises that is subject to the regulation; a developer, builder, business operator, or owner who is developing, building, or operating a business on the premises that is subject to the regulation; or any person who created, caused, or has allowed the violation to occur on the premises.

Y. pH means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units.

Z. Polar FOG means animal- or vegetable-based fats, oils, and grease.

AA. Premises means any real property, together with any house, building, or other structure located upon such real property.

BB. Public sanitary sewer means a sewer owned and operated by a governmental body or public utility in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights of access in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and which conveys wastewater through the sanitary sewer system.

CC. Sanitary sewage means domestic and commercial wastewater including flushed toilet water, water from dishwashers, clothes washing machines, and any other used water that generally is disposed of down interior household drains.

DD. Sanitary sewer system means a conveyance, or system of conveyances, that is designed to convey domestic and commercial wastewater away from premises through a public sanitary sewer to a collection location for treatment by a governmental body or public utility.

EE. Septic tank means a watertight pretreatment receptacle receiving the discharge of sewage from a building sewer or sewers, designed and constructed to permit separation of settleable and floating solids from the liquid, and detention and anaerobic digestion of the organic matter prior to discharge of the liquid.

FF. Sewage disposal system means a system for disposing of sanitary sewage either by connection to a public sanitary sewer, or connection to an onsite sewage system that is authorized by the Department of Public Health – Seattle and King County, in accordance with this chapter.

GG. Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sanitary sewage.

HH. Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sanitary sewage.

II. Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sanitary sewage.

JJ. Sewer outfall means a sewer that receives sanitary sewage and carries it, after treatment, to a discharge point into a body of water.

KK. Side sewer means a gravity flow pipe connecting the building sewer to the public sanitary sewer.

LL. Side stub means the extension from the public sanitary sewer to the premises’ property line to which the building sewer connects to the public sanitary sewer.

MM. Stormwater system means facilities through which stormwater is collected, conveyed, or treated, including without limitation: inlets, conveyance pipes, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, bioinfiltration facilities, drainage channels, and other drainage structures.

NN. Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sanitary sewage, or other liquids and that are removable by laboratory filtering.

OO. Uniform Plumbing Code means the code that governs the requirements for the installation, alteration, removal, replacement, repair, or construction of all plumbing within the state of Washington, and that edition which has been adopted by KCC 14.01.010(E), as currently enacted or hereafter amended, for application and enforcement in the city of Kent.

PP. Wastehauler means any person licensed to collect, pump, transport and/or dispose of wastewater, polar FOG, or nonpolar FOG, and who (1) holds any valid state license as may be required by Chapter 18.27 RCW, and (2) holds a valid business license issued by the city of Kent.

QQ. Wastewater means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sanitary sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, institutions or any other premises, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed or conveyed through the public sanitary sewer.

RR. Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs either continuously or intermittently.

SS. Waters of the state means those waters defined as “waters of the United States” in 40 CFR 122.2, within the geographic boundaries of the state of Washington, and those “waters of the state” as defined in Chapter 90.48 RCW, which includes lakes, rivers, ponds, streams, inland waters, groundwater, salt waters, and all other surface waters and watercourses within the jurisdiction of the state of Washington.

Unless the context clearly demonstrates the contrary, “shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive, when used in this chapter.

(Ord. No. 4210, § 2, 8-16-16)


7.04.030 Powers and authority of the director, inspectors, and assistants – Discretion of the director.

A. Access to facilities. The director and other duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all premises for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurements, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. No consent, warrant, or court order is required to enter those areas open to the public generally or to which no reasonable expectation of privacy exists.

B. Director discretion. In applying, interpreting, and enforcing this chapter, the director has the authority to develop, implement and administer policies and procedures pertaining to this chapter, impose additional conditions, to waive or alter the application of any requirement under the facts then existing or pursuant to policies and procedures, or to alter any performance required under this chapter where the director determines such departure is necessary to mitigate identified or potentially negative impacts to the sanitary sewer system or public health, safety, or welfare.

(Ord. No. 4210, § 2, 8-16-16; Ord. No. 4285, § 1, 9-4-18)


7.04.040 Connection with public sanitary sewer.

It shall be unlawful for any person to make any opening in any public sanitary sewer; to connect any private sewer or drain therewith; or to lay, repair, alter, or connect any private drain or sewer in any public street, alley, right-of-way, or easement, except as provided within this section.

A. Connection – Licensed contractor. A contractor may conduct the work provided for within this section if the contractor is qualified and (1) holds a valid state contractor’s license as defined in Chapter 18.27 RCW, (2) holds a valid business license issued by the city, and (3) has first obtained any required city approval or permit.

A licensed contractor shall be responsible for all work done within any public street, alley, easement area, or other city right-of-way, or under any permits issued to the contractor under any other provision of this chapter. It shall be the duty of every licensed contractor to leave with the city public works department the name and telephone number of the person responsible for the work to be conducted in any public street, alley, easement area, or other city right-of-way area.

B. Connection – Owner. The owner or occupant of the premises, or such person’s agent, may connect a side sewer to a side stub with the approval of and under the supervision of the director, after having first obtained all required permits. All other work must be performed by a qualified and licensed contractor.

Upon granting any approval for connection of a side sewer to the public sanitary sewer side stub, such person, including any future or subsequent owner, shall be responsible for all costs of maintenance, repair, removal of obstructions, cleaning, and operation of the side sewer, including that portion of the side sewer extending into the city’s right-of-way and connecting to the public sanitary sewer, including without limitation the tee and side stub thereto. Acceptance of a side sewer connection under the provisions of this chapter within or outside of the city’s right-of-way shall not be deemed to create a duty upon the city to repair, maintain, replace, or clean the same.

(Ord. No. 4210, § 2, 8-16-16)


7.04.050 Permit required to construct, extend, or repair sewer.

A permit is required for all work to construct, extend, relay, or repair a building sewer or a side sewer, or to make any connection to a side stub or the public sanitary sewer, whether that work is performed on private property or within the city right-of-way. In addition to any conditions expressed on the permit, all sewer permits are subject to the provisions of this chapter. The director shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the director when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. Work shall be done by the owner or a licensed contractor as provided for in this chapter.

(Ord. No. 4210, § 2, 8-16-16)


7.04.060 Permits for additional work required.

When a permit has been issued, no additional work outside of the particular work for which the permit was issued shall be completed without the advance approval of the director, and a new permit must be obtained for such additional work.

(Ord. No. 4210, § 2, 8-16-16)


7.04.070 Permit and inspection fees.

A. Fees – Generally. The city council shall, by resolution, establish the fees to be assessed to implement and operate the regulations adopted in this chapter. An additional charge will be made if review and inspection time exceeds three and one-half hours. The hourly rate for this additional staff time shall be paid at the rate as established by council resolution. The fee shall be paid to the city before the permit is issued. In the event of any conflict or ambiguity regarding any fees authorized under this chapter and established by council resolution, the director is authorized to interpret the fee schedule(s) to resolve that conflict or ambiguity.

B. Onsite sewage system fees – Public Health. Permits to construct, install, or repair onsite sewage systems are issued by the Department of Public Health – Seattle and King County in accordance with the King County Code. Application for all necessary permits and payment of associated fees shall be made directly to the Department of Public Health – Seattle and King County.

C. Unauthorized work – Penalty. When work is commenced or performed without first obtaining the required permit, the basic permit fee will be doubled; however, the payment of that doubled fee will not relieve the person responsible for the violation from full compliance with all of the requirements of this chapter in the execution, inspection, or approval of the work, or from any other penalties that may be provided for by local, state, or federal law, including criminal penalties.

(Ord. No. 4210, § 2, 8-16-16)


7.04.080 Issuance of temporary permit.

At the discretion of the director, a temporary permit may be issued permitting temporary connection to a public sanitary sewer, sewer outfall, or side sewer. This temporary permit may be issued when, in the opinion of the director, failure to do so would endanger human health or the environment. A temporary permit is revocable by the director upon providing 60 days’ advance written notice to the owner, occupant, and the permit applicant. This notice shall be given by posting the notice on the premises for which the permit was issued, or by mailing notice to any other address known by the city for the owner, occupant, and applicant. If the private sewer or drain is not disconnected at the expiration of such notice, the director may disconnect the sewer or drain and collect the cost of such disconnection from the owner, occupant, or permit applicant through the issuance of an invoice in accordance with KCC 7.04.270(A). Any permittee granted a temporary permit under this section will hold the city harmless from any damage by reason of the issuance or revocation of a temporary permit, or the disconnection of a temporary connection, as provided for under this section.

(Ord. No. 4210, § 2, 8-16-16)


7.04.090 Display of permits.

Any permit required by this chapter must, at all times during the performance of the work and until completion and final approval thereof, be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the permitted work premises.

(Ord. No. 4210, § 2, 8-16-16)


7.04.100 Permit time limit – Extension.

Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid for a period of six months. In the event work is not completed within the time specified on the permit, an extension must be requested through the city permit center. Permit extension approvals will be granted on a case-by-case basis. No more than two extensions may be issued, at which time a new permit must be obtained.

(Ord. No. 4210, § 2, 8-16-16)


7.04.110 Permits to install or repair onsite sewage systems.

A. Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, or repair any onsite sewage system within the city without first obtaining a permit from the Department of Public Health – Seattle and King County, or any other approval that department may require. That department shall issue permits pursuant to the applicable King County standards, and the permit shall, until all work is completed and final approval obtained, be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the permitted work premises.

B. Disposal of contents. All liquids and solids removed from an onsite sewage system shall be disposed of to the satisfaction of the director and in accordance with all federal, state, and local laws.

(Ord. No. 4210, § 2, 8-16-16)


7.04.120 Construction standards.

All sewers and side sewers shall be installed in strict accordance with the specifications contained in any existing city ordinance or code, any construction standards, any international or uniform codes that the city has adopted or adopts in the future, and any conditions imposed upon an issued permit. All construction shall be subject to the inspection of the director.

(Ord. No. 4210, § 2, 8-16-16)


7.04.130 Use of public sanitary sewer required.

A. Proper sanitation required. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, or other objectionable waste.

B. Sewage disposal system – Chapter compliance required. Except as provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.

C. Connection to public sanitary sewer required. The owners of all houses, buildings, properties or other premises used in any manner for human occupancy situated within or without the city that abut any street, alley, or easement in which there is located a public sanitary sewer of the city shall, at their expense, install suitable toilet facilities therein and connect those facilities directly to the proper public sanitary sewer within 90 days from the date of official notice to do so; provided, that the public sanitary sewer is within 200 feet of any building on the owner’s property.

D. Failure to connect when required. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this chapter, a property owner who fails to connect to the public sanitary sewer within 90 days of receiving official notice to do so may be subject to a penalty that shall be a monetary charge in an amount equal to the base monthly sewer rate that would be charged against that property if it were connected to the public sanitary sewer. The city’s finance department shall assess the penalty against the property through its utility billing system.

E. Lien for costs and charges. Pursuant to RCW 35.67.200, failure to pay the penalties levied pursuant to this section shall constitute a lien for those delinquent and unpaid charges against the premises to which the service is available. This lien shall be superior to all other liens and encumbrances except general taxes and local and special assessments.

F. Interest assessed for delinquencies. All delinquent charges imposed under the authority of this section shall bear interest at the rate of eight percent per annum computed on a monthly basis.

(Ord. No. 4210, § 2, 8-16-16; Ord. 4285 § 2, 2018)


7.04.140 Privy wells or vaults, cesspools – Prohibited.

No privy well, vault, or cesspool may be used or maintained if such use or maintenance is detrimental or dangerous to life or health. If such condition exists, the director may prohibit use of the privy well, vault, or cesspool and may order the same to be disinfected and filled with fresh earth. The director will notify in writing the owner and occupant of such premises that the privy well, vault, or cesspool must be disinfected and filled with fresh earth, and a suitable sewage disposal system, either public or private, constructed within a period of 20 days from and after the time when such notice shall be served, or such later date as the director may determine and identify within the notice.

(Ord. No. 4210, § 2, 8-16-16)


7.04.150 Onsite sewage systems – Responsibilities of owner and occupant.

Maintenance and repair of an onsite sewage system is the sole responsibility of the owner and occupant of the premises, who shall maintain the system in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations, including the following:

A. Prohibited discharge to public sanitary sewer. No onsite sewage system may discharge to any public sanitary sewer.

B. Abandoned facility – Requirement to fill. Any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar onsite sewage systems whose use has been abandoned shall be filled with suitable material and in a manner that will insure the public safety, health, and well-being. Such abandonment must be permitted through the Department of Public Health – Seattle and King County under KCC 7.04.110.

C. Maintain sanitation. All onsite sewage systems shall be operated and maintained in a sanitary manner at the entire and sole expense of the owner and occupant.

D. Repairs required. Whenever, in the judgment of the director or any public health officer, any onsite sewage system shall fail to function properly, or the continued use of such private onsite sewage system will be detrimental to life or health, the director may order such work to be done upon the premises where the onsite sewage system is situated as necessary to restore and insure sanitary conditions upon such premises. In such event, the director will notify in writing the owner and occupant of such premises of the work required under this subsection. Unless otherwise ordered by the Department of Public Health – Seattle and King County, work shall be completed within a period of 180 days from and after the time when such notice shall be served, or such other time period determined appropriate by the director and warranted by the then existing circumstances. The work shall be done in accordance with all federal, state, and local laws.

(Ord. No. 4210, § 2, 8-16-16)


7.04.160 City may connect and assess costs.

A. Failure to act – Connection made by city at cost of owner. If any owner or occupant shall fail, neglect, or refuse to connect its premises to the public sanitary sewer within the time specified in any notice provided under this chapter, or shall fail, neglect, or refuse to do the other work specified and ordered to be done as this chapter provides, the director may make such connection or do such work and collect the cost thereof from the owner, occupant, or other person responsible for the violation through the issuance of an invoice in accordance with KCC 7.04.270(A).

B. Cost to become a lien. If unpaid, this cost shall additionally be assessed and become a lien against the premises as authorized by law.

(Ord. No. 4210, § 2, 8-16-16)


7.04.170 Side sewer and private sewer pipes – Maintenance and repair – Violation.

A. Side sewer.

1. Condition likely to cause obstruction – Violation. It is a violation of this chapter for there to exist in any side sewer a visually evident accumulation of FOG of animal, vegetable, mineral, or petroleum origin which, either alone or in combination with other wastes, is reasonably likely to obstruct flow or interfere with the operation or performance of any part of the sanitary sewer system. If the director shall give notice to the person responsible for the violation of such condition and of the corrective action necessary, it is a further violation of this chapter for such person to fail to take such corrective action.

2. Damaged or noncompliant sewer – Notice and repair – Violation. When any side sewer, whether upon private property or upon the city’s right-of-way, is constructed, laid, connected, or repaired and does not comply with the provisions of this chapter or any construction standards or codes that may hereafter be adopted, or where it is determined by the director that a side sewer is obstructed, broken, inadequate, is a menace to health, or is liable to cause damage to public or private property, the director shall give notice to the person responsible for the violation of such condition and the required corrective action. It is a violation of this chapter for such person to fail to take the required corrective action by the date specified in that notice.

B. Private sewer. Whenever any private sewer connected to any public sanitary sewer becomes obstructed, broken, or out of order and the person responsible for the violation fails to repair the same within five days after notification by the director, the director is hereby authorized to remove, reconstruct, replace, alter, or clear the same as required at the expense of the person responsible for the violation, which expense shall be collected through the issuance of an invoice in accordance with KCC 7.04.270(A). When two or more houses or buildings are connected to the same private sewer, the owners, agents, or occupants of such premises shall be jointly and severally liable for any work done at the direction of the director under this section. No permit shall be required for the removal of obstructions from private sewers, provided the sewer pipe is not damaged.

(Ord. No. 4210, § 2, 8-16-16)


7.04.180 Use of public sanitary sewer.

A. Discharge of storm or surface water to sanitary sewer system – Prohibited. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, or roof runoff, to the sanitary sewer system, unless expressly authorized by the director.

B. Prohibited discharges to sanitary sewer system. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described substances to the sanitary sewer system:

1. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit;

2. Any water or waste that may contain more than 100 parts per million by weight of FOG;

3. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas;

4. Any emulsifying agent, enzyme, bio-additive, or similar chemical;

5. Any animal guts or tissue, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, fish guts or skin, seafood shells, cloth, carpet fibers, plastic, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, grass clippings, brewing or distilling slops, spent grain or hops, lard, tallow, baking dough, coffee grounds, tea leaves or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works;

6. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0 or having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works;

7. Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;

8. Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant;

9. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance;

10. Any liquid containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids; or

11. Any discharge with an average daily flow greater than two percent of the average daily sewage flow of the city without the prior review and approval of the director.

C. Protection of sanitary sewer system. The following provisions are enacted in an effort to protect the sanitary sewer system from obstruction and to ensure its proper operation.

1. FOG removal device required. All FOG generating facilities shall install, operate, and maintain FOG removal devices of an approved type and adequate size to effectively remove polar and nonpolar FOG, sludge, and settled solids from wastewater prior to the wastewater entering the public sanitary sewer. The city understands that there is a cost attributable to installing a FOG removal device. Therefore, all FOG generating facilities operating at a location within the city as of the original adoption date of this section (August 16, 2016) shall install a FOG removal device within 180 days of receiving notification by the city that such a FOG removal device is required, or such greater time period as determined appropriate by the director and warranted by the then-existing circumstances. All FOG generating facilities that open or relocate within the city after the above-referenced adoption date must install, operate, and maintain a FOG removal device in compliance with this chapter prior to commencing operation.

a. Installation of a FOG removal device. All FOG removal devices shall be installed as required by this chapter and shall conform in all respects to the Uniform Plumbing Code or other applicable building codes adopted for application in the city through Chapters 13.01 and 14.01 KCC, including size, type, and installation method, unless otherwise approved by the director. Plans, specifications, and other pertinent information relating to proposed FOG removal devices shall be submitted for the approval of the director. No construction of such facilities shall be commenced until such approvals are obtained in writing. FOG generating facilities are responsible for obtaining a plumbing permit and final inspection approval before the FOG removal device may be put into operation. A FOG removal device shall be installed at locations where they are readily and easily accessible for cleaning, maintenance, and inspection.

b. Maintenance of FOG removal device. All FOG removal devices shall be maintained and operated by the FOG generating facility at its own expense. These FOG removal devices shall be kept in continuous operation at all times, and shall be maintained in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code, established BMPs, and other federal, state, and local law.

i. Minimum frequency of maintenance. At a minimum, all FOG removal devices shall be maintained as required by this subsection. However, an increase in the cleaning frequency and additional BMPs may be required to reflect the actual operating conditions of each FOG generating facility.

(A) Grease interceptor. Maintenance of grease interceptors must be scheduled often enough so that polar FOG and settled solids and sludge do not leave the device through its outlet. At a minimum, the grease interceptor must be cleaned when: (i) the volume of FOG and settled sludge and solids constitute 25 percent of the effective liquid volume; or (ii) if the inlet or outlet displays visible buildup or is obstructed with FOG or other debris. In no event shall the maintenance frequency be less than once every six months.

(B) Grease trap. Maintenance of grease traps must be scheduled often enough so that FOG and settled solids and sludge do not leave the device through its outlet. At a minimum, grease traps shall be cleaned when: (i) the volume of FOG and settled sludge and solids constitute 25 percent of the effective liquid volume; or (ii) if the inlet, outlet, flow control, or vent displays visible buildup or is obstructed with FOG or other debris. In no event shall the maintenance frequency be less than once every month. Unless specifically required or permitted by the city, no food waste disposal unit or dishwasher shall be connected to or discharge into any grease trap.

(C) Oil/water separator. Oil/water separators shall be cleaned when the buildup is eight inches deep in the inlet chamber or when there are two inches or more of oil in any chamber of the oil/water separator. Coalescing plates must be cleaned before they become coated with silt or solids.

ii. Performance of maintenance. Cleaning, inspection, and maintenance must be performed by a licensed contractor and/or wastehauler qualified to perform such activities on a FOG removal device.

(A) Required maintenance for grease interceptors and oil/water separators. Maintenance for grease interceptors and oil/water separators shall include without limitation the removal of the full contents of the grease interceptor and oil/water separator including polar and nonpolar FOG, liquids, and settled sludge and solids from the device’s walls, baffles, inlet, outlet tee, piping, and floors. During maintenance, grease interceptors and oil/water separators shall be inspected for internal and external damage, obstructions, leaks, and missing or damaged components. It is a violation of this chapter to merely skim the surface layer of waste material, to only partially clean the grease interceptor or oil/water separator, or to use any method that does not remove the entire contents of the grease interceptor or oil/water separator. The grease interceptor and oil/water separator shall be filled with clean cold water before returning to service. If cleaning and repairs are required, they shall be performed within seven days of discovery.

(B) Required maintenance for grease traps. Maintenance for grease traps shall include without limitation the removal of the full contents of the device including FOG, liquids, and settled sludge and solids. Removable baffles, plugs, and outlets shall be removed and cleaned, and the walls, cleanout, and all other components of the device shall be scraped free of accumulated FOG and food waste. During maintenance, the device shall be inspected for leaking seams and pipes; damaged or missing gaskets, lids, bolts, and latches; corrosion; and for effective operation of the baffles, venting, and flow-regulating device. The grease trap shall be filled with cold clean water before it is returned to service. If cleaning and repairs are required, they shall be performed within seven days of discovery.

iii. Disposal of material removed during maintenance. All FOG removed from a FOG generating facility shall be disposed of or recycled in accordance with federal, state, and local laws.

iv. Maintenance records. Records of all maintenance activities shall be retained after each maintenance event and shall be made readily available to the city for review via email or in person.

2. Industrial wastes – Control manhole – When required. Any business, establishment, or person who uses the sanitary sewer system to carry industrial wastes shall install and properly maintain a suitable control manhole in the premises’ sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole shall be installed at a location where it is readily accessible, safe, and constructed in accordance with plans approved by the director. The control manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner’s expense, and maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times.

3. Waste cooking oil – Collection and proper disposal. Waste cooking oil shall be collected and stored in appropriate receptacles such as drums or bins at all FOG generating facilities and then disposed of or recycled in accordance with all federal, state, and local laws. Such storage receptacles shall be maintained by implementing proper BMPs to ensure they are watertight and do not leak.

4. Vegetable and fruit canneries – Collection and proper waste disposal. Vegetable and fruit canneries shall provide an efficient screen for the removal of skins, seeds, pomace, culls, discarded produce, and other suspended material and waste from the washing, sorting, or other canning processes. This screen must be 20-mesh, U.S. standard gauge, and may be of the vibrating, rotary, or any other effective type. It shall be located on the main outlet sewer line or lines from the cannery in such a way that all wastewaters, except cooling or other clean waters, will pass through the screen. Cooling or other clean waters may be bypassed around the screen or discharged through a separate outlet. Screened and other solid material removed from the product during cannery operations shall be disposed of in a manner consistent with state solid waste handling regulations, and, in any event, in such a manner that it will not enter a water of the state or the sanitary sewer system.

5. Standard applicable and measurement location. All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with standard methods for the examination of water and sewage, available online at www.standardmethods.org, and shall be determined at the location of the control manhole required under subsection (C)(2) of this section and based upon suitable samples taken from that location. If no control manhole has been required under subsection (C)(2) of this section, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the sanitary sewer system at the point at which the building sewer is connected to the public sanitary sewer.

(Ord. No. 4210, § 2, 8-16-16)


7.04.190 Damage to sewage works.

No person shall cause to break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works.

(Ord. No. 4210, § 2, 8-16-16)


7.04.200 Planting of certain trees and shrubbery prohibited.

It shall be unlawful to plant poplar, cottonwood, soft maples, willow, or any other tree or shrub in any location where the roots of such tree or shrub are likely to obstruct or damage public or private sewers. The director is hereby authorized to remove any trees or shrubs from any public street, or the roots of any trees or shrubs which extend into any public street or right-of-way, when such trees or the roots thereof are obstructing, or when the director has determined that they are liable to obstruct, public or private sewers. The director shall give 10 days’ advance written notice to the owner, agent, or occupant of the abutting property to remove such trees or roots, and it is a violation of this chapter for such owner, agent, or occupant to fail to timely and properly comply with the director’s notice.

If the owner, agent, or occupant fails or refuses to comply with the director’s notice, the director may remove the trees or roots when the city’s access to the property is legally authorized, and the reasonable cost of such removal, whether that removal is from private property, rights-of-way, alleys, or streets, shall be a charge against and a lien upon the abutting property from which such trees or shrubs are removed, which may additionally be collected against the abutting property owner in accordance with KCC 7.04.270.

(Ord. No. 4210, § 2, 8-16-16)


7.04.210 Property not assessed for sanitary sewer construction under a local improvement district to pay sum in lieu of assessment.

A. No permits shall issue for connection to any public sanitary sewer for any property that has not been assessed for the construction of such sewer by a local improvement district, except as follows:

1. Property that was not assessed for a local improvement district, but which has a public sanitary sewer in the street, alley, or sewer easement abutting such property shall be charged an assessment on the same basis as property that was in the local improvement district.

2. Satisfactory arrangement shall be made with the finance director for payment prior to the issuing of any permits provided for in subsection (A)(1) of this section.

B. Side sewers constructed without the payment of the above charges shall be disconnected if, within 15 days after the owner and occupant have been notified by the director that the above charges are due, the owner or occupant fail to pay such charges.

(Ord. No. 4210, § 2, 8-16-16)


7.04.220 Schedule of charges for service.1

King County imposes a sanitary sewer service charge for regional sewage treatment. These charges are passed through, without increase, directly to the city sanitary sewer utility customers. The King County pass-through charge for 2017 is known and established. It is expected, however, that King County will increase its pass-through charge over time. Accordingly, except for the 2017 charge, all other King County charges are estimates only. In order to simplify the rate-making structure, the finance director is authorized to amend King County’s pass-through charges at the time King County imposes new charges.

Beginning January 1, 2018, and on the first day of each calendar year thereafter, the total sewer rate will adjust by the Consumer Price Index (CPI), specifically the CPI-W Seattle-Tacoma-Bremerton, measured from June 1st through June 1st of the previous calendar year, if the CPI-W reflects an upward adjustment from the previous annual June to June period. For the years 2018-2022 the adjustment will not exceed 2.4 percent of the total sewer rate, but after that, beginning January 1, 2023, any increase in the CPI will not be subject to this 2.4 percent limit. In order to simplify the rate-making structure, the finance director is authorized to amend the rate each year to reflect the CPI adjustment.

In addition, the year 2017 city rate for all types of service is subject to any CPI or King County rate increases; for the year 2018 the city rate will increase $1.25 in addition to any CPI or King County rate increases; and for the year 2019 the city rate will increase $0.50 in addition to any CPI or King County rate increases.

The following sanitary sewer service charges for city sanitary sewer service inside the city limits are in effect on the dates and in the amounts listed below. Sewer service charges for customers residing outside the city shall be the charges as on file in the city clerk’s office.

 

	Type of Service	City Sewer Rate	King County Sewer Rate†	Total Sewer Rate

	1. Single-family residential dwelling, as defined in Chapter 15.02 KCC.	$22.16	$44.22	$66.38

	2. Two-family or multiple-family residential dwelling, as defined in Chapter 15.02 KCC, each unit separately metered and charged.	$22.16	$44.22	$66.38

	3. Single-family residential/lifeline: eligibility criteria for the lifeline utility rate set forth in KCC 7.01.080.	$12.70	$44.22	$56.92

	4. All other than service types 1, 2 and 3 shall be billed in accordance with the consumption of water and at the following rate,* except that no monthly bill shall be less than the single-family residential rate set forth in service type No. 1.	$8.85* per 100 cubic feet per month

†    Estimated, based on adjustments issued by King County.

*    Beginning January 1, 2018, this rate will adjust annually based on the basic rate shown for service types 1 and 2 above, calculated on this formula: Total Sewer Rate/7.5 = price per 100 cubic ft. per month.

(Ord. No. 4210, § 2, 8-16-16; Ord. No. 4213, § 5, 8-16-16)


7.04.230 Water meters for METRO billing.

All sewer accounts for other than single-family residential uses must have water meters or sewer meters for billing purposes.

(Ord. No. 4210, § 2, 8-16-16)


7.04.240 Exemption meters.

The amount of flow for the purpose of sewer service billing may be measured by a sewer meter installed and maintained at the customer’s expense or by reading a water meter with allowance made for water measured by any exemption meter which has been approved by both METRO and the city.

(Ord. No. 4210, § 2, 8-16-16)


7.04.250 Certification of sewer meters.

All sewer meters shall be certified for accuracy at least once each year by an independent testing agency. If the city demands an inspection other than a regular annual inspection and the inspection reveals that the meter is operating properly, the city shall bear the cost of the inspection; otherwise, the cost shall be borne by the customer.

(Ord. No. 4210, § 2, 8-16-16)


7.04.260 Sewer service to customers obtaining water from sources other than the city water utility.

For sanitary sewer service to customers obtaining water from sources other than the city water utility, the following regulations shall apply:

1. Single-family residential customers shall pay the flat rate which is on file in the city clerk’s office.

2. All customers other than single-family residential shall install a meter on their source of water within 30 days of date of application or service will be discontinued. Upon request of the customer, the city will install a meter in accordance with its standard practice for such installations.

3. City personnel will read the privately owned meters on normal water meter reading dates.

4. If the meter is the property of a water district or other municipal corporation, the customer must submit written permission from the water district or municipal corporation for the city meter reader to read such meter on the normal reading date.

(Ord. No. 4210, § 2, 8-16-16)


7.04.270 Violations and enforcement – Penalties.

Any violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced as provided for in this section. Each separate date, or portion thereof, during which any violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.

A. Recovery of costs incurred by the city. In addition to any penalty provided for in subsections (B) through (D) of this section, a person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for all costs incurred by the city as a result of the violation. The city will issue an invoice to the person responsible for the violation advising him or her of the amount of costs incurred by the city as a result of the violation. The person to whom the invoice was directed must respond within 14 days of the date the invoice is served upon that person by: (1) paying the invoice, (2) requesting a hearing before the city’s hearing examiner to mitigate the amount of the invoice, or (3) requesting a hearing before the city’s hearing examiner to contest the amount of the invoice. Failure to timely respond shall result in the invoice being deemed valid and the city may seek collection of the invoice through the process provided for in Chapter 3.10 KCC, including the use of a collection agency. Payment of any invoice issued shall not alleviate the person responsible for the violation from complying with this chapter.

1. Service of notice. Service of an invoice issued under this subsection (A) shall occur and is deemed complete in the same manner and under the same provisions as provided for in KCC 1.04.060.

2. Process to mitigate or contest invoice. The process through which a person may request a hearing to contest or mitigate an invoice issued to him or her as a person responsible for the violation is the same as that provided for notices of violation under KCC 1.04.120 through 1.04.190. The hearing examiner’s decision as to any invoice issued under this subsection (A) is final and may not be further appealed.

3. Failure to pay – Civil infraction. The failure to timely pay an invoice issued under this subsection (A), or any mitigated invoice amount set by the hearing examiner, is a separate violation that may be enforced through the issuance of a civil infraction pursuant to subsection (B) of this section.

B. Civil infraction. A person who violates any provision of this chapter may be issued a class 1 civil infraction as set forth in RCW 7.80.120, as currently enacted or hereafter amended. An infraction issued pursuant to this section shall be filed in the Kent Municipal Court and processed in the same manner as other infractions filed in the Kent Municipal Court. In addition, a civil code enforcement action may be instituted in accordance with subsection (C) of this section to effectuate any abatement or corrective action required by the person as a result of the violation.

C. Civil code enforcement. In addition to, or as an alternative to any other penalty provided for in this chapter or by law, a civil code enforcement action may be instituted under the provisions provided for in Chapter 1.04 KCC to effectuate any abatement or corrective action required as a result of a violation of this chapter, including the issuance of a stop use or stop work order under KCC 1.04.090 through 1.04.110. The process through which the person responsible for the violation may contest a stop use or stop work order is the same as that provided for notices of violation under KCC 1.04.120 through 1.04.190. Failure to timely abate the violation or take the required corrective action will result in the issuance of a fine in accordance with KCC 1.04.080 and 1.04.200, which fine will be separate and apart from any fine that may have been issued under subsection (B) of this section.

D. Criminal offense. Except as may otherwise be provided, a person who:

1. Negligently violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by up to the maximum penalty established in RCW 9A.20.021(3) as now enacted or hereafter amended; or who

2. Knowingly violates a provision of this chapter, or commits a repeated violation of this chapter, is guilty of a gross misdemeanor, punishable by up to the maximum penalty established in RCW 9A.20.021(2), as now enacted or hereafter amended.

a. For purposes of this section repeated violation means, as evidenced by either a prior committed finding by the Kent Municipal Court of an infraction issued under this chapter, or a committed finding by the hearing examiner of a notice of violation issued under Chapter 1.04 KCC, or a committed finding by operation of law under KCC 1.04.130, that a violation of this chapter has occurred on the same property or that a person responsible for the violation has committed a violation of this chapter elsewhere within the city of Kent. To constitute a “repeat violation,” the violation need not be the same violation as the prior violation.

3. If a person is found guilty of a criminal offense as provided for in this subsection (D), or pleads guilty to another offense on recommendation of the prosecutor, the court shall order the defendant pay restitution to the city of Kent, or any other victim of the offense, for the total suffered loss or damage by reason of the commission of the crime.

(Ord. No. 4210, § 2, 8-16-16)1

Code reviser’s note: Section 8 of Ord. 4213 provides: “Although the fees, rates, and charges established by this ordinance do not take effect until January 1, 2017, this ordinance shall take effect and be in force 30 days from and after its passage, as provided by law.” 


Chapter 7.05 STORM AND SURFACE WATER UTILITY*

Sections:

7.05.010    Purpose. 

7.05.020    Definitions. 

7.05.030    Potential hazard declared. 

7.05.040    Storm and surface water utility created. 

7.05.050    Storm and surface water system. 

7.05.060    Property transferred to utility. 

7.05.070    Utility administered by public works department. 

7.05.074    Construction standards. 

7.05.077    Storm drainage system construction must comply with chapter. 

7.05.080    Drainage master plan adopted. 

7.05.090    System of charges. 

7.05.100    Measurement of impervious area. 

7.05.110    Billing and collection. 

7.05.120    Rates within drainage districts. 

7.05.130    Rate reductions – Credits. 

7.05.140    Permits. 

7.05.150    Repealed.

7.05.160    Connection fees.

7.05.165    Drainage system development charge.

7.05.170    Mitigation of system impact – Developer contributions. 

7.05.180    Storm and surface water utility accounting. 

7.05.190    Regulation and administration. 

7.05.200    Appeals to land use hearing examiner. 

7.05.210    Penalties, enforcement. 

*Cross reference(s) – Department of public works, ch. 2.28; utility tax levied on telephone, gas, electric, garbage, water, sewer, and drainage utilities, ch. 3.18; street use permit, ch. 6.07; environmental policy, ch. 11.03; requirements and standards for subdivisions, ch. 12.04.


7.05.010 Purpose.

A. The city finds that all real property in the city contributes run-off to the common drainage problem, and that all real property in the city benefits from the storm and surface water utility system in the city.

B. The city finds that the intensity of development on all parcels of real property, as measured by the square footage of impervious surface area, is an appropriate basis for determination of an individual parcel’s contribution to the problem of storm and surface water run-off.

C. The city finds that each owner of a parcel of real property within the city should pay for his share of the cost of constructing, operating, maintaining, repairing, improving and replacing drainage facilities in proportion to the amount of run-off contributed to the drainage system beyond that which would occur if the parcel were in its natural state.

(Ord. No. 2547, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.20.005)


7.05.020 Definitions.

The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Detention shall mean the temporary storage of storm and surface water run-off with provisions for the controlled release of the stored water.

Equivalent service unit (ESU) shall mean a configuration of development or impervious surfaces estimated to contribute an amount of run-off to the city’s storm and surface water drainage system which is approximately equal to that created by the average single-family residential parcel. This excludes the multiplier effects of continuous areas of impervious surfaces larger than an ESU. One (1) ESU is equal to two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of impervious surface area or any portion thereof.

Impervious multiplier shall mean a multiplier used in the city storm and surface water utility rate formula which reflects the hydraulic impact of increasing percentages of impervious surface area. The effect of such multiplier is to increase the monthly service charge for parcels having a higher ratio of impervious surface area to total surface area.

Impervious surface shall mean that hard surface area which either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil mantle as it entered under natural conditions pre-existent to development, and/or that hard surface area which causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from that present under natural conditions pre-existent to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, roof tops, concrete or asphalt paving, walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots or storage areas, and oiled, macadam, or other surfaces which similarly impede the natural infiltration of surface water.

Parcel shall mean the smallest separately segregated unit or plot of land having an identified owner, boundaries, and surface area which is documented for tax purposes and given a tax account (lot) number by the King County assessor.

Parcel, agricultural shall mean any parcel of land upon which crops are produced or livestock is raised, and may include houses, barns, greenhouses, and other structures related to farming activities. Agriculture includes both commercial and noncommercial activities.

Parcel, developed shall mean any parcel which has been altered by grading or filling of the ground surface or by construction of any improvement or other impervious surface area which affects the hydraulic properties of the parcel.

Parcel, single-family residential shall mean any parcel of land having on it a dwelling unit which is designed for occupancy by one (1) family or a similar group of people.

Parcel, undeveloped shall mean any parcel which has not been altered by grading or filling of the ground surface, or by construction of any improvements or other impervious surface area which affects the hydraulic properties of the parcel.

Rainwater harvesting system shall mean a system that is properly sized to utilize the available roof surface on any new or remodeled commercial building, which complies with the guidelines established by the Washington State Building Code Council for a harvesting system that collects and stores rainwater for the purpose of supplying water to plumbing fixtures, industrial applications, or used for irrigation purposes.

Retention shall mean the storage of storm and surface water run-off with no provisions for release of the stored water other than by evaporation and infiltration.

Storm and surface water facility shall mean any natural or person-made component of the city storm and surface water system. Storm and surface water facility shall also include any structure or facility impacting the city system, or otherwise related to storm and surface water management.

Storm and surface water system shall mean the total system of storm and surface water facilities as described in KCC 7.05.040 and the drainage basins map.

(Ord. No. 2547, § 1; Ord. No. 3042, § 4, 5-5-92; Ord. No. 3656, § 1, 8-19-03. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 7.20.100, 7.20.110 – 7.20.160)

Cross reference(s) – Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.01.030.


7.05.030 Potential hazard declared.

The city council finds and declares that absent effective regulation and control, existing storm and surface water drainage conditions in all drainage basins within the city generally described in the drainage basins map filed with the city clerk constitute a potential hazard to health, safety and property of city inhabitants. The city council finds further that natural and manmade storm and surface water drainage or sewerage facilities together constitute a storm and surface water drainage facility and that effective regulation and control of storm and surface water in all stream basins and financing of the facilities requires joint regulations, control and financing with some or all of the cities of Auburn, Renton, Tukwila and Des Moines and King County herein referred to as the county pursuant to Chapters 35.67 and 39.34 RCW, and article 11, section 11 of the state constitution, and that the best interests of the city require the formation by the city of a storm and surface water utility and the transfer to the utility of all storm and surface watercourses and related rights belonging to the city.

(Ord. No. 2547, § 1; Ord. No. 3042, § 2, 5-5-92. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.20.010)


7.05.040 Storm and surface water utility created.

There is hereby created and established a storm and surface water utility of the city. The city elects to exercise all the lawful powers necessary and appropriate to the construction, condemnation and purchase, acquisition, addition to, maintenance, conduct and operation, management, regulation and control of, the storm and surface water system described in KCC 7.05.050 as the same may hereafter be added to, bettered or extended within or without the present and future limits of the city, including, without limitation, all the lawful powers to fix, alter, regulate and control the rate, charges and conditions for the use thereof.

(Ord. No. 2547, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.20.020)


7.05.050 Storm and surface water system.

There is hereby specified and adopted the original system or plan of the storm and surface water facilities described as set forth on the drainage basins map filed with the city clerk which is adopted by the city for use in conjunction with the administration of the storm and surface water utility code. Such system or plan shall include all properties, interest, physical and intangible rights of every kind or nature owned or held by the city, however acquired, insofar as they relate to or concern storm or surface water sewerage, further including without limitation, all such properties, interest and rights acquired by adverse possession or by prescription, directly or through another, in and to the drainage or storage, or both, of storm or surface waters, or both, through, under or over lands, landforms, watercourses, sloughs, streams, ponds, rivers, lakes, and swamps, all beginning, in each case or instance at a point where storm or surface waters first enter the storm or surface water system of the city and ending in each case or instance at a point where such storm or surface waters exit from the storm or surface water system of the city, and in width to the full extent of inundation caused by storm or flood conditions.

(Ord. No. 2547, § 1; Ord. No. 3042, §§ 1, 4, 5-5-92. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.20.030)


7.05.060 Property transferred to utility.

A. The city council expressly finds the value of the above-described original system or plan of storm and surface water facilities is equal to the value of release from primary responsibility therefor insofar as it relates to or concerns storm or surface waters within the city. Accordingly, all of the city’s above-mentioned facilities including the rights and interests as a part thereof, as they relate to or concern storm or surface waters are, for purposes of RCW 43.09.210, hereby transferred to and subject to the administration of the city’s storm and surface water utility created by this chapter. All other institutions and departments of the city having primary responsibility therefor within the city are, to the same extent, released from such primary responsibility.

B. Inasmuch as the city now owns all those facilities, including the rights and interests as a part thereof and the original system or plan set forth in KCC 7.05.050, there is no estimated cost thereof.

(Ord. No. 2547, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.20.040)


7.05.070 Utility administered by public works department.

The storm and surface water utility created in KCC 7.05.040 shall be administered by the public works department in such a manner as the city council shall provide by ordinance or by joint resolution with the county or other cities. The failure to pass or adopt such an ordinance or resolution shall not affect the validity of this chapter or the formation of the storm and surface water utility created hereby.

(Ord. No. 2547, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.20.050)


7.05.074 Construction standards.

All storm and surface water systems, whether public or private, shall be installed in strict accordance with specifications contained in any existing city ordinance or code and any construction standards or international or uniform codes that the city either has adopted or adopts in the future. All construction and maintenance of those systems shall be subject to the inspection by the director or his or her designee.

(Ord. No. 3400, § 1, 4-21-98; Ord. No. 3690, § 6, 5-4-04)


7.05.077 Storm drainage system construction must comply with chapter.

When any storm and surface water system, whether upon private property or upon the city’s right-of-way, is constructed, laid, connected, or repaired and does not comply with the provisions of this chapter or any construction standards or codes that may be adopted in the future, or where the director determines that a storm and surface water system is obstructed, broken, or inadequate and is a menace to health, or is liable to cause damage to public or private property, the director shall give notice of that condition to the owner, agent, or occupant of the property in which the condition exists. If the owner, agent, or occupant refuses to construct, relay, reconstruct, or remove the obstruction from the storm and surface water system within the time specified in that notice, the director may perform all necessary work to comply with this chapter. The cost of that work will be assessed against the property or collected from the person responsible for the condition, and the total amount thereof shall become a lien upon the property. The city attorney is authorized, empowered, and directed to collect that cost, either by foreclosure of the lien or by a suit against the owner, agent, occupant, or other person responsible for the condition on the property. The suit shall be maintained in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction.

(Ord. No. 3400, § 2, 4-21-98)


7.05.080 Drainage master plan adopted.

The plan entitled City of Kent Surface Drainage Utility Drainage Master Plan prepared by the city, URS engineers, and Matrix Management Group, dated February 20, 1985, and filed with the city clerk, a copy of which is maintained at the public works department, is hereby specified and adopted by the city as the system or plan for such surface drainage utility. The drainage master plan sets forth recommendations for:

1. Improvements in the city’s system of storm and surface water facilities;

2. Construction of needed new storm and surface water facilities; and

3. Operation and maintenance of storm and surface water facilities within the utility’s service area.

(Ord. No. 2547, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.20.105)


7.05.090 System of charges.

A. There is hereby imposed a system of charges on each parcel of real property within the city served by or to which is available for service the storm and surface water utility established by this chapter. The charges are found to be reasonable and necessary to fund administration, planning, design, construction, operation, maintenance, repair, improvement, and replacement of all existing and future storm and surface water facilities, including the accumulation of reserves and the retirement of any associated debt.

B. The following charges are hereby established for all parcels of real property in the city:

1. Single-family residential parcels. The single-family residential rate shall be as follows:

Charged in Dollars Per Month, Per Single-Family Residential Dwelling 

	Effective January 1, 2013	Effective January 1, 2014	Effective January 1, 2015

	$11.09	$11.64	$12.22

2. Agricultural and undeveloped parcels. Agricultural parcels shall be charged the monthly single-family residential parcel rate. Undeveloped parcels shall not be charged.

3. Other parcels.

a. The charge for all other parcels except single-family residential parcels, agricultural parcels, and undeveloped parcels shall be based upon:

i. The total amount of impervious surface as expressed in equivalent service units (an equivalent service unit (ESU) has been determined to be 2,500 square feet of impervious surface or any fraction thereof); and

ii. The percentage of impervious surface area on each parcel.

b. The charge for all such parcels shall be computed:

i. By multiplying the total number of ESUs on each parcel by the parcel’s impervious multiplier established in subsection (B)(3)(c) of this section; and

ii. Multiplying the results by the sum of the single-family residential rate, if any.

c. Impervious multipliers are hereby established:

	i.	Percentage of impervious area per parcel (impervious surface/total surface x 100)	Impervious multiplier

	 	1 to 40	1

	 	41 to 60	1.2

	 	61 to 80	1.4

	 	81 to 100	1.6

ii. Impervious multipliers correlate the hydraulic impact of a parcel to its percentage of impervious surface per parcel. The multiplier for the average single-family residence is established as one. The multiplier linearly increases as the percentage of impervious area increases. The final category has a multiplier of 1.6 which reflects the hydraulic impact on the drainage system compared to the impact of an average single-family residence.

4. Road systems. The impervious surface area for city roads shall be assessed 30 percent of the charge established in subsection (B)(3) of this section for impervious service areas.

5. Water quality charges.

a. The city hereby authorizes and declares its intent to establish a water quality charge which may be added to any or all of the above rates. The purposes of such a charge will be to finance monitoring, testing, treatment, and control of pollutant discharges into the storm and surface water system, including the exercise of all lawful enforcement powers of the city. A plan for developing such charges, and a schedule and budget for this project, shall be submitted to the city council for review and approval before enactment.

b. Such charges should be based upon appropriate indices of pollutant discharges which approximate each parcel’s contribution to the problem of water quality within storm and surface water facilities including all receiving waters.

6. Undeveloped parcels shall be subject to all charges established under this section upon development. Development shall be determined by the date of issuance of a building permit or any other permit for development purposes or as otherwise established by the director of public works.

C. Beginning January 1, 2018, and on the first day of each calendar year thereafter, the total storm and surface water system of charges set forth in this section will adjust by the Consumer Price Index (CPI), specifically the CPI-W Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue, measured from June 1st through June 1st of the previous calendar year, if the CPI-W reflects an upward adjustment from the previous annual June to June period. For the years 2018 through 2022 the adjustment will not exceed 2.4 percent of the total water rate, but after that, beginning January 1, 2023, any increase in the CPI will not be subject to this 2.4 percent limit. In order to simplify the rate-making structure, the finance director is authorized to amend the rate each year to reflect the CPI adjustment.

(Ord. No. 2547, § 1; Ord. No. 3042, § 5, 5-5-92; Ord. No. 3224, § 1, 5-2-95; Ord. No. 3453, § 1, 5-4-99; Ord. No. 3459, § 1, 5-18-99; Ord. No. 3461, § 1, 6-1-99; Ord. No. 3488, § 1, 11-16-99; Ord. No. 3527, § 1, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 3534, § 1, 12-5-00; Ord. No. 3819, § 5, 11-21-06; Ord. 3864 § 6, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 3901, § 4, 12-9-08; Ord. No. 3981, § 1, 11-16-10; Ord. No. 4021, § 1, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 4060, § 1, 12-11-12; Ord. No. 4267, § 1, 12-12-17. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 7.20.200, 7.20.210)




7.05.100 Measurement of impervious area.

The director of public works or his designee shall determine the number of square feet of impervious surface in all nonsingle-family residential parcels, excluding agricultural and undeveloped parcels, and the total surface area of each parcel of real property, through the records of the King County assessor and through aerial photographic methods; provided, that the methods used ensure accuracy to one-tenth (0.1) of an equivalent service unit as defined in this chapter.

(Ord. No. 2547, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.20.220)


7.05.110 Billing and collection.

Storm and surface water utility charges for each parcel of real property within the city shall be computed on a monthly basis. The amount billed shall be included on the city utility bill. All billings, collections, delinquencies, and related administrative matters shall be handled in a manner consistent with Chapter 7.01 KCC.

(Ord. No. 2547, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.20.230)


7.05.120 Rates within drainage districts.

Through March 31, 2009, the storm and surface water utility charges imposed upon all parcels within the city which are also being assessed, according to the records of the King County assessor, by drainage district number 1 or drainage district number 2 shall be reduced by the amount equal to such assessments upon the providing of adequate proof thereof to the finance director or designee. The maximum reduction allowed in any one (1) year shall be limited to the storm and surface water utility charge imposed for that year. Effective April 1, 2009, these rate reductions shall no longer apply.

(Ord. No. 2547, § 1; Ord. No. 3901, § 5, 12-9-08. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.20.240)


7.05.130 Rate reductions – Credits.

The finance director, upon direction of the director of public works or designee, shall reduce (credit) the normal storm and surface water utility charge for a parcel of real property when the public works department finds:

1. The owner of a parcel, other than a residential parcel, has installed an approved onsite retention system which substantially reduces the flows expected after the development of such a parcel. No credit shall be given for mitigating measures which are required to meet any ordinance, regulation, other control, or standard established by the city, King County, or the state. Such credits shall be commensurate with the mitigating effects so that the reduction in rates will be in approximate proportion to the reduction in run-off. In no case shall such a credit result in a rate less than the monthly charge for a single-family residential parcel. A system of standard credits in storm and surface water utility charges for retention measures shall be developed and transmitted to the city council for approval within ninety (90) days of adoption of this chapter.

2. Such a credit will remain in effect as long as:

a. The owner of such a system has obtained the proper permits and constructed the system according to plans approved by the director of public works or designee;

b. The owner remains responsible for all costs of operation and maintenance of the system consistent with city standards, whether operated and maintained by the owner or by the city; and

c. The director of public works or designee has access for inspection of the system to determine if it is in compliance with design and maintenance standards, and is functioning properly.

3. The owner or renter of a new or remodeled commercial building is utilizing a permissive rainwater harvesting system, as defined in KCC 7.05.020. In such cases, and in accordance with RCW 35.67.020 and 35.92.020, the owner or renter shall receive a credit equal to a minimum ten (10) percent rate reduction. The city’s public works director will consider rate reductions in excess of ten (10) percent depending upon the amount of rainwater harvested.

4. The owner or renter of a single-family residential parcel of real property qualifies under KCC 7.01.080 for lifeline rates. In such cases, the lifeline charge rate for the qualifying customer shall be ninety-two cents ($0.92) per month, and basin-specific charges pursuant to KCC 7.05.090(B)(5) shall not be imposed.

5. The owner of a parcel of real property has made improvements to existing and natural watercourses which will result in the enhancement of water quality or the restoration or enhancement of natural spawning or rearing areas. These credits shall continue so long as the owner or his agent satisfactorily maintains the watercourse improvements. Standards and criteria for establishing the amount of reductions for such improvements shall be developed, with the assistance of a fisheries biologist, and transmitted to the city council for approval within one hundred eighty (180) days of the adoption of this chapter.

6. Approved onsite retention systems in subsection (1) of this section, and approved water quality enhancement efforts, in subsection (5) of this section, are found to be mitigating measures pursuant to RCW 90.03.510 and thereby entitled to the credits provided in this section.

(Ord. No. 2547, § 1; Ord. No. 3656, § 2, 8-19-03; Ord. No. 3779, § 6, 12-13-05. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.20.250)


7.05.140 Permits.

Permits are hereby required for any person to construct, install, place, or attempt to construct, install, or place any storm or surface drainage structure or facility within the city. Every person desiring to construct or install any storm or surface water facility, whether on private or public property, shall make application for same to the public works department prior to commencing work on such project. Such applications shall be made on forms provided by the department prior to commencing work on such project, and shall include all information as may be required by the department. The application shall be approved by the public works director or designee, prior to construction; provided, that such construction or installation is in compliance with all city ordinances, regulations, and other controls or standards. Each application submitted to the department of public works shall be accompanied by payment for a construction permit fee in an amount established by the city council. In addition to the other penalties that may be provided by law, failure to obtain such a permit will result in the fee being doubled. Such fees shall defray part of the cost of inspections and plan reviews required by the city prior to and during the construction of storm and surface water drainage facilities. All such fees shall be placed in a separate revenue account for the storm and surface water utility. This section shall not be construed to duplicate any other existing city requirements.

(Ord. No. 2547, § 1; Ord. No. 3916, § 1, 6-2-09. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.20.260)


7.05.150 Unlawful discharges monitored – Director’s emergency authority.

Repealed by Ord. No. 3916.

(Ord. No. 2547, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.20.270)


7.05.160 Connection fees.

Connection fees shall be assessed against an owner of real property at the time of issuance of a development permit for any onsite storm or surface water drainage structure or facilities which attach or connect to, or otherwise drain into, the system of drainage facilities as defined in KCC 7.05.050 or where any additional surface or storm water run-off is generated and delivered or transported through either natural or person-made watercourses to the utility’s system of storm and surface water facilities. The connection fees, assessed and collected through March 31, 2009, shall be as follows:

	Basin	Connection charge in dollars per month per acre

	G	12.50

	I	11.25

	A	13.75

	B	12.50

	C & A	1.25

	All others (except Basin H)	0.0 

Effective April 1, 2009, the connection fee assessed and collected by the city under this section shall terminate and the city will assess and collect a drainage systems development charge in accordance with KCC 7.05.165.

As of December 31, 1999, and effective through March 31, 2009, for Basin H only (the Soos Creek Watershed, generally), the charge per connection will be a flat fee of four hundred dollars ($400) per equivalent service unit. Effective April 1, 2009, the city will no longer assess and collect basin-specific charges.

The basins are as defined under KCC 7.05.090(B)(5). The charge in effect through March 31, 2009, is calculated by the number of months from the date of adoption of this chapter to the date of issuance of the development permit, and the acre represents the area of the property being developed. All connection fees collected by the storm and surface water utility shall be placed in a separate revenue account for the storm and surface water utility.

(Ord. No. 2547, § 1; Ord. No. 3453, § 2, 5-4-99; Ord. No. 3459, § 2, 5-18-99; Ord. No. 3488, § 2, 11-16-99; Ord. No. 3534, § 1, 12-5-00; Ord. No. 3901, § 6, 12-9-08. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.20.280)


7.05.165 Drainage systems development charge.

A. Effective April 1, 2009, the city shall assess and collect a drainage systems development charge against all new development or redevelopment in the amount of one thousand and seven hundred and eighty-seven dollars ($1,787) per ESU, as defined in KCC 7.05.090(B)(3). This drainage system development charge will increase annually, on the first day of each calendar year, by an amount equal to the percentage increase in the Construction Price Index for Seattle-Tacoma-Bremerton for the twelve (12) month period October 1st through September 30th of the previous calendar year.

All drainage system development charges collected by the storm and surface water utility shall be placed in a separate revenue account for the storm and surface water utility.

B. Fee deferral. Until December 31, 2013, at the time of issuance of any single-family residential building permit for a dwelling unit that is being constructed for initial sale, the owner of the subject real property may defer payment of the drainage system development charge in subsection (A) of this section by executing a first position lien in favor of the city in the amount of the drainage system development charge. The city shall record the lien against the real property and the lien amount shall be paid by the seller to the city at the time of closing of the sale of the real property and single-family residence. An owner who chooses to defer the drainage system development charge must combine the lien with a lien deferring the transportation improvement fee in KCC 12.11.090 or Chapter 43.21C RCW, and water system development charge in KCC 7.02.090.

(Ord. No. 3901, § 7, 12-9-08; Ord. No. 3960, § 2, 6-1-10)


7.05.170 Mitigation of system impact – Developer contributions.

The public works department is hereby authorized to require mitigation of impacts on storm water drainage facilities pursuant to this chapter and Ch. 11.03 KCC. Payment of a fair and equitable pro rata portion of specific offsite storm and surface water drainage improvements necessitated by new development may be authorized. Such mitigation of offsite impacts shall be made in addition to any other requirements of the city for onsite improvements. Where a developer is required to completely finance offsite storm or surface water drainage facilities, the city will enter into a street improvement reimbursement agreement with the developer. All developer contributions shall be placed in a separate revenue account for the storm and surface water utility, earmarked for specific projects or improvements, and utilized solely for such purposes.

(Ord. No. 2547, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.20.290)


7.05.180 Storm and surface water utility accounting.

All monies obtained pursuant to this chapter shall be segregated, credited, and deposited to the credit of storm and surface water utility. The monies deposited shall be expended only for administering, operating, maintaining, or improving storm and surface water drainage facilities, including all or any part of the cost of planning, designing, financing, acquiring, constructing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, improving, or operating present or future storm and surface water drainage facilities owned by the utility. Monies shall not be transferred to any other funds of the city except to pay for expenses directly attributable to storm and surface water drainage.

(Ord. No. 2547, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.20.300)


7.05.190 Regulation and administration.

The director of public works or designee is hereby authorized to administer this chapter unless otherwise designated herein. The director of public works is hereby authorized and directed to formulate any rules and regulations which are consistent with this chapter and which are necessary for its proper administration by the officials of the department of public works.

(Ord. No. 2547, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.20.310)


7.05.200 Appeals to land use hearing examiner.

A. Any owner who disputes the amount of a charge pursuant to this chapter or who disputes any determination made by or on behalf of the city pursuant to and by authority of this chapter may petition the land use hearing examiner in writing for a hearing on a revision or modification of such charge or determination, no later than twenty (20) days after having been billed for such charge or after having been notified of such determination. Such petition shall be filed with the city clerk upon payment of the disputed charge and a fee of fifty dollars ($50). The petition shall identify the property, describe all improvements or proposed improvements, and allege specific errors in a charge or the basis for the challenge of a determination. For purposes of this subsection, notice of determination shall be effective upon the date of mailing, postage prepaid to the address of the person seeking the determination. Notice of charges shall be the monthly account billing date; provided, that a reduction or increase in charges shall only be allowed from that billing date forward, for which an appeal is filed. Pending hearing and final decision, the owner shall pay current charges. Failure to pay current charges shall result in dismissal of the appeal by the land use hearing examiner.

B. Upon receiving such a petition, the land use hearing examiner shall schedule a hearing within thirty (30) days. Notice of the hearing shall be provided to the petitioner at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Following the hearing, a final determination shall be made by the land use hearing examiner and the petitioner shall be notified within thirty (30) days.

C. All decisions of the land use hearing examiner shall be based upon guidelines for storm and surface water drainage rate appeals as amended, to be established by the department of public works on or before July 31, 1985, and as may thereafter be amended. Such guidelines, and amendments thereto, shall be effective upon filing with the city clerk and publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.

D. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as granting any right of judicial review which does not previously exist in law. The decision of the land use hearing examiner shall be final and conclusive. A writ of review must be sought in the superior court, if at all, by an aggrieved party or person within fourteen (14) calendar days of the effective date of the decision.

(Ord. No. 2547, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.20.400)


7.05.210 Penalties, enforcement.

A. Civil. Any violation of this chapter shall be an infraction, and any person found in violation thereof shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250) per day.

B. Criminal. Any knowing violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, and any person found guilty thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000) or imprisonment not to exceed one (1) year or by both such fine and imprisonment.

C. Penalties not exclusive. The penalties authorized in subsections (A) and (B) above shall not be exclusive. The director of public works is authorized to take such emergency measures as are necessary to insure compliance with this chapter. Violation of the provisions of this chapter may give rise to such other remedies or action necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 2547, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.20.500)


Chapter 7.06 COMBINED SEWER AND STORM AND SURFACE WATER UTILITY*

Sections:

7.06.010    Established. 

7.06.020    Management of combined utility property – Restricted use – Penalties. 

*Cross reference(s) – Department of public works, ch. 2.28; utility tax levied on telephone, gas, electric, garbage, water, sewer, and drainage utilities, ch. 3.18; street occupation permit, ch. 6.07.

State law reference(s) – Combined utility authorized, RCW 35.67.331; stormwater utility, RCW 35.92.021; stormwater, RCW 90.03.500 et seq.


7.06.010 Established.

The city maintains and operates a sanitary sewage collection and disposal system, Chapter 7.04 KCC, and a storm and surface water utility, Chapter 7.05 KCC, pursuant to the provisions of RCW 35A.80.010 and 35A.21.150, and Chapters 35.67 and 35.92 RCW. In accordance with this authority, the sanitary sewage collection and disposal system of the city and the storm and surface water utility, together with all additions, extensions, and betterments at any time made, are combined into a single utility, provided that separate accounts be maintained pursuant to RCW 43.09.210.

(Ord. No. 4032, § 1, 4-3-12; Ord. No. 1338, § 2; Ord. No. 2547, § 2; Ord. No. 2665, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.03.010)

State law reference(s) – Storm water control utility, RCW 35.92.020, 90.03.500 et seq.


7.06.020 Management of combined utility property – Restricted use – Penalties.

The director of public works or designee is hereby authorized to post combined utility properties, including rights-of-way, easements, and appurtenant facilities, with appropriate “no trespassing” or other restrictive signs as determined by the director to be necessary to protect such property and facilities from damage or unpermitted use. The director or designee is authorized to post “no trespassing” signs or any other signs in a conspicuous manner which are capable of being readily viewed and understood by the public to prohibit use by any person, including the use of motorized or nonmotorized vehicle on such properties. “Motor vehicle” for purposes of this section is that definition as provided in RCW 46.04.320. “Vehicle” for purposes of this section is that definition as provided in RCW 46.04.670. Every person who enters or remains on any city-combined utility property where notice against such use or trespass has been given by the city through such posting “no trespassing” or other similar signs is punishable as criminal trespass and is subject to the criminal penalties provided in RCW 9A.52.080.

(Ord. No. 4032, § 1, 4-3-12; Ord. No. 2736, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.03.020)


Chapter 7.07 SURFACE WATER AND DRAINAGE CODE*

Sections:

7.07.010    Purpose. 

7.07.020    Definitions. 

7.07.030    Submission of a drainage plan. 

7.07.040    Contents of a drainage plan. 

7.07.050    Mandatory requirements for drainage improvements. 

7.07.060    Development in critical areas. 

7.07.070    Review and approval of the plan. 

7.07.080    Establishment of regional facilities. 

7.07.090    Bonds and liability insurance required. 

7.07.100    City assumption of operation and maintenance. 

7.07.110    Retroactivity relating to city maintenance of drainage facilities. 

7.07.114    Construction standards. 

7.07.117    Storm drainage system construction must comply with chapter. 

7.07.120    Applicability to governmental entities. 

7.07.130    Violations – Penalties. 

7.07.140    Protection of public and private rights. 

*Cross reference(s) – Department of public works, ch. 2.28; utility tax levied on telephone, gas, electric, garbage, water, sewer, and drainage utilities, ch. 3.18; street occupation permit, ch. 6.07; environmental policy, ch. 11.03; requirements and standards for subdivisions, ch. 12.04.


7.07.010 Purpose.

The city council finds that this surface water and drainage code is necessary in order to:

1. Promote sound development policies and construction procedures which respect and preserve the city’s watercourses;

2. Minimize water quality degradation and control the sedimentation of creeks, streams, ponds, lakes, and other water bodies;

3. Protect property owners adjacent to developing and developed land from increased run-off rates which could cause erosion of abutting property;

4. Protect downstream owners;

5. Preserve and enhance the suitability of waters for contact recreation and fishing;

6. Preserve and enhance the aesthetic quality of the waters;

7. Maintain and protect valuable groundwater resources;

8. Minimize adverse effects of alterations in groundwater quantities, locations, and flow patterns;

9. Ensure the safety of city and King County roads and rights-of-way; and

10. Decrease drainage related damage to public and private property.

(Ord. No. 2130, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.14.010)


7.07.020 Definitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

City engineer shall refer to the city of Kent city engineer.

Comprehensive drainage plan refers to a detailed analysis for each drainage basin which compares the capabilities and needs for run-off accommodation due to various combinations of development, land use, structural and nonstructural management alternatives. The plan recommends the form, location and extent of quantity and quality control measures which optimally would meet the legal constraints, water quality standards, and community standards, as well as identifying the institutional and funding requirements for plan implementation. Analysis of each drainage basin will depend upon specific criteria set forth by King County in order to identify critical drainage areas.

Computations shall mean calculations, including coefficients and other pertinent data, made to determine the drainage plan with rates of flow of water given in cubic feet per second (cfs) and cubic meters per second (cms).

Design storm shall refer to that rainfall event which is selected by the public works department for purposes of design, specifying both the return period in years and the duration in hours.

Detention facilities shall mean facilities designed to hold run-off while gradually releasing it at a predetermined maximum rate.

Developer shall mean the individuals or corporations applying for the permits or approvals described in KCC 7.07.030 of this surface water and drainage code.

Developmental coverage shall mean all developed surface areas within the subject property including, but not limited to, rooftops, driveways, carports, accessory buildings, parking areas and any other impervious surfaces. During construction, developmental coverage shall include the above in addition to the full extent of any alteration of previously occurring soils, slope or vegetation due to grading, temporary storage, access areas or any other short-term causes.

Drainage area shall mean the watershed contributing water run-off to and including the subject property.

Drainage plan shall mean a plan for collection, transport, treatment and discharge or recycling of water within the subject property.

Drainage treatment/abatement facilities shall mean any facilities installed or constructed in conjunction with a drainage plan for the purpose of treatment or abatement of urban run-off, excluding retention or detention facilities.

Natural location of drainage systems shall refer to the location of those channels, swales, and other natural conveyance systems as defined by the first documented topographic contours existing for the subject property, either from maps or photographs or such other means as appropriate.

Peak discharge shall mean the maximum surface water run-off rate (cfs and cms) determined for the design storm.

Planned development shall refer to residential developments which are planned and/or developed in several stages but submitted together for approvals, and which typically consist of clusters of multi-unit structures interspersed with areas of common open space.

Procedures manual shall mean the manual of technical and administrative procedures established by the public works department which delineates methods to be used, the level of detail of analysis required, and other details for implementation of the provisions of this surface water and drainage code.

Receiving bodies of water shall mean creeks, streams, lakes and other bodies of water into which waters are directed, either naturally, in manmade ditches or in closed conduit systems.

Retention facilities shall mean facilities designed to hold water for a considerable length of time and then consume it by evaporation, plant transpiration, or infiltration into the soil.

Planning department shall refer to the city planning department.

Public works department shall refer to the city public works department.

Subject property shall mean the tract of land which is the subject of a permit and/or approval action.

(Ord. No. 2130, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.14.010)


7.07.030 Submission of a drainage plan.

A. All developers applying for any of the following permits or approvals shall submit for approval a drainage plan with their application or request:

1. Grading permit;

2. Substantial development permit required under Chapter 90.58 RCW, shoreline management act;

3. Subdivision approval;

4. Short subdivision approval;

5. Rezones;

6. Conditional use permits;

7. Building permits where the permit relates to five thousand (5,000) or more square feet of development coverage within the property or where development is in a critical area as determined by the public works department;

8. Planned unit development.

B. Commencement of construction work under any of the permits in subsection (A) above or applications shall not begin until such time as final approval of the drainage plan is obtained in accordance with KCC 7.07.070.

C. The same plan submitted during one (1) permit/approval process may be subsequently submitted with further required applications. The plan shall be supplemented with such additional information as may be requested by the public works department or required by the provisions of the procedures manual.

D. The plan requirement established in this section will apply except when the developer demonstrates to the satisfaction of the public works and planning departments that the proposed activity or development:

1. Will neither seriously nor adversely impact the water quality conditions of any affected receiving bodies of water;

2. Will not alter the surface discharge location, alter the drainage pattern or adjoining properties, alter drainage patterns, increase the discharge, nor cause any other adverse effects in the drainage area; and

3. Will not alter the subsurface drainage patterns, flowrates and discharge points, nor result in any significant adverse effects to property or residents.

(Ord. No. 2130, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.14.010)


7.07.040 Contents of a drainage plan.

All persons applying for any of the permits or approvals contained in KCC 7.07.030 shall provide a drainage plan for surface and pertinent subsurface water flows entering, flowing within and leaving the subject property both during and after construction. The detailed form and contents of the drainage plan shall be described in procedures established by the public works and planning departments, or in the procedures manual. The procedures manual will set forth the manner of presenting the following required information:

1. Background computations for sizing drainage facilities:

a. Depiction of the drainage area on a topographical map of approved scale and contour interval, with acreage of the site, development, and developmental coverage indicated;

b. Indication of the peak discharge and volume of run-off which will be generated due to the design storm within the subject property under its current use;

c. Indication of the peak discharge and volume of run-off which will be generated due to the design storm within the subject property if the development or proposed activity is allowed to proceed;

d. Determination of the peak discharge and volume of water that will be generated by the design storm at various points on the subject property.

2. Proposed measures for handling the computed run-off at the detail level specified in the procedures manual.

3. Proposed measures for controlling run-off during construction.

The requirements of this section may be modified at the discretion of the public works department in special cases requiring more information, with the concurrence of the planning department.

(Ord. No. 2130, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.14.010)


7.07.050 Mandatory requirements for drainage improvements.

A. Surface water entering the subject property shall be received at the naturally occurring locations and surface water exiting the subject property shall be discharged at the natural locations with adequate energy dissipaters within the subject property to minimize downstream damage and with no division at any of these points. The design storm peak discharge from the subject property may not be increased by the proposed development. Retention/detention facilities must be provided in order to maintain surface water discharge rates at or below the existing design storm peak discharge.

B. Where open channel construction is used to handle drainage within the subject property, a minimum of fifteen (15) feet will be provided between any structures and the top of the bank of the defined channel. In open channel work the water surface elevation will be indicated on the plan and profile drawings. The configuration of the finished grades constituting the banks of the open channel will also be shown on the drawings. Proposed cross section of the channel will be shown with stable side slopes as approved by the public works department. The water surface elevation of the flow for the design storm will be indicated on the cross section.

C. When a closed system is used to handle drainage within the subject property, the system will be a minimum of ten (10) feet from all structures.

D. To the extent possible, approved measures for controlling run-off during construction should comply with the provisions in this section.

E. Variances from the requirements of subsections (A) through (C) above may be permitted only after a determination by the public works and planning departments, using the comprehensive drainage plan, if available, or employing the following criteria:

1. Sufficient capacity of downstream facilities under design conditions;

2. Maintenance of the integrity of the receiving waters;

3. Possibility of adverse effects of retention/detention;

4. Utility of regional retention/detention facilities;

5. Capability of maintenance of the system; and

6. Structural integrity of abutting foundations and structures.

Request for variances shall be filed in writing with the public works department and shall adequately detail the basis for requesting the variance.

(Ord. No. 2130, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.14.010)


7.07.060 Development in critical areas.

Development which would increase the volume or rate of discharge due to any storm from the subject property shall not be permitted in areas designated as critical areas by the city council. Critical areas are those in which existing flooding, drainage, erosion, or unstable conditions present an imminent likelihood of harm to the welfare and safety of the surrounding community, or to the integrity of the surface water or groundwater system. Development shall not be permitted in these critical areas until such time as the existing community hazard is alleviated and it is adequately demonstrated that the proposed development will not cause a recurrence of the problem nor the occurrence of any new drainage-related problem. The public works and planning departments may designate as critical any area in which comparable problems would occur in the future due to any increase in volume or peak discharge. The requirements of this section shall apply regardless of any exemption under KCC 7.07.030(D). Where applications of the provisions of this section will deny all reasonable uses of the property, the restrictions on development contained in this section may be waived for the subject property; provided, that the resulting development shall be subject to all the remaining terms and conditions of the surface water and drainage code. All decisions based on the provision of this section shall be compatible with the comprehensive drainage plan, if available, for the basin in which the subject property is located. For development in areas designated as critical, the developer shall provide information regarding volume and rate of discharge for a range of storms as specified in the procedures manual. The designation of critical drainage areas within the city limits will depend upon criteria set forth by King County.

(Ord. No. 2130, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.14.010)


7.07.070 Review and approval of the plan.

All storm drainage plans prepared in connection with any of the permits or approvals listed in KCC 7.07.030 shall be submitted for review by and approval of the public works and planning departments, in accordance with the procedures established in the procedures manual. At the time of approval of the drainage plan for the subject property, a schedule for inspection of construction and facilities will be established by the public works department.

(Ord. No. 2130, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.14.010)


7.07.080 Establishment of regional facilities.

In the event that public benefits would accrue due to modification of the drainage plan for the subject property to better implement the recommendations of the comprehensive drainage plan, the department of public works, or the planning department may recommend that the city should assume responsibility for the further design, construction, operation and maintenance of drainage facilities on the subject property. Such decision shall be made concurrently with review and approval of the plan as specified in KCC 7.07.070. If the city decides to assume responsibility for design, construction, operation and maintenance of the facilities, the developer will be required to contribute a pro-rata share to the construction cost of the facilities. The developer may be required to supply additional information at the request of the department of public works to aid in the determination by the city. Guidelines for implementing this section will be defined in the procedures manual or by the department of public works and planning department.

(Ord. No. 2130, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.14.010)


7.07.090 Bonds and liability insurance required.

A. The public works department is authorized to require all persons constructing retention/detention or other drainage treatment/abatement facilities to post surety and cash bonds. Where such persons have previously posted or are required to post other such bonds on the facility itself or on other construction related to the facility, such person may with the permission of the department of public works and to the extent allowable by law combine all such bonds into a single bond. At no time shall the amount thus bonded be less than the total amount which would have been required in the form of separate bonds. Such a bond shall on its face clearly delineate those separate bonds which it is intended to replace.

B. Prior to commencing construction, the person constructing the facility shall post a construction bond, or other security in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of conforming such construction with the approved drainage plans. The amount of the bond or security shall reflect the costs of the approved drainage plan and shall be increased at one (1) year intervals in a proportion equivalent to the prevailing rate of inflation in construction costs as specified in the procedures manual. After determination by the department of public works that all facilities are constructed in compliance with the approved plans and upon receipt of the maintenance bond required in subsection (C) below, the construction bond shall be released. At the city’s option, an assignment of savings, letter of credit or some other form of guarantee acceptable to the city may be substituted for the bond requirement.

C. After satisfactory completion of the facilities and release of the construction bond by the city, the person constructing the facility shall commence a one (1) year period of satisfactory maintenance of the facility. A cash bond or other security instrument excluding security bonds to be used at the discretion of the public works department to correct deficiencies in the maintenance affecting public health, safety and welfare must be posted and maintained throughout the one (1) year maintenance period. The amount of the maintenance bond shall be determined by the public works department, but shall not be in excess of fifteen (15) percent nor less than ten (10) percent of the construction cost of the drainage facilities. In addition, a surety bond or cash bond to cover the cost of design defects or failures in workmanship of the facilities shall also be posted and maintained throughout the one (1) year maintenance period. At the city’s option, an assignment of savings, letter of credit, or some other form of guarantee acceptable to the city may be substituted for the bond requirement.

D. The person constructing the facility shall provide liability insurance in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Specifications for Road, Bridge and Municipal Construction or in such other form, type, and amount as required by the public works department. At a minimum, the city shall be named as an additional insured and the insurance shall protect the city from any liability for any accident, negligence, failure of the facility, or any other liability whatsoever, relating to the construction or maintenance of the facility. The liability insurance shall be provided during construction and for the required period of maintenance following construction; provided, that in the case of facilities assumed by the city for maintenance pursuant to KCC 7.07.100, the requirement to provide insurance shall terminate when the city assumes maintenance responsibility.

(Ord. No. 2130, § 2; Ord. No. 3208, § 1, 1-17-95. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.14.010)


7.07.100 City assumption of operation and maintenance.

A. The city may assume the operation and maintenance responsibility of retention/detention or other drainage treatment abatement facilities after the expiration of the one (1) year operation and maintenance period in connection with the subdivision of land; if:

1. All of the requirements of KCC 7.07.090 have been fully complied with;

2. The facilities have been inspected and approved by the department of public works after one (1) year of operation in accordance with the procedures manual;

3. All necessary easements entitling the city to properly operate and maintain the facility have been conveyed to the city and recorded with the King County auditor;

4. The surety bond or other security in KCC 7.07.090 has been extended for one (1) year, covering the city’s first year of operation and maintenance; and

5. The developer has supplied to the city an accounting of capital, construction and operation and maintenance expenses or other items, for the drainage facilities up to the end of the one (1) year period, for the purpose of establishing the basis for future bonding requirements for other developments.

B. If the city elects not to assume operation and maintenance responsibility for the facilities it will be the responsibility of the developer to make arrangements with the occupants or owners of the subject property for assumption of operation and maintenance in a manner subject to the approval of the department of public works or in accordance with the procedures manual. Such arrangements shall be completed and approved prior to the end of the one (1) year period of developer responsibility.

C. If the city elects not to assume operation and maintenance responsibility, the drainage facilities shall be operated and maintained in accordance with the arrangements as approved by the department of public works. The city may inspect the facilities in order to ensure continued use of the facilities for the purposes for which they were built and in accordance with these arrangements.

(Ord. No. 2130, § 2; Ord. No. 3208, § 2, 1-17-95. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.14.010)


7.07.110 Retroactivity relating to city maintenance of drainage facilities.

A. If any person constructing retention/detention or other drainage treatment/abatement facilities and/or receiving approval of drainage plans prior to December 10, 1978, reevaluates according to the requirements of this chapter the facilities and/or plans so constructed and/or approved and demonstrates to the public works department’s satisfaction acceptable compliance with its requirements, the city may, after inspection, approval, and acknowledgment of the proper posting of the required bonds or other security as specified in KCC 7.07.090, assume operation and maintenance responsibility of the facilities.

B. In cases in which all or part of the drainage facilities are not accessible for operation or maintenance purposes due to overlying structures or other causes, the city shall be held harmless for damages which might occur due to failure of design or workmanship of those segments, and further will not be responsible for their maintenance, replacement or rehabilitation. In such cases, responsibility shall revert to the existing owner of such facilities.

(Ord. No. 2130, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.14.010)


7.07.114 Construction standards.

All surface water and storm drainage systems, whether public or private, shall be installed in strict accordance with specifications contained in any existing city ordinance or code and any construction standards or international or uniform codes that the city either has adopted or adopts in the future. All construction and maintenance of those systems shall be subject to the inspection by the director or his or her designee.

(Ord. No. 3400, § 3, 4-21-98; Ord. No. 3690, § 7, 5-4-04)


7.07.117 Storm drainage system construction must comply with chapter.

When any surface water or storm drainage facility, whether upon private property or upon the city’s right-of-way, is constructed, laid, connected, or repaired and does not comply with the provisions of this chapter or any construction standards or codes that may be adopted in the future, or where the director determines that a surface water or storm drainage facility is obstructed, broken, or inadequate and is a menace to health, or is liable to cause damage to public or private property, the director shall give notice of that condition to the owner, agent, or occupant of the property in which the condition exists. If the owner, agent, or occupant refuses to construct, relay, reconstruct, or remove the obstruction from the surface water or storm drainage facility within the time specified in that notice, the director may perform all necessary work to comply with this chapter. The cost of that work will be assessed against the property or collected from the person responsible for the condition, and the total amount thereof shall become a lien upon the property. The city attorney is authorized, empowered, and directed to collect that cost, either by foreclosure of the lien or by a suit against the owner, agent, occupant, or other person responsible for the condition on the property. The suit shall be maintained in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction.

(Ord. No. 3400, § 4, 4-21-98)


7.07.120 Applicability to governmental entities.

All municipal corporations and governmental entities shall be required to submit a drainage plan and comply with the terms of this chapter when developing or improving land including, but not limited to, road building and widening, within the city. It is recognized that many other city, county, state, and federal permit conditions may apply to the proposed action and that compliance with the provisions of this chapter does not constitute compliance with such other requirements.

(Ord. No. 2130, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.14.010)


7.07.130 Violations – Penalties.

Violations of this chapter shall subject the violator to a fine in any sum not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. As an alternative method of enforcement the city may initiate an action to enjoin any development undertaken in violation of this chapter by making application for an injunction in any court of competent jurisdiction, and may also commence a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction to recover any penalty provided for in this section.

(Ord. No. 2130, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.14.010)


7.07.140 Protection of public and private rights.

Implementation of any provision of this chapter shall not cause nor be construed as an infringement of the rights of individuals, municipalities or corporations other than the developer seeking a permit or approval as described in KCC 7.07.030.

(Ord. No. 2130, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.14.010)


Chapter 7.08 SIDE SEWER CODE

(Repealed by Ord. No. 3927)


Chapter 7.09 WASTEWATER FACILITIES PLAN*

Sections:

7.09.010    Adopted. 

7.09.020    Copies on file – Inspection. 

*Cross reference(s) – Department of public works, ch. 2.28; environmental policy, ch. 11.03.


7.09.010 Adopted.

There is adopted by reference as if fully set forth in this chapter that certain plan known as the City of Kent 201 Waste Water Facilities Plan.

(Ord. No. 2138, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.12.010)


7.09.020 Copies on file – Inspection.

One (1) copy of the plan adopted in KCC 7.09.010 is filed with the city clerk and shall be available for public inspection.

(Ord. No. 2138, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.12.020)


Chapter 7.10 UNDERGROUND INSTALLATION OF ELECTRICAL OR COMMUNICATION FACILITIES*

Sections:

7.10.010    Scope and exceptions. 

7.10.020    Cost. 

7.10.030    Underground requirements. 

7.10.040    Cable television conduit. 

7.10.050    Permits. 

7.10.060    Design standards. 

7.10.070    Variance procedures. 

7.10.080    Joint trenches. 

7.10.090    Metal stays or guys boxed. 

7.10.100    Enforcement. 

7.10.110    Penalties. 

*Cross reference(s) – Department of public works, ch. 2.28; environmental policy, ch. 11.03; requirements and standards for subdivisions, § 12.04.235 et seq.

State law reference(s) – Underground electric and communications facilities, RCW 35.96.010 et seq.


7.10.010 Scope and exceptions.

A. It is especially found and determined by the city that the general public necessity, convenience, health, safety, and welfare require that electrical or communication facilities be constructed underground in an orderly manner in accordance with the requirements specified in this chapter.

B. This chapter shall apply to everyone who owns electrical facilities or communication facilities, including but not limited to telephone and cable television facilities, within the corporate city limits. The following facilities are excepted from the underground requirements of this chapter:

1. Electric utility substations, pad-mounted transformers, and switching facilities not located on the public right-of-way where site screening is or will be provided in accordance with KCC 7.10.030;

2. Electric transmission systems of a voltage of fifty-five (55) kv or more, including poles and wires, and equivalent communications facilities;

3. Ornamental street lighting standards;

4. Telephone pedestals and other equivalent communication facilities;

5. Police and fire sirens or any similar municipal equipment, including traffic control equipment;

6. Temporary services for construction;

7. Secondary wiring for street lighting;

8. Cable television cable to the extent that such cables are to be hung on existing utility poles in areas of the city where electrical or other distribution facilities are primarily overhead, subject, however, to the provisions of KCC 7.10.040.

(Ord. No. 1695, § 1; Ord. No. 2047, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.10.010)


7.10.020 Cost.

The cost of constructing new facilities underground or relocating existing aerial facilities underground shall be borne by the serving utilities, the owners of the real property to be served, or others requesting such underground services in accordance with the applicable filed tariffs or the rules and regulations or the published policies of the respective utilities furnishing such service or as may be contractually agreed upon between the utility and such owner or applicant. In the absence of filed tariffs, rules, regulations, published policies, or contractual agreement, the cost of constructing new facilities underground or relocating existing aerial facilities underground may be financed by any method authorized by state law.

(Ord. No. 1695, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.10.020)


7.10.030 Underground requirements.

A. The following requirements shall apply to new facilities:

1. All major additions of new facilities of three (3) or more spans and/or five hundred (500) feet or more shall be underground.

2. Minor additions or new facilities may be constructed aerially where the growth requirements are uncertain or where existing facilities are aerial. A permit from the department of public works shall be required.

B. The following requirements shall apply to rebuilds, replacements and additions:

1. A major rebuild or replacement of existing aerial facilities of three (3) or more spans and/or five hundred (500) feet or more shall be underground.

2. A minor rebuild or replacement of or addition to existing aerial facilities may be constructed aerially. No permit shall be required.

3. When there is casualty damage to an overhead service system due to the elements or other major service outage, the facilities may be restored aerially. No permit shall be required.

4. An addition of three (3) phase conductors or reconductoring will be allowed on existing aerial facilities. No permit shall be required.

C. The following requirements shall apply to relocations or rearrangements:

1. Relocations or rearrangements of aerial facilities necessitated by, but not limited to, road widening, sewer and water main projects, shall be underground if replacement of poles and associated facilities are necessary to accommodate the improvement.

2. Relocations and rearrangements of aerial facilities not requiring major replacement of poles and associated facilities may be constructed aerially.

D. Service connections are facilities extending from a distribution system and terminating on private property to serve a customer or subscriber. The following requirements shall apply to service connections:

1. Service connections shall be underground, if the distribution system serving the customer or subscriber is underground.

2. Service connections shall be underground if the distribution system serving the customer or subscriber is aerial, and the building, structure, or facility to be served is new, single-family residential construction.

3. Service connections may be aerial, if the distribution system serving the customer or subscriber is aerial, and the building, structure, or facility to be served is new construction under twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) in value.

4. Service connections may be aerial, if the distribution system serving the customer or subscriber is aerial, and the service request for building, structure or facility is the result of an addition, alterations, or repair thereto under twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) in value.

5. Service connections shall be underground, unless otherwise provided above.

E. The following requirements shall apply to specific programs:

1. All areas zoned or unzoned for commercial or industrial use shall be converted to underground facilities within fifteen (15) years from the date of this chapter subject to a ten (10) year extension by the city, whereby in the city’s judgment, its financial situation prohibits the city from participating to the degree implied by this chapter.

2. Conversion to underground of existing aerial facilities shall be accomplished in an orderly manner and in conjunction with the city’s street widening and environmental improvement program.

F. Street lighting facilities or systems conforming to current standards of the department of public works shall be installed as an integral part of all undergrounding projects constructed.

G. All rights-of-way proposed to be dedicated to the city or easements for public facilities shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.

H. The owners of real property abutting an underground project shall be responsible at their expense for converting to underground service and disconnecting their aerial services within ninety (90) days following notice in writing of availability of such underground service. Time in consummating such connection and disconnection is of the essence and such notice to the property owner, customer or subscriber may be mailed or delivered in person. If the conversion and disconnection is not accomplished within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice, the city may order the work done and the actual cost shall constitute a lien against the real property subject to enforcement as provided by law.

I. Plans for all aboveground installations shall be submitted to the planning department for approval of site screening and setbacks prior to the issuance of a service permit by the department of public works.

J. Project drawing in form and scale conforming to generally accepted engineering practices, shall be submitted in duplicate to the department of public works within ninety (90) days of the completion of any underground project within the city.

(Ord. No. 1695, § 3; Ord. No. 2367, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.10.030)


7.10.040 Cable television conduit.

A. When a developer and/or landowner extends sewer or water utility mains to serve a residential development or building site, cable television conduits shall be laid underground at the same time as those other utilities. This will include only the conduits that are to be installed between the curb lines within any city street.

B. This section will preclude the necessity for disturbing streets, sidewalks and alleyways when cable television service connections are extended to serve any residential development or building site.

C. All conduits shall be installed according to cable television specifications and with the approval of the director of public works or his designee.

(Ord. No. 2376, § 1; Ord. No. 3694, § 1, 6-1-04. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.10.040)


7.10.050 Permits.

A. A permit for underground construction will be obtained from the department of public works prior to construction of facilities in the public right-of-way. No fee shall be charged for this permit until an appropriate fee schedule is adopted by the city council.

B. Where pole line installations are permitted under the variance procedures of KCC 7.10.070 or minor new additions or temporary aerial facilities under this chapter, a permit shall be obtained from the department of public works prior to construction of such facilities in the public right-of-way. No fee shall be charged for this permit until an appropriate fee schedule is adopted by the city council.

(Ord. No. 1695, § 4. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.10.050)


7.10.060 Design standards.

A. All conductors, switches, transformers, and regulating devices shall be installed in accordance with the applicable national, state, and local safety standards. All structural devices shall be designed in accordance with the provisions of the International Building Code, the International Residential Code, or other applicable building codes, as adopted and amended in Ch. 14.01 KCC. All underground facilities provided for in this section shall be installed in such manner as to coordinate with other underground facilities, e.g., water, sewer, and gas pipeline, traffic control, and other signal systems. Whenever such coordination requires installation practices more restrictive or demanding than the minimum standards required by applicable national, state, and local codes and safety standards, the requirements of such coordination shall be governing and controlling.

B. All vaults, handholes, ventilation gratings, and access covers and conduits in public rights-of-way shall be strong enough to withstand a ten (10) thousand pound wheel load. The serving utility may, at its option, elect to restrict a ten (10) thousand pound wheel load requirement while assuming the responsibility for upgrading facilities to traveled street areas beyond the original traveled street area should subsequent widening occur.

C. Any equipment excepted from those underground requirements or otherwise permitted to be installed above ground shall be:

1. Placed within an enclosure or part of the building being served; or

2. Suitably screened with masonry or other decorative panels and/or evergreen trees, shrubs, and landscaping planted in sufficient depth and height, within a period of five (5) years, to form an effective sight barrier.

D. The utility shall be responsible for the installation, maintenance, repair, or replacement of the aforementioned materials when the real property, on which the aboveground facility is located, is owned by the utility. When aboveground facility is located on nonutility owned real property, the owner shall bear the expense of installation, maintenance, repair, or replacement of screening materials outlined in this section.

E. Space frames and structural arrangements for holding equipment shall be designed to have an uncluttered and neat appearance.

F. Streets shall be graded to subgrade prior to the installation of underground facilities.

(Ord. No. 1695, § 5; Ord. No. 3690, § 8, 5-4-04. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.10.060)


7.10.070 Variance procedures.

A. All applications for variances from the foregoing underground requirements shall first be filed with the department of public works. If the department shall deny such variance request, the applicant shall have the right to appeal such ruling to the city council or its designated subcommittee. If the variance is denied by the city council or its designated subcommittee, the applicant shall have the right to appeal such ruling to the hearing examiner, subject to all rules and regulations of the hearing examiner.

B. Underground requirements shall be waived by a variance only if the owner of electrical or communication facilities, the user thereof or any other affected person can demonstrate that it would be an undue hardship to construct such facilities underground. The term undue hardship shall mean either:

1. There is a technological difficulty associated with such facilities or with the real property involved;

2. The cost of the underground construction outweighs the general welfare consideration in requiring underground construction; or

3. The growth pattern in the geographical area has not been sufficiently established to determine the ultimate service requirements or major service routes.

(Ord. No. 1695, § 6. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.10.070)


7.10.080 Joint trenches.

Where several utilities are planned or required in the same corridor, every effort shall be made by the utilities to use joint trenches for such facilities.

(Ord. No. 1695, § 6. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.10.080)


7.10.090 Metal stays or guys boxed.

All bars, rods, wires, cables, or other metal devices anchored in any public street, alley, or other public place in the city and used as stays or guys for holding telegraph, telephone, electric light, or other poles for supporting electric wires or cables carrying electric current or intended to carry electric current shall be cased or boxed or covered with a good substantial boxing or casing of wood or metal to a perpendicular height of at least eight (8) feet from the surface of the ground or street where such stay or guy is anchored.

(Formerly Code 1986, § 7.10.110)


7.10.100 Enforcement.

The director of public works or his designated representative shall be responsible for the investigation of violations.

(Ord. No. 1695, § 9. Formerly Code 1986, § 7.10.100)


7.10.110 Penalties.

A. Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500) or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B. Failure or refusal of any company operating telephone, telegraph or electric lighting plants in the city to comply with the provisions of KCC 7.10.090 shall be sufficient reason for revoking any franchise such company may have in the street or alley where such stay or guy is permitted to remain unboxed or uncased, after a reasonable notice to box or case the same.

(Ord. No. 1695, § 9. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 7.10.090, 7.10.120)


Chapter 7.11 UTILITY SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY*

Sections:

7.11.010    Within potential annexation area.

7.11.020    Outside potential annexation area.

*Cross reference(s) – Department of public works, ch. 2.28; utility tax levied on telephone, gas, electric, garbage, water, sewer and drainage utilities, ch. 3.18.

State law reference(s) – Authority to extend water system, RCW 35.92.180 – 35.92.200.


7.11.010 Within potential annexation area.

The city may provide utility services to properties located outside city limits, but within the city’s potential annexation area, if the property owner requesting such service covenants and agrees as follows:

1. The owner will enter into a “no-protest to annexation” agreement, which the city will record with the King County recorder’s office, in which the owner will give notice of the owner’s intent to annex and will petition for annexation of the property to the city under any statutory annexation method now enacted, or subsequently enacted, that involves a petition process in order to effect the annexation. The notice and petition will constitute a covenant that runs with the owner’s property and will apply at the time the owner’s property is included within any area that the city is considering for annexation. The notice and petition agreement will state that, upon annexation, the property will be assessed and taxed at the same rate and on the same basis as property within the city is assessed and taxed, and will include any outstanding indebtedness of the city contracted prior to or existing at the time of annexation. Further, this notice and petition will only be accepted under terms and conditions established by the city through the public works department and consistent with the provisions of this chapter.

2. The owner will agree to design and construct all public improvements to meet or exceed city subdivision and construction standards. The city’s public works director, or his or her designee, reserves the right to withhold providing sanitary sewer or water service until the public improvements have been constructed in accordance with such standards.

3. The owner will agree to provide the city with mylar-reproducible or other acceptable as-built construction drawings of the public improvements prior to initiating building construction on any lot within any proposed subdivision of the property. The city shall have the right to inspect all construction work during and after completion. Any work found not to have been constructed in accordance with city construction standards, as determined by the public works director or his or her designee, shall be corrected by owner at the owner’s sole cost and expense.

4. The owner will agree and covenant to participate in the cost of constructing required improvements determined to be necessary by the city, including impacts to the city’s streets, roads, and traffic system and payment of a proportionate share of all costs associated with the construction of the road and traffic system improvements as determined by the city. These improvements must be completed to the city’s satisfaction prior to the city providing utility service.

5. The requirements of this section will act as covenants and promises that will run with the land and be binding upon all parties and successors in interest having or acquiring any right, title, or interest in the property and the improvements described in any agreement.

6. The owner will agree that, should it fail to comply with any of the covenants or any agreements executed with the city, the city may, at its sole discretion, terminate the utility services provided to the owner.

7. The annexation areas subject to these agreements shall be consistent with the city’s comprehensive plan and with the city’s long-range planning goals, as determined by the planning manager. The city may withhold full implementation of the comprehensive land use plan map designations in its annexation zoning proposals in order to achieve a more orderly physical development pattern and to implement its goals of twenty (20) percent density reduction in multifamily residential areas.

8. The owner will state in its application for utility service or in its notice and petition for annexation the existing King County zoning designation in order to certify that it is consistent with the city’s comprehensive plan.

(Ord. No. 2767, § 1; Ord. No. 2953, § 1, 11-20-90; Ord. No. 3671, § 1, 12-9-03. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.22.010)


7.11.020 Outside potential annexation area.

In accordance with RCW 35.67.310, as currently enacted or hereafter amended or recodified, the city may provide utility services to properties located outside city limits and outside the city’s potential annexation area, if the property owner requesting such service covenants and agrees, in writing, to the following requirements:

1. The owner agrees that development of the property may create significant impacts on the city, including impacts to the city’s streets, roads, and traffic system and to the city’s creeks, streams, and drainage system. The owner will agree and covenant that it will participate in the cost of constructing required improvements determined to be necessary by the city. These actions must be completed to the city’s satisfaction prior to the city providing utility service to the subject property.

2. The owner agrees and covenants that it will mitigate its impact upon the city’s storm drainage system in those areas deemed appropriate by the city’s public works director, or his or her designee. Mitigation may be by implementing the offsite mitigation improvements deemed necessary by the city, by paying to the city an amount equivalent to the estimated cost of construction of the necessary improvements in order to mitigate the impact upon the city’s system due to development of owner’s property, or by other appropriate mitigation procedures. In those instances where impacts to a major or regional project is involved, the owner shall pay a prorated share as determined appropriate by the city. Construction of any mitigating improvements shall meet or exceed city construction standards and shall be further made in accordance with this subsection.

3. The owner shall agree to pay a proportionate share of all costs associated with the construction of the road and traffic system improvements as determined by the city. Further, where the subject property abuts and takes access off of a city street, the owner agrees to improve the property’s frontage to city standards as outlined in the city’s construction standards. The owner shall submit plans of the frontage improvements to the city for review and approval along with providing mylar reproducible or other acceptable as-built construction drawings upon completion. The city shall have the right to inspect the construction work during and after completion. Any work found not to have been constructed in accordance with the city’s construction standards, as determined by the city’s public works director or his or her designee, shall be corrected by owner at owner’s expense. These frontage improvements must be completed or bonded to the satisfaction of the city prior to the city providing utility service to the property.

4. The owner agrees that the covenants and promises contained in these agreements shall run with the land and shall be binding upon all parties and successors in interest having or acquiring any right, title, or interest in the property and improvements described in any agreement.

5. The owner agrees that, should it fail to comply with any of the covenants or any of the agreements executed with the city, the city may, at its sole discretion, terminate the utility services provided to owner.

6. For those properties seeking city utility service that would affect an upstream tributary of a drainage watershed area that is subject, all or in part, to city regulation or control, and which is serviced, all or in part, by the city’s storm and surface water utility, the following additional requirements will also apply:

a. The owner will design and construct all public and/or private storm water detention and water quality treatment system(s) (“drainage system(s)”) in a manner that meets or exceeds city construction standards as determined by the public works department. The city’s public works director, or his or her designee, reserves his or her right to withhold sanitary sewer and water service until the drainage system(s) have been constructed in accordance with these standards.

b. The owner will submit all construction plans for the drainage system(s) associated with the development to the city for its review and approval prior to initiating development work on the property. The owner will provide the city with mylar-reproducible or other acceptable as-built construction drawings of the drainage system(s) after they have been constructed. The owner will grant the city the right to enter the owner’s property at any time in order to inspect any construction work during design or construction, or after its completion. Any work found not to have been constructed in accordance with city construction standards, as determined by the public works director or his or her designee, shall be corrected by the owner at its sole cost and expense.

c. The owner will pay any permit review fees deemed appropriate by the public works director. The owner must grant to the city a right of access to inspect continuing operations and maintenance of the drainage system(s) to assure they are being operated and maintained properly. If the drainage system(s) are not maintained or operated properly, the owner agrees to promptly bring the utility facilities into compliance with city standards.

d. Where deemed appropriate by the public works director, or his or her designee, owner’s property may be subject to the same terms and conditions as those properties located within city limits, including but not limited to service charges in accordance with Ch. 7.05 KCC, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time. 

(Ord. No. 3671, § 1, 12-9-03)


Chapter 7.12 CABLE SYSTEMS – FRANCHISE AND ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

Part I. General Provisions

7.12.010    Purpose.

7.12.020    Conflicting provisions.

7.12.030    Definitions.

7.12.040    Franchise required.

7.12.050    General conditions upon use of city right-of-way.

7.12.060    Protection of the city and residents.

7.12.070    Transfers.

7.12.080    Books and records.

7.12.090    Discrimination prohibited by operator.

7.12.100    Redlining prohibited.

7.12.110    Delegation of authority – Chief administrative officer.

7.12.120    Delegation of authority – Hearing examiner.

7.12.130    Calculation of time.

Part II. Franchise Application and Review

7.12.140    Franchise application.

7.12.150    Application fee and franchise fee.

7.12.160    Franchise application – Determination of completeness.

7.12.170    Public notice concerning franchise applications – Hearing on renewals under formal process.

7.12.180    Grant or denial of application.

Part III. Franchise Provisions

7.12.190    Construction provisions and technical standards.

7.12.200    Operator-provided public, education, and government access channels.

7.12.210    Customer service standards.

Part IV. Enforcement and Penalties

7.12.220    Performance bonds/security fund.

7.12.230    Procedure for remedying violation.

7.12.240    Remedies cumulative.

Part I. General Provisions


7.12.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to regulate in the public interest the operation of cable systems and cable operators and their use of city right-of-way by establishing procedures for the application and granting of franchises, by prescribing rights and duties of cable operators, and by providing generally for cable service to the citizens of Kent.

(Ord. No. 4224, § 2, 12‑13‑16)


7.12.020 Conflicting provisions.

In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter, the terms of any issued franchise, or any federal law or federal regulation, it is intended that the stricter standard shall apply unless the context clearly evidences a contrary intent, or unless the city is preempted on the issue by applicable law. Should any franchise or other applicable law be silent on the issue of conflict, this section shall control.

(Ord. No. 4224, § 2, 12‑13‑16)


7.12.030 Definitions.

In construing the provisions of this chapter, the following definitions shall be applied, unless the context or subject matter clearly requires otherwise. If specific provisions of law are referred to in this chapter, those references shall apply to any subsequent amendments or recodifications of those cited provisions of law.

Affiliate means a person that directly or indirectly owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with another person.

Applicable law means any statute, ordinance, judicial decision, executive order, or regulation having the force and effect of law, that determines the legal standing of a case or issue.

Applicant means a person who applies for a cable franchise with the city of Kent, or submits a request to modify or renew an existing cable franchise in the city.

Application fee means the charge specified in KCC 7.12.150 and designed to recover the city’s actual costs in processing applications for initial franchises, or modification requests to existing franchises, including applications for the transfer of a franchise, as authorized under applicable law.

Basic cable service means any service tier that includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals.

Business days means a working day for the cable operator which day is included within the definition of normal business hours provided for in this section.

Cable Act means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. Sections 521 et seq.; as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992; as further amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996; and as may be further amended from time to time.

Cable operator means any person or group of persons who: (1) provides cable service in the city over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system; or (2) otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system in the city.

Cable service means:

1. The one-way transmission to subscribers of (a) video programming, or (b) other programming service; and

2. Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.

Cable system means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service, which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community; but such term does not include:

1. A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; or

2. A facility that serves subscribers without using any city right-of-way; or

3. A facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II (Common Carriers) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of 47 U.S.C. Section 541(c)) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; or

4. An open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. Section 573; or

5. Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems.

City means the city of Kent, Washington.

City rights-of-way and city right-of-way mean the surface of, and the space above and below, any city street, highway, freeway, bridge, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk, way, lane, drive, circle, conduit, manhole, or utility easement that, by its terms, permits location of cable system facilities within the corporate boundaries of the city as now or hereafter constituted for the purpose of public travel. Excluded from this definition are railroad rights-of-way, airports, harbor areas, buildings, parks, open spaces, nature trails, poles, dedicated but unopened rights-of-way, environmentally sensitive areas, and such similar facilities or property owned, maintained, or leased by the city and which the city determines based upon the property’s characteristics is not conducive for cable operator’s facilities. For purposes of this definition, the phrase dedicated but unopened right-of-way shall mean right-of-way that has been dedicated to the city for right-of-way purposes, but not yet put to that use by the city.

Complaint means any issue raised by a subscriber that is a violation of the minimum customer service performance standards provided for in KCC 7.12.210.

Customer service representative or CSR means any person employed or retained by the cable operator, or with whom cable operator may contract with, to assist or provide service to subscribers, whether by answering telephone lines, writing service or installation orders, answering subscribers’ questions, receiving and processing payments, performing installation or interacting with subscribers in the field, or performing other subscriber service-related tasks.

FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or its successor.

Franchise refers to the authorization granted by the city to a cable operator for the nonexclusive right to occupy city rights-of-way to provide cable service within a designated franchise area. A franchise shall be authorized by ordinance, and must be accepted by the cable operator to become effective. A cable franchise shall not include or be a substitute for:

1. Any other permit or authorization required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on business within the city, including without limitation a business license; or

2. Any permit, agreement, or authorization required in connection with operations on or in public streets or property, including without limitation, a street cut permit, a street use permit, or other construction permit or approval; or

3. Any permits or agreements for occupying any other property in the city for which access is not specifically granted by the franchise, including without limitation, permits and agreements for placing devices on or in poles, conduits, other structures, or railroad easements, whether owned by the city or any other public or private entity, or for providing any service other than cable service.

Franchise area means the geographical area of the city that a cable operator is authorized to serve by the terms of its franchise or by operation of law.

Interactive voice response or IVR means a technology that allows a computer to interact with humans through the use of voice and dual-tone multi-frequency signaling tones input via keypad.

Necessary means required or indispensable.

Nonstandard installation means any installation of cable service that requires the installation of plant facilities from a point more than 125 feet from the subscriber’s property line to one of the following locations: (1) for a dwelling unit, the demarcation point as that term is defined in 47 C.F.R. Section 76.5; or (2) any underground installation in an area where plant facilities are not underground; or (3) a commercial installation.

Normal business hours means those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve subscribers. In all cases, normal business hours must include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some weekend hours.

Normal operating conditions means those service conditions that are within the control of the cable operator. Those conditions that are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include without limitation special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, maintenance or upgrade of the cable systems. Those conditions that are not within the control of the cable operator include but are not limited to natural disasters, civil disturbances other than labor strikes by cable operator’s employees or agents, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions.

Other service means any wire or radio communication service, provided through the use of any of the facilities of a cable operator that are used in the provision of a cable service.

Person includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, or any other legal entity, but not the city.

Service tier means a group of channels for which a single periodic subscription fee is charged.

Standard installation means an installation of cable service to the subscriber’s dwelling unit that is located up to 125 feet from the existing distribution system, plus additional inside wire and at least one outlet sufficient to receive cable service; or as otherwise defined in a cable franchise if necessary to address a cable operator’s specific technology.

Subscriber means the city, any government entity, or any person who legally receives any cable service from a cable operator delivered over that cable operator’s cable system.

(Ord. No. 4224, § 2, 12‑13‑16)


7.12.040 Franchise required.

A. Franchise required. An operator of a cable system must obtain a nonexclusive franchise prior to providing cable service in the city. No franchise shall become effective without the cable operator’s written acknowledgment of its unconditional acceptance of the franchise.

B. Authorization granted by franchise. A franchise shall not convey title, equitable or legal, in city right-of-way. The right granted is only the right to occupy those portions of city right-of-way to which the city has the right to grant access, for the purposes and for the period stated in the franchise, and, subject to the limitations in this chapter, the right may not be subdivided or subleased by cable operator.

C. No guarantee of rights conferred. No reference herein, nor in any franchise, to city right-of-way shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the city that the city’s interest or other right to control the use of such property is sufficient to permit the property’s use for such purposes, and a franchise shall be deemed to grant no more than those rights that the city may have the undisputed right and power to give.

(Ord. No. 4224, § 2, 12‑13‑16)


7.12.050 General conditions upon use of city right-of-way.

In addition to the provisions of this chapter and any franchise, a cable operator shall comply with all applicable law that applies to cable operator, its business operation within the city of Kent, or its installation and operation of its cable system within the city right-of-way, including city construction standards, the Kent special provisions, and any necessary permit application, review, and city or other government agency approval.

(Ord. No. 4224, § 2, 12‑13‑16)


7.12.060 Protection of the city and residents.

No franchise shall issue unless it includes adequate indemnity, insurance, and security from the cable operator to protect the city and its residents.

(Ord. No. 4224, § 2, 12‑13‑16)


7.12.070 Transfers.

A. Transfer/change of control requests. A cable operator shall be required to make written request and obtain city approval of any actual or proposed change in, or transfer of, or acquisition by any other party of control of the cable operator or the cable franchise. The word control as used herein is not limited to majority stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. Every change, transfer, or acquisition of control of the cable operator shall make a cable franchise subject to cancellation unless and until the city shall have consented in writing thereto. No consent shall be required, however, for (1) a transfer in trust, by mortgage, hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights, title, or interest of the cable operator in the franchise or in the cable system in order to secure indebtedness, or (2) a transfer to an entity directly or indirectly owned or controlled by the cable operator; provided, however, the new cable operator under subsections (A)(1) or (2) of this section must have the financial and technical capabilities to comply with the terms of the franchise.

B. Costs. As part of its application for approval, and as authorized under applicable law, the cable operator and transferee shall be responsible to reimburse the city for all costs reasonably incurred in connection with the city’s evaluation of whether to grant the request, which shall include, without limitation, reasonable attorney and consultant fees.

C. Criteria. In deciding whether to approve a request for transfer or change in control, the city may consider any criteria permitted by applicable law, and may impose conditions of approval consistent with applicable law.

(Ord. No. 4224, § 2, 12‑13‑16)


7.12.080 Books and records.

A. City access to books and records. Each cable operator shall provide the city reasonable access to all books and records related to the city’s oversight and enforcement authority pursuant to its cable franchise, this chapter, or any other applicable law. To the extent that books and records related to the city’s oversight and enforcement authority are confidential, the information may be provided to the city or its duly authorized agent(s) pursuant to a nondisclosure agreement whereby the city and/or its duly authorized agent agrees not to make such information public, to the extent such nondisclosure compiles with the state Public Records Act, Chapter 42.56 RCW. If the requested books and records are too voluminous, or for security reasons cannot be copied or removed, then within 10 days of its receipt of the city’s request, the cable operator may request that the city inspect operator’s books and records at the cable operator’s local offices or at one of cable operator’s offices more convenient to the city or its duly authorized agent. In such event, however, all reasonable travel expenses incurred in making such examination shall be paid by the cable operator.

B. Open records and confidentiality. Unless otherwise provided by law, information and records received by the city from the cable operator are generally open to public inspection and subject to the state of Washington Public Records Act, Chapter 42.56 RCW. It is the responsibility of the operator to be familiar with the Washington Public Records Act.

(Ord. No. 4224, § 2, 12‑13‑16)


7.12.090 Discrimination prohibited by operator.

A. Retaliation for exercising rights. A cable operator shall not discriminate among persons, or take any retaliatory action against a person or the city because of that entity’s exercise of any right it may have under applicable law, nor may the operator require a person or the city to waive such rights as a condition of receiving cable service.

B. Employment discrimination. A cable operator shall not refuse to employ, discharge from employment, or discriminate against any person in compensation or in terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because of race, religion, color, sex, age, sexual orientation, national origin, or the presence of any sensory, mental, or physical disability. A cable operator shall comply with all applicable law governing equal employment opportunities, as the same may be from time to time amended.

(Ord. No. 4224, § 2, 12‑13‑16)


7.12.100 Redlining prohibited.

A cable operator shall not deny access or charge different rates to any group of subscribers because of the income of the residents of the local area in which such group resides.

(Ord. No. 4224, § 2, 12‑13‑16)


7.12.110 Delegation of authority – Chief administrative officer.

The city’s chief administrative officer or designee is authorized to perform the following:

A. To enforce and administer this chapter and any franchise granted by the city council; and

B. To give any notice required by law or under any franchise, including by way of example and not limitation, a notice required under 47 U.S.C. Section 546 to review the performance of the cable operator and identify the community’s future cable-related needs and interests; and

C. To seek information from any cable operator; and

D. To establish forms for submission of applications and other information; and

E. To make a staff recommendation to the hearing examiner following any hearing held in accordance with 47 U.S.C. Sections 541 and 546, and this chapter; and

F. To make all decisions or take all other actions required under this chapter or in any franchise on behalf of the city; and

G. To take all other actions necessary or appropriate on behalf of the city in the administration of this chapter or any franchise.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, a franchise may only be granted by formal action of the city council.

(Ord. No. 4224, § 2, 12‑13‑16)


7.12.120 Delegation of authority – Hearing examiner.

The city’s hearing examiner is authorized to conduct any hearing required under 47 U.S.C. Sections 541(a)(1), 545, and 546, or other provision of applicable law in accordance with the provisions required therein, and prepare a recommendation to the city council for final action.

(Ord. No. 4224, § 2, 12‑13‑16)


7.12.130 Calculation of time.

Unless otherwise indicated, when the performance or doing of any act, duty, matter, or payment is required under this chapter or any franchise, and a relevant period of time or duration is prescribed in this chapter or any franchise, the time shall be computed so as to exclude the first and include the last day of the prescribed or fixed period of time. In the event the last day of the period so computed shall fall on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period runs until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday, nor legal holiday. Unless otherwise indicated, when the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation.

(Ord. No. 4224, § 2, 12‑13‑16)

Part II. Franchise Application and Review


7.12.140 Franchise application.

All requests for an initial franchise, to renew an existing franchise, or to modify an existing franchise shall be submitted in accordance with this section.

A. Initial franchise. All requests for an initial or new franchise must be made by application to the city.

1. Written application. Each entity required to hold a franchise under this chapter, who has not already been granted an initial franchise by the city, must submit a complete written application for an initial franchise. To be accepted for filing, an applicant must file an original and six copies of a complete application for an initial franchise. An application may be filed by any person on that person’s own initiative or in response to a request for franchise proposals, which may be authorized by the city from time to time.

a. Complete application. An application is deemed complete for purposes of this subsection, 47 U.S.C. Section 541(a), and 47 C.F.R. Section 76.41(d) when the application includes a complete response to every requirement of the application, this chapter, and includes payment of the full application fee required by KCC 7.12.150(A). Submission of an application that does not meet these requirements will not commence the running of the time period for granting or denying any application governed by 47 U.S.C. Section 541(a) and 47 C.F.R. Section 76.41(d). The applicant shall submit additional or updated information as necessary to ensure the requisite information provided is complete and accurate throughout the city’s review of the application.

2. Application contents. Except as expressly modified by the city for good cause, any application submitted pursuant to this chapter shall contain, at a minimum, all information that may be required by 47 C.F.R. Section 76.41 and the following additional information:

a. Applicant information. Identity of the applicant, including the name, address, telephone number, and web site (if applicable); the name, address, telephone number, and email address of all individual(s) authorized to represent the applicant before the city during its consideration of the franchise(s) requested; and management/organizational information showing the management structure of the applicant. In addition, an applicant must provide a chart, or other similar document, that identifies the relationship of the applicant to all general partners, parent corporations, subsidiaries, affiliates, and all other subsidiaries of parent corporations or other entities with any ownership share or control, direct or indirect, of the applicant, including a brief description of each entity’s relationship to the applicant.

b. Other cable systems. A list of all cable systems in which the applicant or any of its affiliates owns more than five percent of the system. For each cable system, the applicant shall include the name of the community served, number of subscribers, number of homes passed, date of system award, duration (start and end date) of franchise, status of construction, and percent of penetration of homes passed as of most recently available date (indicate date).

c. Potential franchises. An applicant shall list communities where it or any affiliate currently has a formal or informal request pending for an initial franchise or the approval of a transfer of ownership. The applicant shall include the name of the communities, date of application, and date of expected action.

d. Applicant’s technical qualifications to provide cable service. The application shall describe the applicant’s planned initial and proposed cable services geographic area, including a map of all areas proposed to be served and proposed dates for offering cable service to each area. The application shall additionally state a proposed timetable for providing cable service to the entire proposed franchise area. The applicant shall additionally describe with particularity:

i. Its planned system technical design, upstream and downstream capacity and speed, provision for digital services or packages, distribution of fiber, planned count of households per residential node, and any other information necessary to demonstrate that the applicant’s technology will be deployed so as to be able to successfully offer cable services in the proposed locations; and

ii. A description of the size of equipment cabinets, shielding, and electronics that will be installed along the plant route; and

iii. The power sources that will be used and a description of the noise, exhaust, and pollutants, if any, that will be generated by the operation of the same.

Notwithstanding these requirements, if some of the descriptive data is not available at the time of application, a franchise may be granted subject to conditions that the data be filed and approved by the city before construction begins and that the franchise will be deemed to be forfeited if the data is not supplied and approved.

e. Existing authority for right-of-way access. If the applicant has or asserts existing authority to access city right-of-way in any of the service areas proposed by applicant in accordance with this section, the applicant shall state the basis for such authority or asserted authority and attach the relevant agreements or other documentation of such authority.

f. Description of planned residential cable services. The applicant shall describe with particularity its planned residential cable services, including basic cable services; other cable programming service tiers; and any additional pay-per-view, on-demand, or digital services.

g. Description of planned nonresidential cable service. The applicant shall describe with particularity its planned nonresidential cable services.

h. Description of intended construction. The applicant shall describe any planned construction and extension or phase schedule, as applicable. In providing the necessary description under this section, the following minimum information must be included:

i. System extension plans or policy, describing when and where construction will begin, how it will proceed, and when it will be completed;

ii. A description of the current status of the applicant’s existing or proposed arrangements, with area utilities, including pole attachments, vault, or conduit sharing agreements as applicable. Information sufficient under this section must include:

(A) A designation of the portions of the system that will be placed above ground, the portions that will be placed underground, and the construction techniques that the applicant proposes to use in installing the system above ground and underground; and

(B) The expected effect on city right-of-way usage, including information on the ability of city right-of-way to accommodate the proposed system, including, as appropriate given the system proposed, an estimate of the availability of space in conduits and an estimate of the cost of any necessary rearrangement of existing facilities; and

(C) A description, where appropriate, of how services will be converted from existing facilities to new facilities, and what will be done with existing facilities.

i. Description of protective measures to be taken. Applicant shall provide a description of the various protective measures it will take in carrying out any franchise it may be granted. At a minimum, the following specific areas must be addressed:

i. Protection of persons and property. The applicant shall describe its plan to ensure that the safety, function, appearance of property, and the convenience and safety of other persons are not adversely affected by the installation or construction of the applicant’s facilities, and that property owners are justly compensated for any damages caused by the installation, construction, operation, or removal of the facilities as set forth in this chapter.

ii. Protection of privacy. The applicant shall describe its plan to comply with the subscriber privacy protections set forth in 47 U.S.C. Section 551, and the privacy protections of any applicable law, including those contained in this chapter.

j. Ability to meet future needs. An applicant must demonstrate how it will reasonably meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the Kent community.

k. Financially qualified. An applicant must demonstrate that it is financially qualified, including at a minimum, a statement certified by the applicant’s chief financial officer regarding the applicant’s financial ability to complete construction to meet the proposed time frame and to operate the proposed cable system. In addition:

i. Unless SEC Forms 10K and 10Q are available on the EDGAR database, applicants with existing operations shall provide audited financial statements, including statements of income, balance sheets and cash flow statements, together with any notes necessary to the understanding of the financial statements for the last three fiscal years for the applicant and any parent corporation.

ii. Applicants that are new (start-up) entities shall provide pro forma projections for the next five fiscal years, if available, but at a minimum the next three fiscal years from the date of the application.

l. Legally qualified. An applicant must demonstrate that it is legally qualified, which demonstration must include a statement from the applicant that includes the following minimum information:

i. Whether it has received, or is in a position to receive, necessary authorizations from state and federal authorities;

ii. Whether it has engaged in fraud or racketeering or violated antitrust laws, consumer protection laws, or similar laws;

iii. Whether it or any affiliate has been found in violation by a regulatory authority or franchising authority of any franchise ordinance or agreement, contract, or regulation governing a cable system. If so, the applicant shall identify the judicial or administrative proceeding, giving the date, name of tribunal, case number (if applicable), and result or disposition of that proceeding;

iv. Whether it has been found in violation by a regulatory authority of any other type (e.g., utility) of franchise, ordinance, agreement, permit, contract, or regulation. If so, the applicant shall identify the judicial or administrative proceeding, giving the date, name of tribunal, case number (if applicable), and result or disposition of that proceeding; and

m. Declaration of applicant. Each application shall be accompanied by a declaration substantially in the form set forth below:

This application is submitted by the undersigned who has been duly authorized to make the representations within on behalf of the Applicant and certifies the representations are true and correct.

The Applicant recognizes that all representations are binding on it, that all application commitments are enforceable, and that material misrepresentations or omissions, or failure to adhere to any such representation, may result in a denial of an application by the City.

The Applicant shall comply with all applicable local laws.

Consent is hereby given to the City and its representatives to make inquiry into the legal, character, technical, financial, and other qualifications of the Applicant by contacting any persons or organizations named herein as references, or by any other appropriate means.

I certify (or declare) under penalty of perjury under the laws of the state of Washington that the foregoing is true and correct.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Date and Place) (Signature)

3. Application review and negotiation. Once a complete application is received by the city for an initial franchise, the city and applicant will meet informally, discuss applicant’s initial franchise request, and negotiate an initial franchise, if appropriate. Once those efforts are complete, and within the time period required by 47 C.F.R. Section 76.41, or such other time period as the parties may mutually agree, city staff will present its recommendation to the city council on the applicant’s application for an initial franchise. Prior to the city council taking action to grant or deny a proposed initial franchise, the public will be provided adequate notice and an opportunity for comment.

B. Renewal of existing franchise. Requests for cable franchise renewal under the Cable Act will be received and reviewed in a manner consistent with Section 626 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. Section 546) and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

1. Formal applications for renewal. Either a cable operator or the city may, in accordance with the time limitations provided for in 47 U.S.C. Section 546(a)(1), commence a formal proceeding for franchise renewal. To seek formal renewal of a franchise, the cable operator must timely submit to the city a written renewal request as provided for in 47 U.S.C. Section 546(a). The cable operator’s renewal request must clearly indicate the cable operator seeks formal renewal under the process provided for in 47 U.S.C. Section 546(a) and KCC 7.12.170.

2. Informal applications for renewal. Concurrently or as an alternative to the formal process provided for in subsection (B)(1) of this section and 47 U.S.C. Section 546(a), a cable operator may submit an informal proposal for renewal of a franchise pursuant to 47 U.S.C. Section 546(h). To seek informal renewal of a franchise, the cable operator must submit a written renewal request to the city clearly indicating the cable operator seeks an informal renewal under the alternative process provided for in 47 U.S.C. Section 546(h). Such a proposal may be submitted at any time and the city may, after affording the public adequate notice and opportunity for comment, grant or deny such proposal at any time, including after formal proceedings have been commenced in accordance with 47 U.S.C. Section 546(a). The city and applicant will then meet informally and attempt to resolve franchise issues through negotiation. If negotiations are successful and all issues are resolved, a renewal franchise may be adopted after the public is provided an opportunity for comment. An informal application for renewal may be denied for any reason.

C. Modification of existing franchise. An existing franchise may be modified in accordance with 47 U.S.C. Section 545 and this chapter.

1. Application for modification. An application for modification of a franchise shall include, at a minimum, the following information:

a. The specific modification requested;

b. The justification for the requested modification;

c. An explanation as to how the requested modification will impact others, including subscribers and the city;

d. An explanation of the financial impact to applicant if the modification is approved or disapproved, which impacts must be demonstrated through submission of pro forma financial statements or similar financial documentation, or other documents that sufficiently evidence the financial impacts;

e. A statement indicating whether the modification is sought pursuant to Section 625 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. Section 545), and if so, the applicant must additionally demonstrate that the requested modification meets the standards set forth in 47 U.S.C. Section 545;

f. Any other information that the applicant believes is necessary for the city to consider in making an informed determination on the application for modification; and

g. A declaration of the applicant’s authorized officer, substantially similar to that provided in subsection (A)(2)(m) of this section, certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the modification application, and certifying that the application is consistent with the requirements of applicable law.

2. City response to modification. Upon receipt of a complete application for modification, the city may request additional information that it deems reasonably necessary to address the request, and may enter into informal negotiations with the cable operator regarding the terms of the proposed modifications. The city shall approve or deny the request, or approve a further modification as may be agreed to by the cable operator, consistent with 47 U.S.C. Section 545.

(Ord. No. 4224, § 2, 12‑13‑16)


7.12.150 Application fee and franchise fee.

A. Application fee. Every cable operator must pay an application fee for the consideration of an application for an initial franchise, or an application to modify or transfer an existing franchise. The application fee shall be in an amount to cover the actual costs incurred by the city in connection with the processing of the application, which shall be considered incidental to the award of a franchise, unless otherwise categorized under applicable law. This application fee shall cover all reasonable costs incurred by the city to process the application and, to the extent consistent with applicable law, shall be excluded from any franchise fee assessed and collected under a cable franchise. As provided for in KCC 7.12.140(A)(1), an application will not be deemed complete until sufficient funds to cover the application fee are received by the city. The city may, at any time, require that the applicant deposit additional sums if it appears that the initial deposit made in accordance with this section or subsequent deposits will be exhausted prior to final action by the city on the franchise application. The applicant will not be entitled to further consideration by the city of the applicant’s franchise application until the additional deposit has been received by the city, and in accordance with subsection (A)(2) of this section, no franchise shall be effective until all required fees and costs are paid. In the event the amount of an applicant’s deposit is in excess of the amount of the administrative expenses of the city related to the action requested, then the applicant shall be entitled to a return of any such excess amount.

1. Minimum deposit. Every application for an initial franchise shall be accompanied by an initial minimum deposit in the amount of $5,000 or such higher amount as may be necessary to cover the city’s anticipated costs in processing the application. Every application for a franchise transfer or modification shall be accompanied by an initial minimum deposit in the amount of $3,500 or such higher amount as may be necessary to cover the city’s anticipated costs in processing the application, including the city’s reasonable attorney and consultant fees as may be authorized by applicable law.

2. Failure to remit fees. No franchise shall become effective until all required fees and costs are paid. These fees shall not be credited from future franchise fees owed. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city may collect any unpaid fees in any lawful manner, including without limitation, under Chapter 3.10 KCC.

B. Franchise fee. Every operator of a cable system shall pay to the city a franchise fee in an amount equal to five percent of gross revenues to compensate the city for operator’s use of city right-of-way. However, this franchise fee need not be paid if applicable law requires otherwise. An operator who is engaged in one line of business that is subject to this exception shall not be excused from paying the franchise fee for its other lines of business for which a franchise and franchise fee are required, including those provided over a franchised cable system. The franchise fee specifically excludes the application fee to the extent the application fee is deemed to be incidental to the awarding of the franchise, and any requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages.

(Ord. No. 4224, § 2, 12‑13‑16)


7.12.160 Franchise application – Determination of completeness.

A. Application review.

1. Determination of completeness. Within 20 calendar days of receipt of an application under the formal process for an initial franchise or a franchise renewal or modification, the city will review the application for completeness as provided for in KCC 7.12.140(A)(1). If the application is not complete, the city will notify the applicant in writing, listing the requisite information that is required to complete the application. This notification will also inform the applicant that the time period set forth in 47 C.F.R. Section 76.41(d) for granting or denying the application, if applicable, will not begin to run until the required information is received. If the city’s review determines the application is complete, the city will notify the applicant in writing that all requisite information has been received and the application is complete as provided for in KCC 7.12.140(A)(1).

2. Additional information necessary. If any time during the franchise review process, and after a determination of completeness has been made, the city reasonably requires additional information from the applicant to evaluate applicant’s franchise request and ability to perform the proposed franchise’s requirements, the city will promptly request the information from the applicant. This request will additionally notify the applicant that the time period set forth in 47 C.F.R. Section 76.41(d) for granting or denying the application will be tolled until the requested information is received by the city.

(Ord. No. 4224, § 2, 12‑13‑16)


7.12.170 Public notice concerning franchise applications – Hearing on renewals under formal process.

No franchise will be granted, renewed, or modified except by action of the city council conducted at a public meeting for which notice has been given in accordance with the Open Public Meetings Act, Chapter 42.30 RCW. Neither the Cable Act nor the Open Public Meetings Act requires the city to provide individualized notice to cable operators concerning another cable operator’s franchise and council’s consideration of that franchise. However, if the city has agreed in a franchise to provide a cable operator individualized advance notice of anticipated council action concerning another cable operator’s franchise, the city will provide all cable operators with that same advance notice. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a failure to provide notification shall have no effect on any application to grant, renew, or modify an existing franchise.

In the event a cable operator submits a formal application to renew a franchise, or the city notifies a cable operator that its franchise renewal shall be considered under the procedures provided in 47 U.S.C. Section 546(b) through (g), the city shall hold a public hearing before acting on an application, affording participants the right to introduce evidence, to require the production of evidence, and to question witnesses, and creating a transcript of the proceedings. This public hearing shall be held before the city’s hearing examiner who, after completion of the proceeding, shall prepare and issue a decision containing the hearing examiner’s recommendation to the city council regarding the application to renew an existing franchise.

(Ord. No. 4224, § 2, 12‑13‑16)


7.12.180 Grant or denial of application.

If the city finds that it is in the public interest to issue, modify, or renew a franchise, the city may adopt a franchise ordinance setting forth the terms and conditions of the franchise, which franchise shall become effective upon satisfaction of any conditions precedent to effectiveness and once signed and accepted by the applicant. If the city denies a franchise application for an initial franchise or a request to modify or renew an existing franchise, the city will explain the reasons for the denial in writing, which may be in any form deemed appropriate by the city. Without limiting its authority to deny an application for an initial franchise or a request to modify or renew an existing application, the city specifically reserves the right to reject any application or request that is incomplete or fails to respond to a request for franchise proposals. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in any way to limit the discretion and legislative authority of the city council to make a decision to grant or deny a franchise or any request to modify or renew an existing franchise.

(Ord. No. 4224, § 2, 12‑13‑16)

Part III. Franchise Provisions


7.12.190 Construction provisions and technical standards.

The following construction provisions and technical standards apply to every franchise for cable service awarded in the city, except as may be specifically and subsequently modified by any awarded franchise. If the franchise is silent on the issue, the provisions set forth in this chapter shall apply.

A. Provision of quality cable service. In addition to satisfying any requirement established in a franchise, every cable operator shall ensure the policies and practices stated below are adhered to during the operation of any cable system within the city, unless any stated policy or practice is expressly prohibited by applicable law. The city retains the discretion to evaluate any franchise proposal, and impose construction and service availability requirements in a franchise in order to meet the needs of the community.

1. Availability of cable service to subscribers.

a. Cable plant facilities within 125 feet of structure to be served. A cable operator must extend cable service as a standard installation to any person or to any government building that requests cable service within the city or, if smaller, its franchise area within seven business days of the request, where service can be provided by activating or installing a drop within 125 feet of the structure to receive service.

b. Cable plant facilities beyond 125 feet of structure to be served. In cases where a potential subscriber’s structure is more than 125 feet from cable operator’s existing cable plant, an operator must still provide service as a nonstandard installation, so long as the potential subscriber agrees to bear a share of extension or installation costs equal to the cable operator’s incremental cost of that portion of the extension that exceeds the 125-foot limit required to be provided under subsection (A)(1)(a) of this section. A cable operator that requires a potential subscriber to bear a portion of installation or extension costs must prepare and provide the potential subscriber a written estimate of the extension costs within seven business days of a request for an installation. Any estimate shall indicate the portion of costs attributable to both the cable operator and the subscriber.

c. Other technologies. Notwithstanding subsection (A)(1)(a) and (b) of this section, if a cable operator’s cable system is not constructed in a manner that is technologically compatible with cable plant availability requirements set forth above, the parties shall negotiate provisions in the cable franchise that address service availability standards in a manner that is compatible with the cable operator’s technology and mirrors the obligations in subsection (A)(1)(a) and (b) of this section as closely as reasonably possible.

2. Extension of distribution line – Charges. Unless otherwise provided for in a franchise, cable service shall be available to all residents within the city, provided there are at least 35 dwelling units per street mile. In the event a request is made for service by a resident living in an area not meeting such criteria, the cable operator shall enter into a contractual agreement with the resident requesting service wherein the operator shall be reimbursed for its construction costs. Whenever any subsequent subscriber who did not contribute to the original cost of the extension connects to the extended distribution service line, that subscriber shall pay his or her pro rata share directly to the operator prior to obtaining cable service. The cable operator shall then promptly tender such payment to the original subscriber so long as the agreement remains in force. Reimbursement shall be calculated on a front foot basis as a percentage of the total cost of the service line extension. Reimbursements shall be made to the original subscriber for a period of up to five years or to the point when the original subscriber has recovered its incremental costs for construction of the distribution service line. The operator shall record its contractual agreement with the original subscriber in the King County recorder’s office before any subsequent subscriber may connect to the extended service line.

B. System maintenance and technical quality. A cable operator shall maintain all transmission equipment as necessary to carry a quality signal to subscribers from the access facilities provided under this chapter or any franchise.

C. Cable operator facilities in the community. Cable operator will properly maintain and promptly repair all cable operator-owned equipment (boxes, connectors, etc.) on private, public, or city right-of-way property to avoid the creation or maintenance of a public nuisance in violation of Chapter 8.01 KCC.

D. Emergency alert capability. A cable operator shall provide an emergency alert system (“EAS”) and comply with all applicable law and franchise provisions.

(Ord. No. 4224, § 2, 12‑13‑16)


7.12.200 Operator-provided public, education, and government access channels.

A cable operator must provide public, education, and government (PEG) access channels and capital support to meet community needs. The operator-provided PEG channels made available must be of comparable quality and functionality as the other channels the cable operator makes available to subscribers on the cable system. A cable operator shall maintain all interconnects, and return lines at the same or better level of technical quality and reliability required by a franchise and applicable law for other services, and interconnects.

(Ord. No. 4224, § 2, 12‑13‑16)


7.12.210 Customer service standards.

Reserved.

(Ord. No. 4224, § 2, 12‑13‑16)

Part IV. Enforcement and Penalties


7.12.220 Performance bonds/security fund.

A cable operator shall comply with any franchise regarding the agreed-upon performance bond or security fund. If a franchise is silent on the provision of a performance bond or security fund, the following shall apply:

A. Within 30 calendar days of the written notification to a cable operator by the city that an alleged violation exists, a cable operator shall deposit with an escrow agent approved by the city $50,000 or, in the sole discretion of the city, such lesser amount as the city deems reasonable to protect subscribers within its jurisdiction. Alternatively, at the cable operator’s discretion, the operator may provide to the city security, in the form of a performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or other security mutually agreeable to the city, in the same amount. The escrowed funds, performance bond, letter of credit, or other agreed security shall constitute the “security fund” for ensuring compliance with this chapter and the franchise for the benefit of the city. The security fund shall be maintained by a cable operator at the amount initially required, even if amounts are withdrawn pursuant to any provision of the franchise, until any claims related to the alleged franchise violation are paid in full.

B. The city may require the cable operator to increase the amount of the security fund if it finds that new risk factors exist that necessitate such an increase.

C. The security fund shall serve as security for the payment of any penalties, fees, charges, or credits as provided for herein or under the franchise and for the performance by a cable operator of all its obligations.

D. The rights reserved to the city with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by any applicable franchise agreement or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding, or exercise of a right with respect to same shall in any way affect, or diminish, any other right the city may otherwise have.

(Ord. No. 4224, § 2, 12‑13‑16)


7.12.230 Procedure for remedying violation.

A. Violations of this chapter, customer services standards, or franchise provisions – Unlawful. It is unlawful for a cable operator to violate any provision of this chapter, any of the city’s lawfully adopted customer service standards, or any negotiated franchise provision. If the city has reason to believe that a violation has occurred, the city may pursue the contractual remedies provided for in its franchise, including monetary damages; a civil infraction as provided for in this section; or any other remedy that may be provided for by applicable law.

B. Civil infractions – Kent municipal court. Any operator who violates subsection (A) of this section may be issued a civil infraction in the amount of $1,000, plus court costs and assessments, which infraction shall be filed in the Kent municipal court and processed in the same manner as other civil infractions and subject to the Infraction Rules for Courts of Limited Jurisdiction (IRLJ), and all local rules and policies as promulgated by the Kent municipal court shall govern the infraction proceedings and appeals. Each separate date, or portion thereof, during which any violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.

(Ord. No. 4224, § 2, 12‑13‑16)


7.12.240 Remedies cumulative.

All remedies provided for in this chapter, within any franchise, or under applicable law are cumulative unless otherwise expressly stated. The exercise of one remedy shall not foreclose use of another, nor shall the exercise of a remedy or the payment of penalties relieve a cable operator of its obligations to comply with its franchise. Remedies may be used singly or in combination, and the city may exercise any rights it has at law or equity. Recovery by the city of any amounts under insurance, a performance bond, a security fund, or letter of credit, or otherwise, does not limit a cable operator’s duty to indemnify the city in any way; nor shall such recovery relieve a cable operator of its obligations under a franchise, limit the amounts owed to the city, or in any respect prevent the city from exercising any other right or remedy it may have.

(Ord. No. 4224, § 2, 12‑13‑16)


Chapter 7.13 WATER SHORTAGE EMERGENCY REGULATIONS*

Sections:

7.13.010    Purpose.

7.13.020    Definitions.

7.13.030    Emergency – Ordinance.

7.13.040    Ordinance – Publication.

7.13.050    Water use – Limitations – Exceptions.

7.13.060    Penalties – Enforcement.

7.13.070    Emergency ordinance – Precedence.

*Cross reference(s) – Department of public works, ch. 2.28; water, ch. 7.02.

State law reference(s) – Water shortage, RCW 43.83B.400 et seq.; water use efficiency and conservation programs and practices, RCW 90.54.180.


7.13.010 Purpose.

The city council finds that from time to time, the availability of water within the city may be reduced due to lack of supply or lack of transmission capabilities. The city council further finds that in order to protect the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of the city and to guarantee the availability of water for human consumption, sanitation, or fire protection, restrictions on the use of water may, from time to time, be necessary. 

(Ord. No. 3550, § 2, 3-6-01)


7.13.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

1. Customer means any person who uses the water supply of the city of Kent.

2. Director means the director of the department of public works.

3. Drought means any period in which water within the city of Kent is in short supply due to low water levels within city wells or other areas from which the city draws its water.

4. Water or water supply means all water of the water utility or water supply system of the city of Kent, regardless of its source.

(Ord. No. 3550, § 2, 3-6-01)

Cross reference(s) – Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.01.030.


7.13.030 Emergency – Ordinance. 

Whenever it appears to the director of the department of public works that a drought condition either exists or is forecast to occur within the city of Kent or within portions thereof, the city council may pass an ordinance restricting or prohibiting the use of water. Unless otherwise set forth in the ordinance, the ordinance and the restrictions set forth therein shall expire twelve (12) months after the passage of the ordinance. An ordinance passed pursuant to this section may be amended or repealed during the period in which it is enacted as deemed necessary by the city council. 

(Ord. No. 3550, § 2, 3-6-01)


7.13.040 Ordinance – Publication.

The full text of an ordinance passed pursuant to this chapter shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation for a minimum of one (1) day. The publication required by this section shall satisfy the publication requirements of RCW 35A.12.160. 

(Ord. No. 3550, § 2, 3-6-01)


7.13.050 Water use – Limitations – Exceptions.

A. Subject to subsection (B) of this section, any ordinance passed pursuant to this chapter may limit or prohibit the following uses of water:

1. Irrigating or watering of landscaping, grass, plants, vegetables, vines, trees, shrubbery, gardens, ground cover, or any other similar vegetation; and/or 

2. Washing of “motor vehicles” or watergoing “vessels” as those terms are defined in RCW 46.04.320 and 46.04.670, and WAC 352-60-030, as those statutes and sections are now enacted or hereafter amended or recodified; and/or

3. Washing of sidewalks, porches, driveways, or other outdoor surfaces; and/or

4. The use of water for recreational purposes, such as running a sprinkler system or maintaining a pool used for swimming; and/or

5. Any other water use that may limit the availability of water for human consumption, sanitation, or fire protection.

B. Customers whose historic monthly average water use for the period from May 15th through August 31st exceeds one hundred thirty-three thousand six hundred ninety (133,690) cubic feet per month, or who operate a business in which the essential function of the business is the sale of plants, vegetables or other vegetation, hereinafter referred to as “large water users,” shall not, by operation of an ordinance passed pursuant to subsection (A) of this section, be completely prohibited from all use of water; provided, that the director may limit the number of days in which large water users use water that would normally be subject to a complete prohibition authorized by subsection (A) of this section. The days in which large water users are permitted to use water in a manner that would normally be subject to a complete prohibition as authorized by subsection (A) of this section shall be designated by the director. 

C. A customer that operates a properly licensed public motor vehicle washing facility, such as a car wash, shall not be subject to limitations on washing motor vehicles as set forth in subsection (A) of this section.

D. A customer that operates a properly licensed business, other than a car wash, in which the washing of motor vehicles is required to perform the essential functions of the business shall not be subject to the limitations on washing motor vehicles as set forth in subsection (A) of this section. This exception shall not apply to motor vehicle dealerships or other customers in the business of selling or renting motor vehicles, except to the extent that washing the vehicles is necessary for the repair of the vehicles. 

E. Recreational facilities in which the use of water is essential to the operation of the facility and which are open to the public shall not be subject to the limitations on the use of water for recreation as set forth in subsection (A) of this section.

F. The director may, for good cause, order that the limitations or prohibitions set forth in an ordinance passed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to certain categories of customers if it is shown that the application of such limitations or prohibitions will cause substantial economic harm to such customers or will be detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of such customers or the public.

(Ord. No. 3550, § 2, 3-6-01)


7.13.060 Penalties – Enforcement.

A. Unless otherwise stated in an ordinance passed pursuant to this chapter, the first violation of any ordinance passed pursuant to this chapter shall be a class 3 (fifty-dollar ($50)) civil infraction as proscribed by RCW 7.80.120, as now enacted or hereafter amended. Unless otherwise stated in an ordinance passed pursuant to this chapter, the second or subsequent violation of any ordinance passed pursuant to this chapter shall be a class 1 (two-hundred-fifty-dollar ($250)) civil infraction as proscribed by RCW 7.80.120, as now enacted or hereafter amended. Infractions shall be processed pursuant to the authority and provisions set forth in Chapter 7.80 RCW, as now enacted or hereafter amended, and the Infraction Rules for Courts of Limited Jurisdiction. 

B. Unless otherwise stated in an ordinance passed pursuant to this chapter, as an alternative to subsection (A) of this section, the third or subsequent violation of any ordinance passed pursuant to this chapter may be charged as a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than ninety (90) days, or a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or both such imprisonment and fine. 

C. For the purposes of subsection (A) of this section, and pursuant to RCW 7.80.040, as now enacted or hereafter amended, and the Infraction Rules for Courts of Limited Jurisdiction, the following persons shall be “enforcement officers” and “citing officers” authorized to enforce the provisions of an infraction which is in violation of an ordinance passed pursuant to this section and issue notices of infraction to:

1. Police officers of the city of Kent;

2. Fire officials of the city of Kent;

3. Code enforcement officers of the city of Kent;

4. The director of public works or his or her designee;

5. Any other person authorized by the mayor to enforce the provisions of the ordinance.

(Ord. No. 3550, § 2, 3-6-01)


7.13.070 Emergency ordinance – Precedence.

The provisions of KCC 7.13.050 and 7.13.060 may be modified or superseded by an ordinance passed pursuant to this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3550, § 2, 3-6-01)


Chapter 7.14 ILLICIT DISCHARGES

Sections:

7.14.010    Purpose.

7.14.020    Definitions.

7.14.030    Applicability.

7.14.040    Entry onto premises.

7.14.050    Prohibited discharges.

7.14.060    Allowable discharges.

7.14.070    Conditional discharges.

7.14.080    Illicit connections prohibited.

7.14.090    Suspension of discharge access to MS4.

7.14.100    Inspections.

7.14.110    Reinspections.

7.14.120    Monitoring of discharges.

7.14.130    Requirements to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by the use of BMPs.

7.14.140    Industrial or construction activity discharges.

7.14.150    Violations and enforcement – Penalties.

7.14.160    Joint and several responsibility and liability.


7.14.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to prevent pollutants and nonstormwater from entering the city of Kent municipal separate storm sewer system (the “MS4”) and waters of the state to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This chapter establishes the minimum methods required for controlling pollutants and preventing their entry into the MS4 and waters of the state to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this chapter are:

A. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 and waters of the state;

B. To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4 and waters of the state;

C. To establish inspection, surveillance, and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;

D. To mitigate impacts to water quality as a result of increased runoff due to urbanization, correct or mitigate existing water quality problems related to stormwater, and to help restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the city’s waters for the protection of beneficial uses, including salmonid habitat and aquifer recharge; and

E. To establish the reasonable use of best management practices (BMPs) to prevent pollutants and nonstormwater from entering the MS4 and waters of the state.

(Ord. No. 3916 § 3, 6-2-09; Ord. No. 4127, § 1, 11-4-14)


7.14.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following words, terms, and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless a different meaning is plainly required.

A. Best management practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to the MS4 or waters of the state. BMPs also include treatment practices, structural methods, and operating procedures and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. BMPs are determined by reference to standard industry practice or applicable state, county, and local government design and pollution prevention manuals.

B. Clean Water Act (CWA) means the federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.

C. Construction activity means land-disturbing operations including clearing, grading or excavation which disturbs the surface of the land. Such activities may include road construction, construction of residential houses, office buildings, or industrial buildings, and demolition activity.

D. Director means the city of Kent public works director, or his or her designee.

E. Groundwater means water in a saturated zone or stratum beneath the surface of the land or below a surface water body.

F. Hazardous material means any material; including any substance, waste, or combination thereof; which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics; may cause or significantly contribute to a substantial present or potential hazard to human, health, safety, property, or the environment; when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 

G. Hyperchlorinated means water that contains more than ten (10) mg/liter chlorine. Disinfection of water mains and appurtenances requires a chlorine residual of ten (10) mg/liter at the end of the disinfection period. 

H. Illicit connections means any conveyance that is connected to the MS4 or waters of the state without a permit, excluding roof drains and foundation drains. Examples include sanitary sewer connections, floor drains, channels, pipelines, conduits, inlets, or outlets. Illicit connections include, but are not limited to, any conveyances that allow any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water, to enter the MS4 or waters of the state; any connections from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether such drain or connection was previously allowed or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the MS4 or waters of the state that has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the city or another agency of government duly authorized to give such approvals. 

I. Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge, not expressly allowed by this code, to the MS4, waters of the state, or any other location within the city where the discharge has a reasonable likelihood of being washed into the MS4 or waters of the state.

J. Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14). 

K. Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) means a conveyance, or system of conveyances; including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, flow controls, treatment facilities, or storm drains:

1. Owned or operated by a state, city, town, county, district, port, or other public body created by or pursuant to state law having jurisdiction over disposal of wastes, stormwater, or other wastes, including special districts under state law such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or a designated and approved management agency under Section 208 of the CWA that discharges to waters of the state;

2. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;

3. That is not a combined sewer; and 

4. That is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (“POTW”) as defined at 40 CFR 122.2.

L. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) means the national program for issuing, modifying, revoking, reissuing, terminating, monitoring, and enforcing permits; and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements; under sections 307, 402, 318, and 405 of the federal CWA for the discharge of pollutants to surface waters of the state. These permits are referred to as NPDES permits, and in the state of Washington are administered by the Washington State Department of Ecology. 

M. Nonstormwater discharge means any discharge to the MS4 or waters of the state that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 

N. Owner/operator means any of the following: a person or entity with an ownership interest in the premises, a person or entity who occupies or has control over the premises, or a person or entity who participates in any activity on the premises that is regulated by this chapter.

O. Person means any individual, firm, business, association, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity, public or private, however organized. Because “person” shall include both human and nonhuman entities, any of the following pronouns may be used to describe a person: he, she, or it.

P. Person responsible for the violation means any of the following: a person who has titled ownership or legal control of the premises that is subject to the regulation; an occupant or other person in control of the premises that is subject to the regulation; a developer, builder, business operator, or owner who is developing, building, or operating a business on the premises that is subject to the regulation; or any person who created, caused, or has allowed the violation to occur on the premises.

Q. Pollutant means anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, and accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous materials and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 

R. Premises means any real property or interest in real property and any improvement upon real property. 

S. RCW means the state Revised Code of Washington. It is the compilation of all permanent state laws, as currently enacted or as subsequently amended or recodified.

T. Sanitary sewage means domestic and commercial wastewater including flushed toilet water, water from dishwashers, clothes washing machines, and any other used water that generally is disposed of down interior household drains.

U. Sanitary sewer system means a conveyance, or system of conveyances, that is designed to convey domestic and commercial wastewater.

V. Stormwater system means facilities through which stormwater is collected, conveyed, or treated, including but not limited to inlets, conveyance pipes, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, bioinfiltration facilities, drainage channels, and other drainage structures.

W. Stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.

X. Stormwater pollution prevention plan means a document that describes the BMPs and activities to be implemented by an owner/operator to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site, and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, the MS4, and/or waters of the state.

Y. Waters of the state means those waters as defined as “waters of the United States” in 40 CFR 122.2, within the geographic boundaries of the state of Washington, and those “waters of the state” as defined in Chapter 90.48 RCW, which includes lakes, rivers, ponds, streams, inland waters, groundwater, salt waters, and all other surface waters and water courses within the jurisdiction of the state of Washington.

Z. Water quality standards means Surface Water Quality Standards – Chapter 173-201A of the Washington Administrative Code (WAC), Ground Water Quality Standards – Chapter 173-200 WAC, and Sediment Management Standards – Chapter 173-204 WAC. 

AA. Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from any premises.

(Ord. No. 3916 § 3, 6-2-09; Ord. No. 4127, § 1, 11-4-14)


7.14.030 Applicability.

This chapter shall apply to all owners/operators as defined herein.

(Ord. No. 3916 § 3, 6-2-09; Ord. No. 4127, § 1, 11-4-14)


7.14.040 Entry onto premises.

With the consent of the owner/operator of any premises, through permissions granted in a stormwater facility maintenance covenant, or pursuant to a lawfully issued warrant, the director may enter any premises at any reasonable time to perform the duties imposed by this chapter. No consent, warrant, or permission is required to enter those areas open to the public generally or to which no reasonable expectation of privacy exists.

(Ord. No. 3916 § 3, 6-2-09; Ord. No. 4127, § 1, 11-4-14)


7.14.050 Prohibited discharges. 

A. No person shall discharge, cause an illicit discharge, or fail to utilize reasonable BMPs to protect against a potential or accidental discharge of nonstormwater or other material not expressly allowed by this code, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, to enter into the MS4 or waters of the state that may reasonably cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards as herein defined.

B. Prohibited discharges include but are not limited to the following list of common substances that are illicit discharges when discharged to the MS4 or waters of the state:

1. Solid waste, trash or debris;

2. Human and animal waste;

3. Petroleum products in quantities that produce a visible sheen, including but not limited to oil, gasoline, grease, fuel, oil, and heating oil;

4. Antifreeze and other automotive products;

5. Flammable or explosive materials;

6. Radioactive material; 

7. Construction materials;

8. Batteries;

9. Acids, alkalis, or bases;

10. Paints, stains, resins, lacquers, or varnishes;

11. Metals in excess of naturally occurring amounts, whether in liquid or solid form;

12. Solvents and degreasers;

13. Drain cleaners: commercial and household cleaning materials;

14. Pesticides, herbicides, or fertilizers;

15. Ink;

16. Steam-cleaning waste;

17. Laundry waste, soap, detergent, and ammonia;

18. Domestic or sanitary sewage;

19. Animal carcasses;

20. Food and food waste including fats, oils, and grease (FOG);

21. Recreational vehicle waste;

22. Swimming pool or spa filter backwash; 

23. Chlorine, bromine, or other disinfectants; 

24. Heated water;

25. Yard waste, dirt, sand, and gravel; 

26. Bark and other fibrous materials;

27. Collected lawn clippings, leaves, or branches;

28. Silt, sediment, concrete, cement, or gravel; 

29. Dyes, except as permitted by KCC 7.14.060;

30. Chemicals not normally found in uncontaminated water;

31. Chlorinated swimming pool or hot tub water except as permitted by KCC 7.14.070;

32. Discharges from potable water sources which may include but are not limited to: water line flushing, hyperchlorinated water line flushing, fire hydrant flushing, and pipeline hydrostatic test water, except as permitted by KCC 7.14.070;

33. Any other process-associated discharge except as otherwise allowed in this chapter; or

34. Any hazardous material or waste not listed above.

C. Any person who violates this section may be liable, jointly or severally, in accordance with KCC 7.14.150 and 7.14.160. The city may pursue enforcement action against any person responsible for the violation.

(Ord. No. 3916 § 3, 6-2-09; Ord. No. 4127, § 1, 11-4-14)


7.14.060 Allowable discharges.

The following types of discharges shall not be considered illicit discharges for the purposes of this chapter unless the director determines that the type of discharge, whether singly or in combination with others, is causing or is likely to cause a violation of water quality standards in the MS4 or waters of the state:

A. Diverted stream flows;

B. Rising groundwaters;

C. Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration as defined in 40 CFR 35.2005(20);

D. Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;

E. Foundation drains discharging uncontaminated groundwater or stormwater;

F. Air conditioning condensation;

G. Irrigation water from agricultural sources that is commingled with urban stormwater;

H. Springs;

I. Water from crawl space pumps discharging clean stormwater only;

J. Footing drains discharging uncontaminated groundwater or stormwater;

K. Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;

L. Nonstormwater discharges covered by an NPDES permit; or

M. Discharges from emergency firefighting activities.

(Ord. No. 3916 § 3, 6-2-09; Ord. No. 4127, § 1, 11-4-14)


7.14.070 Conditional discharges.

The following types of discharges shall not be considered illicit discharges for the purposes of this chapter if they meet the following stated conditions:

A. Potable water, including water from water line flushing, hyperchlorinated water line flushing, fire hydrant system flushing, and pipeline hydrostatic test water. Planned discharges shall be de-chlorinated to a concentration of 0.1 ppm or less, pH-adjusted, if necessary, and in volumes and velocities controlled to prevent resuspension of sediments in the MS4;

B. Lawn watering and other irrigation runoff shall be minimized;

C. Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges. These discharges shall be dechlorinated to a concentration of 0.1 ppm or less, pH-adjusted, if necessary, and in volumes and velocities controlled to prevent resuspension of sediments; or

D. Street and sidewalk wash water, water used to control dust, and routine external building wash down that is unheated and does not use any additives are permitted, if the amount of street wash and dust control water used is minimized.

(Ord. No. 3916 § 3, 6-2-09; Ord. No. 4127, § 1, 11-4-14)


7.14.080 Illicit connections prohibited.

A. No person shall connect a conveyance system that was not constructed or intended to convey precipitation runoff, or that has been converted from such usage to another use, to the MS4 or waters of the state. The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit connections to the MS4 is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 

B. Any person who violates this section may be liable, jointly or severally, in accordance with KCC 7.14.150 and 7.14.160. The city may pursue enforcement action against any person responsible for the violation.

(Ord. No. 3916 § 3, 6-2-09; Ord. No. 4127, § 1, 11-4-14)


7.14.090 Suspension of discharge access to MS4.

As permitted by applicable law, the city may suspend MS4 access to an owner/operator when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that is or would be prohibited under this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3916 § 3, 6-2-09; Ord. No. 4127, § 1, 11-4-14)


7.14.100 Inspections. 

A. The director may establish inspection programs to ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter and to accomplish its purposes. Inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis including, but not limited to, routine inspections, random inspections, or inspections based upon complaints received or concerns of possible code violations. Additionally, inspections may be conducted of businesses or industries with suspicious discharges, a high volume of discharge, or pollutants that appear to be present in the discharge. 

B. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, reviewing maintenance and repair records, sampling discharges, and evaluating the condition of the premises’ stormwater system and BMPs.

(Ord. No. 3916 § 3, 6-2-09; Ord. No. 4127, § 1, 11-4-14)


7.14.110 Reinspections.

Should a city inspection discover a violation of this chapter or other applicable federal, state, or local code provision, it shall be the duty of the owner/operator to notify the director that any noted violations have been corrected, and to request a reinspection. It shall be the duty of the owner/operator to provide safe access to and a means for inspection of any corrective work.

(Ord. No. 3916 § 3, 6-2-09; Ord. No. 4127, § 1, 11-4-14)


7.14.120 Monitoring of discharges.

The city may conduct monitoring and/or sampling of stormwater discharge from any premises, and may recover the costs of so doing from the owner/operator of the premises.

(Ord. No. 3916 § 3, 6-2-09; Ord. No. 4127, § 1, 11-4-14)


7.14.130 Requirements to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by the use of BMPs.

All owners/operators shall provide, at owner/operator expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the MS4 or waters of the state through the use of structural, nonstructural, and operational BMPs. Further, any owner/operator responsible for premises that are, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge may be required to implement, at owner/operator expense, additional structural, nonstructural, and operational BMPs to prevent illicit discharges to the MS4 or waters of the state. 

(Ord. No. 3916 § 3, 6-2-09; Ord. No. 4127, § 1, 11-4-14)


7.14.140 Industrial or construction activity discharges.

Any owner/operator subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of that permit.

(Ord. No. 3916 § 3, 6-2-09; Ord. No. 4127, § 1, 11-4-14)


7.14.150 Violations and enforcement – Penalties.

Any violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced as provided for in this section. Each separate date, or portion thereof, during which any violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.

A. Recovery of costs incurred by the city. In addition to any penalty provided for in subsections (B) through (D) of this section, a person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for all costs incurred by the city as a result of the violation. The city will issue an invoice to the person responsible for the violation advising him or her of the amount of costs incurred by the city as a result of the violation. The person to whom the invoice was directed must respond within 14 calendar days of the date the invoice is served upon that person by: (1) paying the invoice, (2) requesting a hearing before the city’s hearing examiner to mitigate the amount of the invoice, or (3) requesting a hearing before the city’s hearing examiner to contest the amount of the invoice. Failure to timely respond shall result in the invoice being deemed valid and the city may seek collection of the invoice through the process provided for in Chapter 3.10 KCC, including the use of a collection agency. Payment of any invoice issued shall not alleviate the person responsible for the violation from complying with this chapter.

1. Service of notice. Service of an invoice issued under this subsection (A) shall occur and is deemed complete in the same manner and under the same provisions as provided for in KCC 1.04.060.

2. Process to mitigate or contest invoice. The process through which a person may request a hearing to contest or mitigate an invoice issued to him or her as a person responsible for the violation is the same as that provided for notices of violation under KCC 1.04.120 through 1.04.190. The hearing examiner’s decision as to any invoice issued under this subsection (A) is final and may not be further appealed.

3. Failure to pay – Civil infraction. The failure to timely pay an invoice issued under this subsection (A), or any mitigated invoice amount set by the hearing examiner, is a separate violation that may be enforced through the issuance of a civil infraction pursuant to subsection (B) of this section.

B. Civil infraction. A person who violates any provision of this chapter may be issued a class 1 civil infraction as set forth in RCW 7.80.120, as currently enacted or hereafter amended. An infraction issued pursuant to this section shall be filed in the Kent municipal court and processed in the same manner as other infractions filed in the Kent municipal court. In addition, a civil code enforcement action may be instituted in accordance with subsection (C) of this section to effectuate any abatement or corrective action required by the person as a result of the violation.

C. Civil code enforcement. In addition to, or as an alternative to, any other penalty provided for in this chapter or by law, a civil code enforcement action may be instituted under the provisions provided for in Chapter 1.04 KCC to effectuate any abatement or corrective action required as a result of a violation of this chapter, including the issuance of a stop use or stop work order under KCC 1.04.090 through 1.04.110. The process through which the person responsible for the violation may contest a stop use or stop work order is the same as that provided for notices of violation under KCC 1.04.120 through 1.04.190. Failure to timely abate the violation or take the required corrective action will result in the issuance of a fine in accordance with KCC 1.04.080 and 1.04.200, which fine will be separate and apart from any fine that may have been issued under subsection (B) of this section.

D. Criminal offense. Except as may otherwise be provided, a person who:

1. Negligently violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by up to the maximum penalty established in RCW 9A.20.021(3) as now enacted or hereafter amended; or who

2. Knowingly violates a provision of this chapter, or commits a repeated violation of this chapter, is guilty of a gross misdemeanor, punishable by up to the maximum penalty established in RCW 9A.20.021(2), as now enacted or hereafter amended.

a. For purposes of this section repeated violation means, as evidenced by either a prior committed finding by the Kent municipal court of an infraction issued under this chapter, or a committed finding by the hearing examiner of a notice of violation issued under Chapter 1.04 KCC, or a committed finding by operation of law under KCC 1.04.130, that a violation of this chapter has occurred on the same property or that a person responsible for the violation has committed a violation of this chapter elsewhere within the city of Kent. To constitute a “repeat violation,” the violation need not be the same violation as the prior violation.

3. If a person is found guilty of a criminal offense as provided for in this subsection (D), or pleads guilty to another offense on recommendation of the prosecutor, the court shall order the defendant pay restitution to the city of Kent, or any other victim of the offense, for the total suffered loss or damage by reason of the commission of the crime.

(Ord. No. 3916 § 3, 6-2-09; Ord. No. 4127, § 1, 11-4-14; Ord. No. 4215, § 1, 10-18-16)


7.14.160 Joint and several responsibility and liability.

Responsibility for violations of this chapter is joint and several, and the city is not prohibited from taking action against a party where other persons may also be potentially responsible for a violation, nor is the city required to take action against all persons potentially responsible for a violation.

(Ord. No. 4127, § 1, 11-4-14)

 


Title 8 HEALTH AND SANITATION Revised 8/19 Revised 9/19

Chapters:

8.01    Public Nuisances

8.02    Single-Use Plastic and Carryout Bags Revised 9/19

8.03    Animal Control

8.04    Litter Control

8.05    Noise Control Revised 8/19

8.06    Rodent Control

8.07    Weeds and Vegetation

8.08    Junk Vehicles

8.09    Camping


Chapter 8.01 PUBLIC NUISANCES*

Sections:

8.01.010    Definitions.

8.01.020    Prohibited conduct.

8.01.030    Types of public nuisances.

8.01.035    Joint and several liability.

8.01.037    Notification to nonresident owner of criminal conduct.

8.01.040    Authorized act not a public nuisance.

8.01.050    Violation – Penalty.

*Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3111, § 4, adopted May 18, 1993, repealed former ch. 8.01 in its entirety, which pertained to similar subject matter. Section 5 of said Ord. No. 3111 added a new ch. 8.01 to read as herein set out.

Cross reference(s) – Environmental policy, ch. 11.03; buildings, ch. 14.01; dangerous buildings, § 14.01.080; performance standards, § 15.08.050.

State law reference(s) – Nuisances, RCW 9.66.010 et seq.; public health authority, RCW 35A.70.070; abandoned or unclaimed property, RCW 63.32.010 et seq.; disposition of certain unclaimed property, RCW 63.21.010 et seq.; local health departments, RCW 70.05.010 et seq.; mosquito control, RCW 70.22.010 et seq.


8.01.010 Definitions.

The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

A. Abate means to repair, replace, remove, destroy, or otherwise remedy a condition which constitutes violation of this chapter by such means and in such a manner and to such an extent as the applicable department director determines is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety, and welfare of the community.

B. Building materials means and includes lumber, plumbing materials, wallboard, sheet metal, plaster, brick, cement, asphalt, concrete block, roofing material, cans of paint, and similar materials.

C. Chronic criminal nuisance means any premises at which three (3) or more instances of criminal conduct occurs within a one (1) year period when such criminal conduct is committed by the person who either owns, occupies, leases, or rents the premises, or who is an invitee, licensee, or guest of the person who owns, occupies, leases, or rents the premises.

D. Criminal conduct shall mean any criminal act that is defined by the city of Kent, the state of Washington, or the United States as a misdemeanor, gross misdemeanor, felony, or crime, or which is otherwise punishable by a sentence in a correctional facility, jail, or prison. Gang or gang-related activity, as those terms are defined by RCW 59.18.030, shall also be considered criminal conduct. The term shall also include the seizure and/or forfeiture of real or personal property pursuant to RCW 69.50.505 or a similar federal statute. Criminal conduct engaged in by any person who either owns, occupies, leases, or rents the premises, or who is an invitee, licensee, or guest of the person who owns, occupies, leases, or rents the premises, shall be deemed to have occurred on the premises even if such event does not conclude on the premises; provided, that such criminal event originates or starts on the premises and is concluded within one hundred (100) feet of the premises.

1. Criminal conduct excluded from definition. For the purposes of this chapter, criminal conduct shall not include conduct wherein:

a. The person who owns, occupies, leases, or rents the premises, or who is an invitee, licensee, or guest of the person who owns, occupies, leases, or rents the premises was the victim of the criminal conduct; or

b. The person who owns, occupies, leases, or rents the premises, or who is an invitee, licensee, or guest of the person who owns, occupies, leases, or rents the premises contacted the police to report the criminal conduct.

2. Establishing existence of criminal conduct. In establishing the existence of criminal conduct on the premises, the city shall have the burden of establishing an instance of criminal conduct by a preponderance of the evidence. The entry of a certified order of judgment and sentence, or other certified court document that establishes a conviction or the entry of a deferred prosecution or sentence, or any certified document maintained by the court that contains an entry of a finding of guilt, an admission to the commission of the criminal conduct, an admission to the facts that would establish the commission of the criminal conduct, or an acknowledgment that there are sufficient facts to prove the instance of criminal conduct, shall be sufficient proof of the occurrence of the criminal conduct; provided, that an absence of such court document(s) shall not prohibit the city from establishing that an instance of criminal conduct occurred. Police reports and other documentary evidence shall be admissible as evidence of criminal conduct; provided, that such reports are certified pursuant to RCW 9A.72.085.

E. Director means the director of the department in charge of code enforcement or his or her designee or any designated alternate who is empowered by ordinance or by the mayor to enforce this chapter including assigned code enforcement officials.

F. Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, picture, graphics, or design that is sprayed, painted, posted, pasted, drawn, or otherwise affixed to or upon any surface of public or private property. Signs regulated by Chapter 15.06 KCC shall not constitute graffiti under this chapter.

G. Owner means one (1) or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested all or any part of the legal title to the premises, or all or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the premises, including any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety of the whole or a part of such premises.

H. Person means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or any other entity, public or private.

I. Person responsible for the violation has the same meaning as that provided for in KCC 1.04.020(K), and for the purposes of this chapter, specifically includes any person in actual or constructive possession of the premises, including but not limited to an owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant of the premises.

J. Premises means any building, lot, parcel, real estate, or land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks, public rights-of-way, and parking strips and any lake, river, stream, drainage way, or wetland.

(Ord. No. 3111, § 5, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 4088, § 1, 9-17-13)


8.01.020 Prohibited conduct.

It is a violation of this chapter for any person to permit, create, maintain, or allow, upon any premises, any of the acts or things declared in KCC 8.01.030 to be a public nuisance.

(Ord. No. 3111, § 5, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 4088, § 1, 9-17-13)


8.01.030 Types of public nuisances.

Each of the following conditions, unless otherwise permitted by law, is declared to constitute a public nuisance, subjecting the person responsible for the violation to the penalties provided for in KCC 8.01.050:

1. The existence of any trash, dirt, filth, the carcass of any animal, manure or rubbish, accumulation of yard trimmings, excluding properly maintained yard compost, or other matter which is offensive to a reasonable person; except for such yard debris that is properly contained and concealed as not to affect the health, safety, or depreciation of adjoining property for the purpose of composting.

2. Erecting, maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving, or permitting to be or remain in or upon any premises, which may be viewed or smelled from without the premises, or in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park, parkway, or other public or private place in the city, any one (1) or more of the following disorderly, disturbing, unsanitary, fly-producing, rat-harboring, disease-causing places, conditions, or things:

a. Any putrid, unhealthy, or unwholesome bones, meat, hides, skins, the whole or any part of any dead animal, fish, or fowl, or waste parts of fish, vegetable, or animal matter in any quantity; but nothing herein shall prevent the temporary retention of waste in approved covered receptacles; or

b. Any privies, vaults, cesspools, open containers of stagnant water, sumps, pits, or like places which are not securely protected from flies and rats, or which are malodorous; or

c. An accumulation of material including but not limited to bottles, cans, glass, plastic, ashes, scrap metal, wire bric-a-brac, broken stone or cement, broken crockery, broken glass, broken plaster, litter, rags, empty barrels, boxes, crates, packing cases, mattresses, bedding, packing hay, straw, or other packing material or building materials on any premises which is not properly stored or neatly piled or is offensive to a reasonable person or in which flies or rats may breed or multiply; or

d. Accumulation of any litter, garbage, trash, refuse, and/or rubbish; or

e. The keeping, using, or maintaining of any pen, stable, lot, place, or premises in which any hog, cattle, or fowl may be confined or kept in such a manner as to be nauseous, foul, or offensive.

3. The existence of any fence or other structure on private property abutting or fronting upon any public street, sidewalk, or place which is in a sagging, leaning, fallen, decayed, or other dilapidated or unsafe condition.

4. The existence of wrecked or disassembled trailers, house trailers, boats, tractors, or other vehicle, appliance, or machinery of any kind, or any major parts thereof.

5. The existence on any premises of any abandoned or unused well, pit, shaft, cistern, or storage tank without first demolishing or removing from the premises such storage tank, or securely closing and barring any entrance or trapdoor thereto or without filling any well, pit, shaft, or cistern or capping the same with sufficient security to prevent access thereto.

6. The existence in a place accessible to children of any attractive nuisance dangerous to children, including but not limited to any abandoned, broken, or neglected equipment, machinery, refrigerator, freezer, or other large appliance.

7. Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, and soot, or cinders, in unreasonable quantities.

8. All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks within a reasonable time after the snow and ice have ceased to be deposited thereon.

9. All trees, hedges, billboards, fences, or other obstructions which prevent persons from having a clear view of traffic approaching an intersection from cross streets in sufficient time to bring a motor vehicle driven at a legal speed to a full stop before the intersection is reached.

10. Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and the free use of the streets or sidewalks. This subsection shall not apply to events, programs, or parades authorized by the city council.

11. Any poisonous or harmful substance which is reasonably accessible to persons or to animals.

12. The keeping or harboring of any animal which by frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking, or the making of other noises, or the keeping or harboring of any fowl which by frequent habitual crowing or the making of other noises shall annoy or disturb a neighborhood or any considerable number of persons.

13. Every building or unit within a building used for the purpose of unlawfully manufacturing, delivering, selling, storing, or giving away any controlled substance as defined in Chapter 69.50 RCW, legend drug as defined in Chapter 69.41 RCW, or imitation controlled substance as defined in Chapter 69.52 RCW, and every building or unit within a building wherein or upon which such acts take place.

14. Soils contaminated by dangerous waste, hazardous substances, or hazardous wastes as those terms are defined in RCW 70.105.010.

15. The existence of graffiti on public property or on private property where the graffiti is visible from any vantage point located on public property, a railway, or any property open for business to the public.

16. Maintaining, conducting, promoting, facilitating, permitting, or allowing a chronic criminal nuisance.

(Ord. No. 3111, § 5, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 3849, § 1, 8‑7-07; Ord. No. 4088, § 1, 9-17-13)


8.01.035 Joint and several liability.

A public nuisance is actionable against the person responsible for the violation, as that term is defined in KCC 8.01.010(I), in accordance with KCC 8.01.050. Responsibility for a public nuisance under this chapter is joint and several, and the city is not prohibited from taking action against a party where other persons may also be potentially responsible for a violation, nor is the city required to take action against all persons potentially responsible for a violation.

(Ord. No. 4088, § 1, 9-17-13)


8.01.037 Notification to nonresident owner of criminal conduct.

If criminal conduct occurs on the premises that may create a chronic criminal nuisance, and the owner of the premises does not reasonably appear to the city to reside therein, the police department may cause notice to be sent to the premises’ owner advising the owner of the occurrence of criminal conduct. Notice sent to the owner should set forth the date of the occurrence, the location of the occurrence, the nature of the occurrence, and the name of the person who engaged in the occurrence. Notice may be sent whenever the police department has reasonable grounds to believe that criminal conduct has occurred on the premises. Notice may be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the last known address of the owner.

(Ord. No. 4088, § 1, 9-17-13)


8.01.040 Authorized act not a public nuisance.

No act which is done or maintained under the express authority of a statute or ordinance can be deemed a public nuisance.

(Ord. No. 3111, § 5, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 4088, § 1, 9-17-13)


8.01.050 Violation – Penalty.

A. Civil code enforcement action. Any violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a civil violation under Chapter 1.04 KCC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required as provided therein. For a violation involving a chronic criminal nuisance, a correction letter need not be issued under KCC 1.04.070 prior to the issuance of a notice of violation and the immediate assessment of a civil penalty under KCC 1.04.080.

B. Criminal offense. In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of the Kent City Code may be charged criminally, pursuant to KCC 1.04.030(B).

C. Civil infraction. In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of this chapter may be issued a class 1 civil infraction pursuant to RCW 7.80.120, as currently enacted or hereafter amended, and KCC 1.04.225.

D. Abatement proceedings. As an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter, abatement proceedings may be instituted under RCW Title 7.

E. Repeat violation or failure to abate – Criminal misdemeanor charge – Chronic criminal nuisance. For the purpose of filing criminal charges under KCC 1.04.220 for a subsequent violation after a prior violation is deemed committed, the subsequent violation for a chronic criminal nuisance must occur within 180 days from the date the prior violation was deemed committed. For a chronic criminal nuisance, a subsequent violation is a single occurrence of criminal conduct.

(Ord. No. 3111, § 5, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 4088, § 1, 9-17-13; Ord. No. 4282, § 3, 7-3-18)


Chapter 8.02 SINGLE-USE PLASTIC AND CARRYOUT BAGS Revised 9/19

Sections:

8.02.010    Definitions. Revised 9/19

8.02.020    Distribution of carryout bags. Revised 9/19

8.02.030    Exemptions. Revised 9/19

8.02.040    Violations. Revised 9/19


8.02.010 Definitions. Revised 9/19

A. “Carryout bag” means any bag that is provided by a retail establishment at home delivery, the check stand, cash register, point of sale, or other point of departure to a customer for use to transport or carry away purchases. Carryout bags do not include:

1. Bags used by consumers inside stores to:

a. Package bulk items, such as fruit, vegetables, nuts, grains, candy, greeting cards, or small hardware items such as nails, bolts, or screws;

b. Contain or wrap items where dampness or sanitation might be a problem including, but not limited to:

i. Frozen foods;

ii. Meat;

iii. Fish;

iv. Flowers; and

v. Potted plants;

c. Contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods;

d. Contain prescription drugs; or

e. Protect a purchased item from damaging or contaminating other purchased items when placed in a recycled content paper carryout bag or reusable carryout bag; or

f. Newspaper bags, door hanger bags, laundry/dry cleaning bags, or bags sold in packages containing multiple bags for uses such as food storage, garbage, or pet waste.

B. “Recycled content paper carryout bag” means a paper carryout bag provided by a store to a customer at the point-of-sale that meets all of the following requirements:

1. Has a material weight of larger than eight pounds and contains an average of 40 percent postconsumer recycled materials;

2. Is accepted for recycling in curbside programs in a majority of households that have access to curbside recycling programs in the city;

3. Is capable of composting in a commercial composting facility; and

4. Is clearly labeled with the minimum percentage of postconsumer content.

C. “Retail establishment” means any person, corporation, partnership, business, facility, vendor, organization, or individual that sells or provides food, merchandise, goods, or materials directly to a customer including home delivery, temporary stores, or vendors at farmers markets, street fairs, and festivals.

D. “Reusable carryout bag” means a bag made of cloth or other durable material with handles that is specifically designed and manufactured for long term multiple reuse and meets the following requirements:

1. Has a minimum lifetime of 125 uses, which for purposes of this subsection, means the capacity of carrying a minimum of 22 pounds 125 times over a distance of at least 175 feet;

2. Is machine washable or made from a durable material that may be cleaned or disinfected; and

3. If made of film plastic:

a. Be made from a minimum of 40 percent postconsumer recycled material;

b. Display the minimum percentage of postconsumer content in print on the exterior of the plastic bag;

c. Have a minimum thickness of no less than 2.25 mils; and

d. Display wording that the bag is reusable.

E. “Pass-through charge” means a charge collected by retailers from their customers when providing recycled content paper carryout bags and reusable carryout bags made of film plastic, and retained by retailers to offset the cost of bags and other costs related to the pass-through charge.

F. “Single-use plastic carryout bag” means any bag that is made from plastic that is less than 2.25 mils thick and is designed and suitable only to be used once and disposed.

(Ord. No. 4331, § 1, 8-20-19)


8.02.020 Distribution of carryout bags. Revised 9/19

Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, effective March 1, 2020, all retail establishments within the city are subject to the following requirements:

A. Retail establishments shall not provide a single-use plastic carryout bag to any customer.

B. No retail establishment shall distribute a single-use plastic carryout bag at any city facility, city-managed concession, city-sponsored event, or city-permitted event.

C. Retail establishments shall not provide to any customer at the point-of-sale a paper bag or reusable carryout bag made of film plastic that does not meet recycled content requirements.

D. A retail establishment must collect a pass-through charge of eight cents for every recycled content paper carryout bag with a manufacturer’s stated capacity of one-eighth barrel (882 cubic inches) or greater or reusable carryout bag made of film plastic it provides. A retail establishment may make reusable carryout bags available to customers through sale.

E. A retail establishment must keep all revenue from pass-through charges. A retail establishment must show all pass-through charges on any receipts provided to customers.

(Ord. No. 4331, § 1, 8-20-19)


8.02.030 Exemptions. Revised 9/19

A. No retail establishment may collect a pass-through charge from anyone using a voucher or electronic benefits card issued under food assistance programs including, but not limited to, Women Infants and Children (WIC); Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF); Federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), also known as Basic Food; and the Washington State Food Assistance Program (FAP).

B. Food banks and other food assistance programs are exempt from the requirements for this chapter but are encouraged to take actions to reduce the use of single-use plastic carryout bags.

C. The director may exempt a retail establishment from the requirements of this chapter for up to a one-year period, upon a request by the retail establishment showing that the conditions of this chapter would cause undue hardship. An “undue hardship” shall only be found in:

1. Circumstances or situations unique to the particular retail establishment, such that there are no reasonable alternatives to single-use plastic carryout bags or a pass-through charge cannot be collected; or

2. Circumstances or situations unique to the retail establishment, such that compliance with the requirements of this chapter would deprive a person of a legally protected right.

(Ord. No. 4331, § 1, 8-20-19)


8.02.040 Violations. Revised 9/19

A. Civil infraction. A retail establishment that violates any provision of this chapter may be issued a class 1 civil infraction as set forth in RCW 7.80.120, as currently enacted or hereafter amended. An infraction issued pursuant to this section shall be filed in the Kent municipal court and processed in the same manner as other infractions filed in the Kent municipal court.

B. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any retail establishment to penalize, discipline, or discriminate against any employee for performing any duty necessary to comply with this chapter.

(Ord. No. 4331, § 1, 8-20-19)


Chapter 8.03 ANIMAL CONTROL*

Sections:

8.03.010    Animal control authority.

8.03.020    King County Code – Chapters adopted by reference.

8.03.030    Definitions.

8.03.040    Dogs – Leash required.

8.03.050    Animal waste – Removal required.

8.03.060    Compliance with local zoning and health regulations.

8.03.070    Animal nuisances defined.

8.03.080    Violations and enforcement – Penalties.

*Cross reference(s) – Animals in parks and recreation areas, § 4.01.030; environmental policy, ch. 11.03; keeping of animals, § 15.08.070.

State law reference(s) – Trespass of animals, RCW 16.04.005 et seq.; dangerous dogs, RCW 16.08.010 et seq.


8.03.010 Animal control authority.

The city of Kent has contracted with King County and its animal control section, division of general services, to provide animal control, sheltering, and licensing services for the city of Kent. That contract does not divest the city of its authority to independently enforce its code. As such, the provisions of this chapter may be enforced by law enforcement officers or by King County animal control officers, both of whom are hereby authorized to issue and file notices of infraction with the Kent municipal court as provided for in KCC 8.03.080. Additionally, for those violations of the King County Code that are adopted by reference for application and enforcement within the city of Kent, King County animal control officers may enforce those provisions in accordance with the King County Code. A copy of the Interlocal Agreement between the city of Kent and King County for animal control services is available for public examination in the city clerk’s office.

(Ord. No. 4162, § 1, 9-1-15)


8.03.020 King County Code – Chapters adopted by reference.

A. Chapters adopted. The following chapters of the King County Code, as currently enacted or hereafter amended or recodified, are adopted by reference for enforcement and application within the city of Kent and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

1. King County Code, Chapter 11.04, entitled “Animal Care and Control Regulations,” with the following exceptions:

a. All references made in King County Code Chapter 11.04 to Title 21A of the King County Code, which establishes King County’s zoning provisions and limits the number of animals that may be kept in a dwelling unit without the application of certain licensing requirements, shall be replaced with a reference to KCC 15.08.070.

b. King County Code Section 11.04.010.B shall be read to provide that if there is a conflict between a provision of Chapter 11.04 of the King County Code and a provision of the Kent City Code, the provision of the Kent City Code shall control.

c. King County Code Section 11.04.240 regarding police department dogs is not adopted because the city of Kent has adopted a similar provision at KCC 9.02.280.

d. King County Code Section 11.04.510 shall be read to provide that no person within the city of Kent shall publish or advertise to King County residents the availability of any unaltered cat or dog unless the publication or advertisement includes the unaltered animal’s license number; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit licensed breeders from advertising in national publications for sale of a planned litter or litters.

2. King County Code, Chapter 11.12, entitled “Rabies Control”;

3. King County Code, Chapter 11.20, entitled “Disposition of Fowl and Rabbits”;

4. King County Code, Chapter 11.24, entitled “Stock Restricted Area”;

5. King County Code, Chapter 11.28, entitled “Exotic Animals”;

6. King County Code, Chapter 11.32, entitled “Guard Dogs.”

B. Agency references. Unless the context requires otherwise, references to “King County,” “county,” and “unincorporated King County” in the King County provisions adopted by reference through subsection (A) of this section shall be interpreted to mean the city of Kent.

C. King County Code – Available for inspection. In the city clerk’s office, the city shall maintain for review by the general public one copy of the King County Code provisions adopted by reference in this chapter. The King County Code is also available online through King County’s website at: www.kingcounty.gov.

(Ord. No. 3979, § 1, 10-19-10; Ord. No. 4162, § 1, 9-1-15. Formerly 8.03.005)


8.03.030 Definitions.

The following words, terms, and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless a different meaning is plainly required. For those King County Code provisions adopted through KCC 8.03.020(A), the words, terms, and phrases used in those King County Code provisions shall have the meanings ascribed to them by the King County Code.

A. Domesticated fowl means any duck, goose, swan, chicken, or other fowl of similar size and character.

B. Large domesticated animal means any horse, mule, ass, bovine animal, lamb, goat, sheep, or other animal of similar size and character; provided, it shall not mean pigs or swine of any kind.

C. Owner means any person having an interest in or right of possession to an animal. Owner also means any person having control, custody, or possession of any animal, or by reason of the animal being seen residing consistently at a location to an extent such that the person could be presumed to be the owner.

D. Person means any individual, firm, business, association, partnership, corporation or other legal entity, public or private, however organized. Because person shall include both human and non-human entities, any of the following pronouns may be used to describe a person: he, she, or it.

E. Person responsible for the violation means any of the following: a person who has titled ownership or legal control of the property or structure that is subject to the regulation; an occupant or other person in control of the property or structure that is subject to the regulation; a developer, builder, business operator, or owner who is developing, building, or operating a business on the property or in a structure that is subject to the regulation; or any person who created, caused, or has allowed the violation to occur.

F. Small domesticated animal means any dog, cat, rabbit, or other animal of similar size and character. Included within this definition is a type of swine commonly known as Vietnamese, Chinese, or Asian potbelly pigs (Sus scrofa bittatus).

G. Under control means a dog who is either under competent voice control or competent signal control, or both, so as to be restrained from approaching any bystander or other animal and from causing or being the cause of physical property damage when off a leash or off the premises of the owner. Evidence that a bystander or other animal was approached by the dog, or evidence that the dog caused physical property damage, is prima facie evidence that the dog was not under control.

(Ord. No. 2316, § 2; Ord. No. 2787, § 2(9.16.08), 6-21-88; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 2-15-94; Ord. No. 3218, § 1, 4-4-95; Ord. No. 3429, § 1, 12-8-98; Ord. No. 3837, § 1, 4-17-07; Ord. No. 3844, § 1, 6‑19-07; Ord. No. 3979, § 1, 10-19-10; Ord. No. 4162, § 1, 9-1-15. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.16.08)


8.03.040 Dogs – Leash required.

A. Leash required. It is unlawful for the owner of any dog to cause, permit, or allow such dog to roam, run, stray, or to be away from the premises of such owner and to be on any public place, or on any public property, or on the private property of another, unless such dog, while away from the premises of the owner, is controlled by a leash, cord, or chain held or otherwise secured by the owner and of a length sufficient to restrain the dog from approaching any bystander or other animal, or from causing or being the cause of physical property damage when off the premises of the owner. A leash of eight feet in length or smaller is presumed to be a leash of sufficient length for purposes of this section. A violation of this section may be enforced as provided for in KCC 8.03.080.

B. Exceptions. A leash is not required if the dog is:

1. Within an area of a park expressly designated as an off-leash area; or

2. Upon the premises of another with that owner or occupant’s permission and the dog is secured or otherwise under control in a manner that prevents it from roaming, running, or straying away from the premises; or

3. Under control and engaged in lawful obedience training, lawful hunting, lawful competition sanctioned by a nationally recognized body or a local chapter thereof, or lawful training in preparation for such hunting or competition; or

4. Contained within a vehicle under circumstances that do not amount to a violation of another law; or

5. A working dog engaged in the herding of livestock or in sanctioned search and rescue activities; or

6. A law enforcement canine in the performance of the canine’s duty or training.

C. A violation of this section may be enforced as provided for in KCC 8.03.080. Alternatively, a dog running at large within the city of Kent is a public nuisance under the King County Code provisions adopted through KCC 8.03.020(A) and may be enforced by King County animal control through the code enforcement provisions provided for in the King County Code.

D. Impound and redemption. Any dog found roaming, running, straying, or being away from such premises and not on a leash as herein provided may be impounded subject to redemption in the manner provided for by King County animal control.

(Ord. No. 4162, § 1, 9-1-15)


8.03.050 Animal waste – Removal required.

It is unlawful for any person to fail to immediately remove fecal matter deposited by a dog or other animal in his or her possession on any public property, including, without limitation, a park, sidewalk, trail, street, parking lot, waterway, lake, pond, or landscaping, or on any private property that does not belong to the animal’s owner, custodian, or other person having possession of the animal. A violation of this section may be enforced as provided for in KCC 8.03.080.

(Ord. No. 4162, § 1, 9-1-15)


8.03.060 Compliance with local zoning and health regulations.

A. Zoning compliance. The applicant for an original animal shelter, kennel, grooming parlor, cattery, hobby kennel, or pet shop license shall, prior to issuance of such license, present to the animal control authority any required zoning permit from the city planning department.

B. Health inspection. Before an animal shelter, kennel, grooming parlor, cattery, hobby kennel, or pet shop license may be issued by the animal control authority, a certificate of inspection from the Seattle-King County health department or King County animal control division must be issued showing that the animal shelter, kennel, grooming parlor, cattery, hobby kennel, or pet shop is in compliance with hygienic standards of this chapter or other applicable ordinances or regulations.

(Ord. No. 2316, § 4B; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 2-15-94; Ord. No. 4162, § 1, 9-1-15. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.16.20. Formerly 8.03.090)


8.03.070 Animal nuisances defined.

Each of the following conditions, unless otherwise permitted by law, is declared to constitute a public nuisance, subjecting the person responsible for the violation to the penalties provided for in KCC 8.03.080:

1. Maintaining large domesticated animals on lots of less than 20,000 square feet or in violation of KCC 15.08.070.

2. Maintaining more than three small domesticated animals per business establishment or dwelling unit on lots of less than 20,000 square feet, or maintaining any small domesticated animal in violation of KCC 15.08.070; provided, this section shall not apply to a properly licensed business operating as a pet shop, veterinary clinic, or animal shelter to the extent that the animals maintained at the business are maintained for the purposes of conducting the business and not for the personal benefit of the owner, operator, or any employee or volunteer of such business.

3. Maintaining more than three domesticated fowl on lots of less than 5,000 square feet, or maintaining any domesticated fowl in violation of KCC 15.08.070; provided, this section shall not apply to a properly licensed veterinary clinic to the extent that maintaining the domesticated fowl is necessary for the veterinary treatment of the domesticated fowl.

(Ord. No. 2316, § 6; Ord. No. 2787, § 2(9.16.64), 6-21-88; Ord. No. 3156, § 1, 2-15-94; Ord. No. 3837, § 4, 4-17-07; Ord. No. 3844, § 2, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 3979, § 1, 10-19-10; Ord. No. 4162, § 1, 9-1-15. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.16.64. Formerly 8.03.210)


8.03.080 Violations and enforcement – Penalties.

Any violation of this chapter may be enforced as provided for in this section. In the alternative, any violation of a King County Code provision adopted in this chapter for application and enforcement within the city of Kent may be enforced by King County animal control as provided for within the King County Code.

A. Civil infraction. A person who violates any provision of this chapter may be issued a civil infraction as provided in this section, which shall be filed in the Kent municipal court and processed in the same manner as other infractions filed in the Kent municipal court.

1. Leash requirement – KCC 8.03.040. Fine amounts for violation of the leash requirement of KCC 8.03.040 shall be as follows:

a. A first violation is a fine of $100;

b. A second violation is a fine of $200;

c. A third violation is a fine of $400; and

d. A fourth or subsequent violation is a fine of $500.

2. Waste removal – KCC 8.03.050. Fine amounts for violation of the waste removal requirement of KCC 8.03.050 shall be as follows:

a. A first violation is a class 4 civil infraction as set forth in RCW 7.80.120, as currently enacted or hereafter amended. As of the adoption date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, this statutory fine amount is $25.

b. A second violation is a class 3 civil infraction as set forth in RCW 7.80.120, as currently enacted or hereafter amended. As of the adoption date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, this statutory fine amount is $50.

c. A third or subsequent violation is a class 2 civil infraction as set forth in RCW 7.80.120, as currently enacted or hereafter amended. As of the adoption date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, this statutory fine amount is $125.

3. All other violations. Except for leash and waste removal violations as noted above, any person who violates any provision of this chapter may be issued a class 2 civil infraction as set forth in RCW 7.80.120, as currently enacted or hereafter amended. As of the adoption date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, this statutory fine amount is $125.

B. Criminal offense – Leash requirement – Repeated violation. Except as otherwise specifically provided for within this section, a person who knowingly commits a repeated violation of the leash requirement provided for in KCC 8.03.040 is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by up to the maximum penalty established in RCW 9A.20.021(3) as now enacted or hereafter amended.

1. Repeated violation – Definition. For purposes of this section repeated violation means, as evidenced by a prior committed finding by the Kent municipal court of an infraction issued under this chapter, or a committed finding by King County’s hearing examiner of a public nuisance under Title 11 of the King County Code, that the person charged has violated KCC 8.03.040 four times within a one-year period. Therefore, on the fourth time a violation occurs within any one-year period, the person may be criminally charged for a repeated violation.

(Ord. No. 4162, § 1, 9-1-15)


Chapter 8.04 LITTER CONTROL*

Sections:

8.04.010    Short title.

8.04.020    Definitions.

8.04.030    Litter in public places.

8.04.040    Placement of litter in receptacles.

8.04.050    Litter in parks.

8.04.060    Litter in lakes and fountains.

8.04.070    Truck loads causing litter.

8.04.080    Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.

8.04.090    Sweeping litter into gutters.

8.04.100    Litter on private property.

8.04.110    Reserved.

8.04.120    Reserved.

8.04.130    Posting notices prohibited.

8.04.140    Throwing or distributing commercial handbills in public places.

8.04.150    Commercial and noncommercial handbills – Placing on vehicles.

8.04.160    Same – Depositing on uninhabited or vacant premises.

8.04.170    Same – Prohibiting distribution where properly posted.

8.04.180    Same – Distributing at inhabited private premises.

8.04.190    Violation – Penalty.

*Cross reference(s) – Littering in parks and recreation areas, 4.01.100; performance standards, § 15.08.050.

State law reference(s) – Model litter control act, RCW 70.93.010 et seq.


8.04.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City of Kent Anti-Litter Ordinance.”

(Ord. No. 2154, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.18.04)


8.04.020 Definitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Aircraft is any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word “aircraft” includes helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.

Authorized private receptacle is a litter storage and collection receptacle as required and authorized in Ch. 7.03 KCC.

Commercial handbill is any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature:

1. Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or thing;

2. Which directs attention to any business, mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales;

3. Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this subsection shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incidental to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state, or under any ordinance of this city; or

4. Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.

Garbage is putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.

Litter is “garbage,” “refuse,” and “rubbish” as these terms are defined in this section and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as prohibited in this chapter tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.

Newspaper is any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the post office of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law. In addition, the term “newspaper” shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per year, and sold to the public.

Noncommercial handbill is any printed or written matter, any sample, or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper.

Park is a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation.

Private premises is any dwelling, house, building, or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited, temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.

Public place is any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.

Refuse is all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes.

Rubbish is nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.

Vehicle is every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

(Ord. No. 2154, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.18.08)

Cross reference(s) – Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.01.030.


8.04.030 Litter in public places.

No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the city except in public receptacles, or in authorized private receptacles for collection.

(Ord. No. 2154, § 3. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.18.12)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 70.93.060.


8.04.040 Placement of litter in receptacles.

Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.

(Ord. No. 2154, § 4. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.18.16)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 70.93.060(2).


8.04.050 Litter in parks.

No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided in this chapter.

(Ord. No. 2154, § 9. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.18.36)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 70.93.060.


8.04.060 Litter in lakes and fountains.

No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city.

(Ord. No. 2154, § 10. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.18.40)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 70.93.060.


8.04.070 Truck loads causing litter.

No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind.

(Ord. No. 2154, § 8. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.18.32)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 46.61.655.


8.04.080 Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.

No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon private property.

(Ord. No. 2154, § 7. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.18.28)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 73.93.060.


8.04.090 Sweeping litter into gutters.

A. Prohibited. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.

B. Merchants’ duty to keep sidewalks free of litter. No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter.

(Ord. No. 2154, §§ 5, 6. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 9.18.20, 9.18.24)


8.04.100 Litter on private property.

A. Occupied property. No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.

B. Vacant lots. No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not.

C. Owner to maintain premises free of litter. The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection.

(Ord. No. 2154, §§ 18, 19, 20. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 9.18.72, 9.18.76, 9.18.80)


8.04.110 Reserved.

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3111, § 1, adopted May 18, 1993, repealed former § 8.04.110 in its entirety, which pertained to the clearing of litter from open private property by the city.


8.04.120 Reserved.

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3111, § 2, adopted May 18, 1993, repealed former § 8.04.120 in its entirety, which pertained to alternative or accumulative methods of collection of charges.


8.04.130 Posting notices prohibited.

No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public utility pole or shade tree, or upon any public structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law.

(Ord. No. 2154, § 17. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.18.68)


8.04.140 Throwing or distributing commercial handbills in public places.

No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street, or other public place within the city. No person shall hand out or distribute or sell any handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street, or other public place within the city for any person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof any handbill to any person willing to accept it.

(Ord. No. 2154, § 11. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.18.44)


8.04.150 Commercial and noncommercial handbills – Placing on vehicles.

No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof, a handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it.

(Ord. No. 2154, § 12. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.18.48)


8.04.160 Same – Depositing on uninhabited or vacant premises.

No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.

(Ord. No. 2154, § 13. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.18.52)


8.04.170 Same – Prohibiting distribution where properly posted.

No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on the premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words “No Trespassing,” “No Peddlers or Agents,” “No Advertisement,” or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises.

(Ord. No. 2154, § 14. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.18.56)


8.04.180 Same – Distributing at inhabited private premises.

A. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handling or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or other person then present in or upon such private premises. In case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, as provided in this chapter, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises if the handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent it from being blown or drifted about the premises or sidewalks, streets, or other public places. Mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal laws or regulations.

B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States mail, nor to newspapers, as defined in KCC 8.04.020, except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.

(Ord. No. 2154, § 15. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.18.60)


8.04.190 Violation – Penalty.

A. Civil code enforcement action. Any violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a civil violation under Chapter 1.04 KCC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required as provided therein.

B. Criminal offense. In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of this chapter may be charged criminally, pursuant to KCC 1.04.030(B).

C. Civil infraction. In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of this chapter may be issued a class 1 civil infraction pursuant to RCW 7.80.120, as currently enacted or hereafter amended, and KCC 1.04.225.

(Ord. No. 3111, § 3, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 4282, § 4, 7-3-18)


Chapter 8.05 NOISE CONTROL* Revised 8/19 Revised 5/20

Sections:

8.05.010    Title.

8.05.020    Scope.

8.05.030    Definitions.

8.05.040    State enabling legislation.

8.05.050    Noise control office (NCO) – Program development.

8.05.060    Same – Responsibilities and powers.

8.05.070    Environmental designations for noise abatement.

8.05.080    Zoning classification for EDNA. Revised 8/19 Revised 5/20

8.05.090    Maximum permissible environmental noise levels.

8.05.100    Deviations.

8.05.110    Daytime exemption.

8.05.120    Nighttime exemption.

8.05.130    Exemptions other than residential.

8.05.140    Other exemptions.

8.05.150    Emergency exemption.

8.05.160    Exempted sources.

8.05.170    Variances.

8.05.180    Public nuisance noises prohibited.

8.05.190    Enforcement.

8.05.200    Complaints regarding violations.

8.05.210    Right of entry.

8.05.220    Notice and order.

8.05.230    Method of service.

8.05.240    Extensions for compliance.

8.05.250    Abatement notice.

8.05.260    Reserved.

8.05.270    Reserved.

8.05.280    Punishment.

*Cross reference(s) – Outdoor musical entertainment and rock festivals, ch. 4.05; environmental policy, ch. 11.03; performance standards, § 15.08.050.

State law reference(s) – Noise control, RCW 70.107.010 et seq.


8.05.010 Title.

This chapter may be cited as the “Noise Control Ordinance of Kent.”

(Ord. No. 2113, § 1.1. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.20.04)


8.05.020 Scope.

Except as provided in KCC 9.02.36, disorderly conduct, this chapter shall apply to the control of all sound originating from sources located within the limits of the city, including but not limited to, commercial and industrial noise.

(Ord. No. 2113, § 1.2; Ord. No. 2954, § 1, 12-5-90; Ord. No. 3133, § 3, 9-7-93. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.20.08)


8.05.030 Definitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Background sound level means the level of all sounds in a given environment, independent of the specific source being measured.

dBA means the sound pressure level in decibels measured using the “A” weighting network on a sound level meter.

EDNA means the environmental designation for noise abatement, being an area or zone (environment) within which maximum permissible noise levels are established.

Emergency machinery and work means machinery and work necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or machinery and work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger.

Impulse sound means either a single pressure peak or a single burst of multiple pressure peaks which occur for a duration of less than one (1) second, as measured on a peak unweighted sound level meter.

Noise means the intensity, duration and character of sounds, from any and all sources.

Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental body, state agency or other entity whatsoever.

Property boundary means the surveyed line at ground surface, which separates the real property owned, rented, or leased by one (1) or more persons, from that owned, rented or leased by one or more other persons, and its vertical extension.

Public nuisance noise means any unreasonable sound which either annoys, injures, interferes with or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of an entire neighborhood or community, although the extent of damage may be unequal.

Receiving property means real property at the boundaries of which the maximum permissible noise levels specified in this chapter shall not be exceeded from sources outside such property.

Sound level meter means a device which measures sound pressure levels and conforms to type 1 or type 2 as specified in the American National Standards Institute publication section 1.4-1971. An impulse sound level meter shall be a peak or impulse, unweighted sound level meter which is capable of measuring impulse sound in conformance with the type 1 or type 2 specifications of ANSI 1.4-1971.

(Ord. No. 2113, § 1.3; Ord. No. 2954, § 2, 12-5-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.20.12)

Cross reference(s) – Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.01.030.


8.05.040 State enabling legislation.

This chapter is in conformance with Chapter 70.107 RCW, Noise Control, and Chapter 173-58 WAC, Sound Level Measurement Procedures.

(Ord. No. 2113, § 1.4; Ord. No. 2954, § 3, 12-5-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.20.16)


8.05.050 Noise control office (NCO) – Program development.

The building department shall be designated the noise control office for coordination of the sound level measurement aspects and enforcement of all sections of this chapter, and for the general purpose of sound and vibration abatement and control.

(Ord. No. 2113, § 1.6; Ord. No. 2954, § 5, 12-5-90; Ord. No. 3133, § 4, 9-7-93. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.20.24)


8.05.060 Same – Responsibilities and powers.

The responsibilities and powers of the noise control office shall be as follows:

1. The issuance of warnings, abatement notices, and citations of violation on the abatement and control of noise.

2. The granting of time extensions according to procedures specified in KCC 8.05.240.

3. The reviewing of any permit, license, variance, zone change, or proposed land use which may be subject to review by city personnel, wherein noise disturbances may be a factor, to insure compliance with the intent and provisions of this chapter.

4. Coordinate the noise control activities of all municipal departments and work with appropriate municipal, county, state, and federal agencies to implement the purposes of this chapter and, where appropriate, enter into contracts with the approval of the city council for the procurement of technical and enforcement services.

(Ord. No. 2113, § 1.7; Ord. No. 2954, § 6, 12-5-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.20.28)


8.05.070 Environmental designations for noise abatement.

Environmental designations for noise abatement (EDNA) are declared. They are based primarily on the zoning code, but also take into consideration the past, present, and future usage, as well as the usage of adjacent and other lands in the vicinity. Designation of such EDNA is based on the following typical uses:

1. Class A EDNA are lands where human beings reside and sleep. Typically, class A EDNA will be the following types of property used for human habitation:

a. Residential.

b. Multifamily living accommodations.

c. Recreation and entertainment (e.g., camps, parks, camping facilities, and resorts).

d. Community service (e.g., orphanages, homes for the aged, hospitals, health and correctional facilities).

2. Class B EDNA are lands involving uses requiring protection against noise interference with speech. Typically, class B EDNA will be the following types of property:

a. Commercial living accommodations.

b. Commercial dining establishments.

c. Motor vehicle services.

d. Retail services.

e. Banks and office buildings.

f. Miscellaneous commercial services, property not used for human habitation.

g. Recreation and entertainment, property not used for human habitation (e.g., theaters, stadiums, fairgrounds and amusement parks).

h. Community services (e.g., education, religious, governmental, cultural and recreational facilities).

3. Class C EDNA are lands involving economic activities of such a nature that higher noise levels than experienced in other areas is normally to be anticipated. Typically class C EDNA will be the following types of property:

a. Storage, warehouse, and distribution facilities.

b. Industrial property used for the production and fabrication of durable and nondurable manmade goods.

c. Agricultural and silvicultural property used for the production of crops, wood products, or livestock.

(Ord. No. 2113, § 3.1; Ord. No. 2954, § 9, 12-5-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.20.40)

Cross reference(s) – Zoning districts, § 15.03.010.


8.05.080 Zoning classification for EDNA. Revised 8/19 Revised 5/20

The following land use zoning classifications as found in the zoning code are assigned the EDNA classification below:

	Zone	EDNA

	SR-1, SR-3, SR-4.5, SR-6, SR-8, MR-D, MR-T12, MR-T16, MR-G, MR-M, MR-H, MHP	Class A

	NCC, CC, DC, DCE, MTC-1, MTC-2, MCR, CM, GC	Class B

	I1, I2, I3, SU, A-10, AG	Class C

(Ord. No. 2954, § 10, 12-5-90; Ord. No. 4329, § 1, 7-16-19; Ord. No. 4355, § 13 (Exh. M), 3-3-20. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.20.44)


8.05.090 Maximum permissible environmental noise levels.

No person shall cause or permit noise to intrude into the property of another person, which noise exceeds the maximum permissible noise levels set forth below in this section, with the point of measurement being at any point within the receiving property. The noise limitations established are as set forth in the following table after any applicable adjustments provided for in this chapter are applied.

	TABLE I

	Maximum Permissible Environmental Noise Levels

	EDNA 

of noise source	EDNA of receiving property

	 	Class A	Class B	Class C

	Class A	55 dBA	57 dBA	60 dBA

	Class B	57 dBA	60 dBA	65 dBA

	Class C	60 dBA	65 dBA	70 dBA

(Ord. No. 2113, § 4.1; Ord. No. 2954, § 11, 12-5-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.20.48)


8.05.100 Deviations.

The following deviations from the maximum permissible noise levels are permitted:

1. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., the noise limitations of Table I shall be reduced by ten (10) dBA for receiving property within class A EDNA.

2. At any hour of the day or night the applicable noise limitations in Table I and in subsection (1) above may be exceeded for any receiving property by no more than:

a. Five (5) dBA for a total of fifteen (15) minutes in any one (1) hour period;

b. Ten (10) dBA for a total of five (5) minutes in any one (1) hour period; or

c. Fifteen (15) dBA for a total of one and one-half (1.5) minutes in any one (1) hour period.

(Ord. No. 2113, § 4.2; Ord. No. 2954, § 12, 12-5-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.20.52)


8.05.110 Daytime exemption.

The following shall be exempt from the provisions of KCC 8.05.090 between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.:

1. Sound originating from residential property relating to temporary projects for the maintenance or repair of homes, grounds, and appurtenances.

2. Sounds created by the discharge of firearms on authorized shooting ranges.

3. Sounds created by aircraft engine testing and maintenance not related to flight operations; provided, that aircraft testing and maintenance shall be conducted at remote sites whenever possible.

4. Sounds created by the installation or repair of essential utility services.

5. Sounds created by blasting.

(Ord. No. 2113, § 4.3; Ord. No. 2954, § 13, 12-5-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.20.56)


8.05.120 Nighttime exemption.

The following shall be exempt from the provisions of KCC 8.05.090:

1. Noise from electrical substations and existing, stationary equipment used in the conveyance of water by a utility.

2. Noise from existing industrial installations which exceed the standards contained in these regulations and which, over the previous three (3) years, have consistently operated in excess of fifteen (15) hours per day as a consequence of process necessity and/or demonstrated routine normal operation. Changes in working hours, which would affect exemptions under this provision, require approval of the noise control office.

(Ord. No. 2113, § 4.4; Ord. No. 2954, § 14, 12-5-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.20.60)


8.05.130 Exemptions other than residential.

The following shall be exempt from the provisions of KCC 8.05.090, except insofar as such provisions related to the reception of noise within class A EDNA between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.: sounds originating from forest harvesting and silvicultural activity.

(Ord. No. 2113, § 4.5; Ord. No. 2954, § 15, 12-5-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.20.64)


8.05.140 Other exemptions.

The following shall be exempt from all provisions of KCC 8.05.090:

1. Sound created by the normal operation of motor vehicles upon a public right-of-way.

2. Sound originating from aircraft in flight and sounds that originate at airports which are directly related to flight operations.

3. Sounds created by surface carriers engaged in interstate commerce by railroad.

4. Sounds created by warning devices not operating continuously for more than five (5) minutes, or bells, chimes, and carillons.

5. Sounds created by safety and protective devices where noise suppression would defeat the intent of the device or is not economically feasible.

6. Sounds created by emergency equipment and work necessary in the interests of law enforcement or for health, safety, or welfare of the community.

7. Sounds originating from motor vehicles racing events at existing, authorized facilities.

8. Sounds originating from officially sanctioned parades and other public events.

9. Sounds emitted from petroleum refinery boilers during startup of such boilers; provided, that the startup operation is performed during daytime hours whenever possible.

10. Sounds caused by natural phenomena and unamplified human voices.

11. Sounds created by watercraft.

12. Sounds caused by motor vehicles, licensed or unlicensed, when operated off public highways, except when such sounds are received in class A EDNA.

13. Sounds originating from natural gas transmission and distribution facilities installed prior to September 1, 1975, shall be exempt from all provisions of this chapter until the Department of Ecology amends Chapter 173-60 WAC. The noise control office shall make recommendations to the city council concerning this exemption after the Department of Ecology completes its action.

(Ord. No. 2113, § 4.6; Ord. No. 2954, § 16, 12-5-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.20.68)


8.05.150 Emergency exemption.

Noise caused in the performance of emergency work for the immediate safety, health, or welfare of the community or individuals of the community, or to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 2113, § 5.1; Ord. No. 2954, § 17, 12-5-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.20.72)


8.05.160 Exempted sources.

No sound source specifically exempted from a maximum permissible sound level or permitted under this chapter shall be a public nuisance noise or public disturbance noise, as provided in KCC 9.02.36, insofar as the particular source is exempted.

(Ord. No. 2113, § 5.2; Ord. No. 2954, § 18, 12-5-90; Ord. No. 3133, § 5, 9-7-93. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.20.76)


8.05.170 Variances.

A. Generally. The noise control office shall have the authority to grant a variance where practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships and results inconsistent with the general purposes of this noise control code might result from the strict application of its provisions.

B. Application. The property owner or his agent may make application to the noise control office for a variance on forms provided by that office.

C. Public hearing. The noise control office shall hold a public hearing on any proposed variance and shall give notice thereof by one (1) publication in the city’s official newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Notice shall be given to all property owners within a radius of at least two hundred (200) feet of the subject property’s boundaries, and, when determined by the noise control office, a greater distance of the exterior boundaries of the subject property.

D. Conditions for granting variances. Before any variance may be granted, it shall be shown and the noise control office shall find:

1. The variance shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with a limitation upon uses of other properties in the vicinity and zone in which the subject property is located;

2. That such variance is necessary, because of special circumstances relative to size, topography, location or surroundings of the subject property to provide it with the rights and privileges enjoyed by other property owners in the vicinity and in the zone in which the property is located; and

3. That the granting of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the comfort, repose, health or safety of the public.

E. Noise control office action and validity. The decision of the noise control office shall be final and conclusive. Any variance authorized by the noise control office shall expire by limitation if the use necessitating the variance is not begun within one (1) year of authorization or if the use is discontinued, suspended or abandoned for any one (1) year period.

(Ord. No. 2113, § 5.2; Ord. No. 2954, § 19, 12-5-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.20.76)


8.05.180 Public nuisance noises prohibited.

Pursuant to the complaint notice and letter of violation procedure set forth in KCC 8.05.200 through 8.05.250, the noise control office may determine that a sound constitutes a public nuisance noise as defined in this chapter. It is unlawful for any person to cause, or for any person in possession of property to allow to originate from the property, any sound which has been determined a public nuisance noise.

(Ord. No. 2954, § 20, 12-5-90)


8.05.190 Enforcement.

A. Unless provided otherwise by this chapter, the building department noise control office shall have the responsibility for enforcing this chapter. The specific provisions of this chapter which describe the noise control office’s methods for obtaining compliance with the noise standards set forth herein, such as KCC 8.05.180 and 8.05.200 through 8.05.250, are related to the civil enforcement process and shall not be applicable to any criminal enforcement action initiated by the chief of police.

B. Where appropriate and necessary for the enforcement of this chapter, the noise control office may request the assistance of the noise control office of the Seattle-King County health department and the city attorney.

(Ord. No. 2954, § 21, 12-5-90; Ord. No. 3133, § 6, 9-7-93)


8.05.200 Complaints regarding violations.

Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint shall state fully the causes and basis thereof and shall be filed with the building department noise control office. The noise control office shall properly record such complaint, immediately investigate, and take any necessary action thereon as provided by this chapter.

(Ord. No. 2113, § 6.1; Ord. No. 2954, § 22, 12-5-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.20.84)


8.05.210 Right of entry.

A. Upon presentation of the proper credentials, the noise control office, with the consent of the occupant, or with the consent of the owner of any unoccupied building, structure, property or portion thereof, or pursuant to a lawfully issued warrant, may enter at all reasonable times, any building, structure, property or portion thereof to inspect the same whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce or determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter over which the noise control office has enforcement responsibility or whenever the noise control office has cause to believe that a violation of any provision of this chapter other than KCC 8.05.080 or 8.05.090 has been or is being committed.

B. If the building, structure, property or portion thereof is unoccupied, the noise control office shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building, structure, property or portion thereof and demand entry. If the noise control office is unable to locate the owner or such other persons and has reason to believe that conditions therein create an immediate and irreparable health hazard, then the noise control office shall make entry.

(Ord. No. 2954, § 23, 12-5-90)


8.05.220 Notice and order.

A. Unless provided otherwise by this chapter, whenever the noise control office has reason to believe that a maximum permissible sound level of KCC 8.05.090 is being exceeded, that a public nuisance noise is being emitted, or when a complaint as described in KCC 8.05.200 has been filed and investigated, the noise control office may serve a written notice and order directed to the owner of the property, person responsible for the property or operator of the source in the manner directed in KCC 8.05.230.

B. The notice shall contain a brief and concise description of the conditions alleged to be in violation or to be a public nuisance noise, the provision of this chapter alleged to have been violated, the sound level readings, if taken, including the time and place of their recording.

C. The order shall contain a statement of the corrective action required and shall specify a reasonable time within which the action must be accomplished.

(Ord. No. 2954, § 24, 12-5-90)


8.05.230 Method of service.

A. Service of the notice and order shall be made upon the person named in the notice and order either personally or by mailing a copy of the notice and order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the person at his last known address. Such service by certified mail shall be effective on the date of mailing. If the whereabouts of the person are unknown and cannot be ascertained by the noise control office in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the noise control office shall make affidavit to that effect.

B. If the person cannot be notified by mail, the service of the notice and order upon the person may be made by publication once each week for two (2) consecutive weeks in the city’s official newspaper.

C. The failure of any such person to receive the notice and order shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter.

(Ord. No. 2954, § 25, 12-5-90)


8.05.240 Extensions for compliance.

A. Upon good cause shown by the owner or operator of any noise source reviewed and measured under KCC 8.05.090, the building department (noise control office) shall have the power to grant an extension from the operation of this chapter in order to allow sufficient time for installation of needed control equipment, facilities, or modifications to achieve compliance not to exceed thirty (30) days. Such extension may be renewed for an additional like period, but only if satisfactory progress toward compliance is shown.

B. Any person seeking an extension shall file a petition with the noise control office. Any such request for an extension must be received in the noise control office at least five (5) working days prior to the date set for compliance in KCC 8.05.220(C).

C. In granting or denying an extension of the date set for compliance, the noise control office shall file a written order, stating the facts and reasons leading to the decision.

(Ord. No. 2113, § 5.3; Ord. No. 2954, § 26, 12-5-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.20.80)


8.05.250 Abatement notice.

After a notice and order has been served as provided in KCC 8.05.220 and 8.05.240 and no request for an extension in the date set for compliance has been received by the noise control office within the time frames set in KCC 8.05.240, the noise control office shall issue an abatement notice. The abatement notice shall be served upon the same persons and in the same manner as provided in the notice and order, KCC 8.05.220. An abatement notice shall be final, and shall serve as the noise control office’s notice to the violator that the matter has been referred to the city attorney’s office to seek abatement and penalties through legal process.

(Ord. No. 2954, § 28, 12-5-90)


8.05.260, 8.05.270. Reserved.

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3133, §§ 7 and 8, adopted Sept. 7, 1993, repealed former §§ 8.05.260 and 8.05.270, which pertained to public disturbance noises and public disturbance noise from portable, or motor vehicle audio equipment.


8.05.280 Punishment.

A. Conduct made unlawful under KCC 8.05.090 through 8.05.250 of this chapter shall subject the violator to a civil fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250). This fine shall be cumulative, and each day such offense continues shall constitute a separate violation.

B. Five (5) separate subsequent offenses by the same violator of the provisions contained in KCC 8.05.090 through 8.05.250 within a five (5) year period of time shall also constitute a misdemeanor, and may be punished by the criminal penalties described in KCC 1.01.140 and/or a penalty in addition to the civil fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250) for the initial act of violation, and two hundred fifty dollars ($250) per day thereafter until the violation is discontinued.

C. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.

(Ord. No. 2113, § 6.2; Ord. No. 2954, § 31, 12-5-90; Ord. No. 3133, § 9, 9-7-93. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.20.88)


Chapter 8.06 RODENT CONTROL*

Sections:

8.06.010    Adoption of King County Code provisions by reference.

8.06.020    Penalty.

*Cross reference(s) – Environmental policy, ch. 11.03; performance standards, § 15.08.050.

State law reference(s) – Rodent control, RCW 17.16.010 et seq.


8.06.010 Adoption of King County Code provisions by reference.

King County Ordinance 2910, sections 2 and 7 and Ordinance 1946, section 2, together with any future additions or amendments thereto, now codified as KCC 8.38.010 through 8.38.030 of the King County Code, a copy of which is on file in the city clerk’s office, is adopted.

(Ord. No. 2248, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.28.04)


8.06.020 Penalty.

Any person, firm or corporation convicted of a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300) or imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or both such fine and imprisonment.

(Ord. No. 2248, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.28.08)


Chapter 8.07 WEEDS AND VEGETATION

Sections:

8.07.010    Short title and purpose.

8.07.020    Definitions.

8.07.030    Nuisances designated.

8.07.040    Exemptions.

8.07.050    Duties of owners and occupants.

8.07.060    Enforcement.

8.07.070    Right of entry.

8.07.080    Violation – Penalty.

8.07.090    Permit required – Tree removal.


8.07.010 Short title and purpose.

A. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Weeds and Vegetation Ordinance” of the city of Kent. The general purpose of this chapter is to exercise the city’s police power for the benefit of the public health, safety and welfare; to provide enforcement mechanisms and the abatement and collection of abatement expenses by the city, and to these ends this chapter shall be liberally construed.

B. This chapter shall be enforced for the benefit of the health, safety and welfare of the general public, not for the benefit of any particular person or class of persons.

C. It is the intent of this chapter to place the obligation of complying with its requirements upon the owner or occupier of the land and buildings within the scope of this chapter. No provision or term used in this chapter is intended to impose any duty upon the city or any of its officers, officials and employees which would subject them to damages in a civil action.

(Ord. No. 3113, § 1, 5-18-93)


8.07.020 Definitions.

Definitions used in this chapter shall have the following meanings, unless an additional meaning clearly appears from the context:

Alley means a public way, paved or unpaved, which is intended to provide or which provides a roadway for vehicular and pedestrian access to abutting properties and is generally located to the rear or side of those properties, but not including such a public way in its natural and undeveloped state which cannot be used by vehicles.

Director means the director of public works or his or her designee or any designated alternate who is empowered by ordinance or by the mayor to enforce this chapter including assigned code enforcement officials.

Fire hazard means vegetation which is dry and combustible, including but not limited to weeds, grass or clippings, dead bushes or trees or their parts, and other combustible vegetative materials.

Health hazard means vegetation or refuse providing a harborage for rats or other rodents (excluding chipmunks and squirrels), rodent runs and habitats; vegetation which is poisonous or noxious, including but not limited to poison ivy, poison oak, poison hemlock, poison sumac and nightshade; vegetation which creates a danger of contamination or disease; and vegetation which is infested with caterpillars or other horticultural pests.

Occupant means any person occupying or having possession of property or any portion thereof.

Owner means any person who, alone or with others, has title or interest in property with or without accompanying actual possession thereof, and including any person who as agent, or as executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of an estate, has charge, care or control of any property.

Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, unincorporated or incorporated association, marital community, joint venture, governmental entity, or other entity or group of persons however organized.

Planting strip means that part of a street right-of-way between the abutting property line and the curb or traveled portion of the street, exclusive of any sidewalk.

Property means a specific parcel or parcels, platted or unplatted, of land or real estate.

Public right-of-way means any alley, street, planting strip and public way, including sidewalks, utilized for and related to pedestrians and vehicular traffic.

Safety hazard means vegetation which creates a defective condition on any street, sidewalk, or alley as set forth in KCC 6.04.100(3) and (4) or vegetation which overhangs the street, sidewalk, or alley in such a way as to impede the free and full use of the street, sidewalk, or alley, and vegetation which obstructs the vision of drivers such that traffic regulation signs or the view of oncoming traffic is obstructed at a distance of fifteen (15) feet or closer from the edge of the pavement or curb, and vegetation which creates injury to or the opportunity or risk for injury to passersby or the general public.

Sidewalk means that property between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a street and the adjacent property, set aside and intended for the use of pedestrians.

Street means a public right-of-way, used for public travel.

Vegetation means trees, shrubs, grass, weeds, bushes, vines, and other plant materials, including but not limited to clippings, fallen leaves, fruit or branches.

(Ord. No. 3113, § 1, 5-18-93)


8.07.030 Nuisances designated.

The following conditions are hereby declared nuisances within the city of Kent:

1. Vegetation constituting a fire hazard;

2. Vegetation constituting a health hazard;

3. Vegetation constituting a safety hazard.

(Ord. No. 3113, § 1, 5-18-93)


8.07.040 Exemptions.

The following are exempt from the application of this chapter:

1. Official city street trees as set forth in Ch. 6.10 KCC.

2. Wetlands, critical areas and natural resource lands designated or to be designated for protection under the Kent City Code pursuant to the Growth Management Act, Chapter 36.70A RCW.

(Ord. No. 3113, § 1, 5-18-93)


8.07.050 Duties of owners and occupants.

A. Subject to subsection (C) below, it is the duty of the owner of property and of any occupant of the property wherein or whereon any nuisance exists to abate the nuisance by destroying, removing or trimming vegetation, and removing or destroying any health, safety or fire hazard and to remove all shrubs, bushes, trees or vegetation growing or which has grown and died which is a fire hazard or is infested with caterpillars or other horticultural pests, or which otherwise constitute a menace to the public health, safety or welfare.

B. In addition to the duties the owner or occupant may have to abate nuisances, subject to subsection (C) below, the owner or occupant of property shall:

1. Remove vegetation in or on an abutting sidewalk;

2. Destroy, remove or trim vegetation or parts thereof on the property, and which are also overhanging any public place at a distance of less than eight (8) feet measured vertically from any point on the sidewalk.

3. Destroy, remove or trim vegetation or any parts thereof on the property or on adjacent planting strips, which encroaches on or overhangs the traveled portion of the street or alley within sixteen and one-half (16.5) feet measured vertically from any point on the street or alley.

4. Remove all grass and weeds attaining a height of six (6) inches, except on property zoned agricultural, and all shrubs, bushes, trees or vegetation growing or which have grown and died which are a fire hazard or are infested with caterpillars or other horticultural pests, or which otherwise constitute a menace to the public health, safety or welfare.

5. Remove vegetation found on adjacent planting strips constituting a public nuisance as defined in KCC 8.07.030.

C. Tree removal. No person shall remove any trees situated upon a public right-of-way pursuant to this section, without first obtaining a permit in accordance with KCC 8.07.090.

(Ord. No. 3113, § 1, 5-18-93)


8.07.060 Enforcement.

It shall be the duty of the director to enforce this chapter. The director may call upon the police, fire, health or other appropriate city departments to assist in enforcement. The director shall adopt such rules as are necessary for the administration of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3113, § 1, 5-18-93)


8.07.070 Right of entry.

Upon presentation of the proper credentials, the director or duly authorized representative may, with the consent of the owner or occupier of a building or the premises, or pursuant to a lawfully issued warrant, enter at reasonable times any property subject to the consent or warrant to perform the duties imposed by this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3113, § 1, 5-18-93)


8.07.080 Violation – Penalty.

A. Civil code enforcement action. Any violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a civil violation under Ch. 1.04 KCC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required as provided therein.

B. Criminal offense. In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of the Kent City Code may be charged criminally, pursuant to KCC 1.04.030(B).

C. Civil infraction. In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of this chapter may be issued a class 1 civil infraction pursuant to RCW 7.80.120, as currently enacted or hereafter amended, and KCC 1.04.225.

(Ord. No. 3113, § 1, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 4282, § 5, 7-3-18)


8.07.090 Permit required – Tree removal.

A. Any person desiring to remove any tree on a public right-of-way, including undeveloped and/or unopened public rights-of-way not currently used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, shall make application in writing to the director for a permit to do so. A permit may be issued only when:

1. The tree constitutes a fire, safety and/or health hazard as defined in this chapter; and

2. The applicant has executed a hold harmless agreement in a form satisfactory to the director, indemnifying the city from claims as a result of the applicant’s removal of said tree.

B. The provisions of this chapter do not preclude the city from removing or maintaining any vegetation, including trees, in public rights-of-way if it deems it appropriate to do so and no such action will create an obligation on the city to maintain such vegetation.

(Ord. No. 3113, § 1, 5-18-93)


Chapter 8.08 JUNK VEHICLES

Sections:

8.08.010    Purpose.

8.08.020    Definitions.

8.08.030    Public nuisance declared.

8.08.040    Exemptions.

8.08.050    Abatement and removal of junk vehicles on private property.

8.08.060    Violation – Penalty.

8.08.070    Rules and procedures.


8.08.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to preserve the character and safety of the city’s neighborhoods by eliminating as nuisances, junk vehicles from private property, and to provide procedures for the removal of junk vehicles as authorized by RCW 46.55.240.

(Ord. No. 3112, § 1, 5-18-93)


8.08.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meaning:

Director means the director of the department in charge of code enforcement or his or her designee or any designated alternate who is empowered by ordinance or by the mayor to enforce this chapter including assigned code enforcement officials.

Junk vehicle means a vehicle meeting at least three (3) of the following requirements: (RCW 46.55.010(4))

1. Is three (3) years old or older;

2. Is extensively damaged, such damage including, but not limited to any of the following: A broken window or windshield or missing wheels, tires, motor or transmission;

3. Is apparently inoperable;

4. Has an approximate fair market value equal only to the approximate value of the scrap in it.

Landowner means an owner of private property, or a person in possession or control of private property.

(Ord. No. 3112, § 1, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 3315, § 1, 10-1-96)


8.08.030 Public nuisance declared.

All junk vehicles certified as such by a law enforcement officer or code enforcement officer designated by the director according to RCW 46.55.230 and found on private property are declared to constitute a public nuisance subject to removal, impoundment and disposal. It is unlawful for any individual firm, entity or corporation to allow, cause to allow or place a junk vehicle on any premises.

(Ord. No. 3112, § 1, 5-18-93)


8.08.040 Exemptions.

A. A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or

B. A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler or licensed vehicle dealer and is fenced according to the provisions of RCW 46.80.130.

(Ord. No. 3112, § 1, 5-18-93)


8.08.050 Abatement and removal of junk vehicles on private property.

A. Voluntary correction. Whenever the code enforcement officer determines that a vehicle is a public nuisance and in violation of this chapter, a reasonable attempt shall be made to secure voluntary correction from the landowner and the vehicle’s registered owner.

B. Issuance of notice of civil violation. If the code compliance officer does not obtain voluntary correction of the public nuisance, the officer may issue a notice of civil violation to the landowner of record and the vehicle’s last registered owner of record in accordance with the provisions of KCC 1.04.040.

C. Content. For violations of this chapter, the notice of civil violation shall contain the following information:

1. The name and address of the landowner of record upon whose property the vehicle is located;

2. The name and address of the vehicle’s last registered owner of record provided license or vehicle identification numbers are available;

3. The vehicle description including: the license plate number and/or the vehicle identification number; the model year; the make; and the factors which render the vehicle a public nuisance;

4. The street address of a description sufficient for identification of the property where the vehicle is located;

5. The required corrective action and a date and time by which the correction must be completed;

6. The date, time and location of a hearing before the hearing examiner on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance which will be at least ten (10) days but no more than forty-five (45) days from the date the notice is issued;

7. A statement indicating that the hearing will be canceled and no monetary penalty will be assessed if the required corrective action is completed at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the scheduled hearing;

8. A statement indicating that the city may remove, impound and dispose of the vehicle, and assess all costs and expenses of administration, removing, impounding and disposing of the vehicle against the landowner or the registered owner as ordered by the hearing examiner; and

9. A statement that a monetary penalty pursuant to KCC 1.04.040(E) in an amount per day for each violation shall be assessed against the landowner and/or the vehicle’s registered owner as specified and ordered by the hearing examiner in accordance with KCC 1.04.040.

D. Service of notice. The notice shall be mailed by certified mail, with a five (5) day return receipt requested, to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owner of record unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership.

E. Landowner responsibility disclaimer. The landowner may appear in person at the hearing or present a written statement prior to the hearing, to deny responsibility for the vehicle’s presence on the property. If the hearing examiner determines that the vehicle was placed on the property without the landowner’s consent and that the landowner has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, then the costs and expenses of administration, removing, impounding and disposing of the vehicle shall not be assessed against the landowner or otherwise attempted to be collected from said landowner.

F. Removal by the city. Pursuant to the hearing examiner’s orders, the vehicle or part thereof may be removed at the request of a law enforcement officer, the city may use any lawful means to cause the vehicle to be removed from the private property and disposed of to a licensed motor vehicle wrecker or hulk hauler or scrap processor, with notice to the Washington State Patrol and the Washington Department of Licensing that the vehicle has been wrecked.

G. Recovery of costs and expenses.

1. The costs of removal and disposal shall be assessed against the last registered owner if the identity of the owner can be determined unless the owner in the transfer of ownership complied with RCW 46.12.101, or against the landowner of record of the property on which the vehicle is stored, or both. If both the owner of the vehicle and the landowner are assessed the costs of removal, then liability for the costs shall be their joint and separate obligation.

2. The costs of administration and of removal and disposal of the vehicle may be recovered pursuant to KCC 1.04.060(D).

H. Conflict of provisions. The notice and related requirements of this section, KCC 8.08.050, are intended to supplement those of KCC 1.04.040, however, should a conflict exist, the provisions of KCC 8.08.050 shall prevail.

(Ord. No. 3112, § 1, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 3315, § 1, 10-1-96)


8.08.060 Violation – Penalty.

A. Civil code enforcement action. Any violation of any provision of this chapter is a civil violation as provided for in Chapter 1.04 KCC, for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required as provided therein.

B. Criminal offense. In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of the Kent City Code may be charged criminally, pursuant to KCC 1.04.030(B).

C. Civil infraction. In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of this chapter may be issued a class 1 civil infraction pursuant to RCW 7.80.120, as currently enacted or hereafter amended, and KCC 1.04.225.

(Ord. No. 3112, § 1, 5-18-93; Ord. No. 4282, § 6, 7-3-18)


8.08.070 Rules and procedures.

The applicable department director in charge of enforcement of this chapter may adopt such rules as may be necessary to effectively implement and administer this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3112, § 1, 5-18-93) 


Chapter 8.09 CAMPING

Sections:

8.09.010    Unlawful camping in public places.

8.09.020    Unlawful storage of personal property in public places.

8.09.030    Definitions.

8.09.040    Parked recreational vehicles exempt.

8.09.050    Permit.

8.09.060    Penalty for violations.


8.09.010 Unlawful camping in public places.

Except as permitted by permit pursuant to KCC 8.09.050 or as otherwise provided by ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any person to camp in any park or other public place.

(Ord. No. 3516, § 1, 7-5-00)


8.09.020 Unlawful storage of personal property in public places. 

Except as permitted by permit pursuant to KCC 8.09.050 or as otherwise provided by ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any person to store personal property, including camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, in any park or other public place.

(Ord. No. 3516, § 1, 7-5-00)


8.09.030 Definitions.

The following definitions are applicable in this chapter unless the context otherwise requires:

A. Camp means to pitch or occupy camp facilities; to use camp paraphernalia.

B. Camp facilities include, but are not limited to, motor vehicles, trailers, tents, huts, or temporary shelters.

C. Camp paraphernalia includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks, or non-city-designated cooking facilities and similar equipment.

D. Director means any director of a city of Kent department having authority over public areas or any other person authorized by the mayor to exercise such authority or his or her designee.

E. Park means and includes all city parks, public squares, park drives, parkways, boulevards, golf courses, park museums, zoos, bathing beaches, and play and recreation grounds under the jurisdiction of the city of Kent parks and recreation department. 

F. Public place means and includes streets, ways, boulevards, sidewalks, planting (parking) strips, squares, triangles, rights-of-way, publicly owned parking lot or publicly owned area, improved or unimproved, and other public places appropriated to the public for public use, including buildings, structures and appurtenances situated thereon.

G. Recreational vehicle means a travel trailer, motor home, truck camper, or camping trailer that is primarily designed and used as temporary living quarters, is either self-propelled or mounted on or drawn by another vehicle, is transient, is not occupied as a primary residence, and is not immobilized or permanently affixed to a mobile home lot.

H. Store means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location.

I. Street means any highway, avenue, lane, road, street, drive, place, boulevard, alley, right-of-way, and every way or place in the city of Kent open as a matter of right to public vehicular travel. 

(Ord. No. 3516, § 1, 7-5-00)


8.09.040 Parked recreational vehicles exempt.

The provisions of this chapter shall not prohibit recreational vehicles from being parked within or on any park or other public place, subject to the parking provisions of Ch. 9.38 KCC, and other applicable provisions of this code, if said recreational vehicle is not at that time being used as temporary living quarters or otherwise inhabited. A recreational vehicle may only be inhabited within or on any park or other public place pursuant to KCC 8.09.050.

(Ord. No. 3516, § 1, 7-5-00)


8.09.050 Permit. 

A. The director is authorized, by permit, to allow persons to camp, occupy camp facilities, use camp paraphernalia, or store personal property within or on any park or other public place that may be designated by the city for such use in the city of Kent.

B. The director shall approve a permit as provided under this section when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, the director finds that:

1. Adequate sanitary facilities are provided and accessible at or near the campsite;

2. Adequate trash receptacles and trash collection is to be provided;

3. The camping activity will not unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort, and repose of private property owners; and

4. The camping activity is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct, or create a disturbance.

C. The director is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations regarding the implementation and enforcement of this chapter.

D. No permit shall be issued for a period of time in excess of seven (7) calendar days.

Any person denied a permit may appeal the denial to the hearing examiner pursuant to Ch. 2.32 KCC. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be final unless appealed to the superior court pursuant to said chapter.

(Ord. No. 3516, § 1, 7-5-00)


8.09.060 Penalty for violations.

Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as follows:

A. First offense. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B. Second offense. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter a second time within a five-year period shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. One hundred dollars ($100) of the fine and one (1) day of imprisonment shall not be suspended or deferred.

C. Third or subsequent offense. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter a third or more times within a five (5) year period shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Five hundred dollars ($500) of the fine and five (5) days imprisonment shall not be suspended or deferred.

(Ord. No. 3516, § 1, 7-5-00)

 


Title 9 PUBLIC SAFETY Revised 2/20

Chapters:

Subtitle I. In General 

9.01    Emergency Services

Subtitle II. Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions

9.02    Criminal Code

9.03    Rewards for Information Leading to Arrest

9.04    Massage and Reflexology Services Revised 2/20

9.05    Seizure, Forfeiture, and Disposal of Unclaimed Property, Firearms, and Property Associated with Controlled Substances

9.08    Audible Intrusion Alarms

9.09    Curfew and Parental Responsibility for Juveniles

9.12    Narcotics and Barbiturates

9.32    Conduct in Alcoholic Beverage Premises

9.34    Corrections Facility

Subtitle III. Traffic and Motor Vehicles

9.36    Traffic Code

9.37    Traffic Violations Bureau

9.38    Parking

9.39    Towing

9.40    Speed Limits

9.41    Bicycle Helmets

9.42    Unlawful Race Attendance

9.43    Stay Out of Areas of Racing – SOAR

9.44    Motorized Wheeled Transportation Devices


Chapter 9.01 EMERGENCY SERVICES

Sections:

9.01.010    Emergency management organization – Established.

9.01.020    Emergency management organization – Director.

9.01.030    Emergency management organization – Powers.

9.01.040    Enhanced 911 (E-911) service – Declaration of policy, findings, intent.

9.01.050    Enhanced 911 (E-911) service – Scope.

9.01.060    Enhanced 911 (E-911) service – Definitions.

9.01.070    Enhanced 911 (E-911) service – Enforcement authority.

9.01.080    Enhanced 911 (E-911) service – Fees.

9.01.090    Enhanced 911 (E-911) service – Liability.

9.01.100    Enhanced 911 (E-911) service – Service or interface products required.

9.01.110    Enhanced 911 (E-911) service – Enforcement.

9.01.120    Enhanced 911 (E-911) service – Appeals.


9.01.010 Emergency management organization – Established.

Pursuant to RCW 38.52.005 et seq., there is hereby established in the city an emergency management organization for the purpose of performing emergency services functions in support of city operations. 

(Ord. No. 2622; Ord. No. 3747, § 1, 5-3-05. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.14.010)

State law reference(s) – Emergency continuity of government, RCW 35A.42.030; continuity of government act, RCW 42.14.050 et seq.; emergency management act, RCW 38.52.005 et seq.


9.01.020 Emergency management organization – Director.

The director of the emergency management organization shall be the city fire chief or designated representative, unless and until another person is appointed by the mayor. The director shall be directly responsible for the organization, administration and operation of the emergency management organization.

(Ord. No. 2622. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.14.020)


9.01.030 Emergency management organization – Powers.

The emergency management organization shall have all powers granted under RCW 38.52.005 et seq. and as may otherwise be provided by law.

(Ord. No. 2622. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.14.030)


9.01.040 Enhanced 911 (E-911) service – Declaration of policy, findings, intent.

A. It is declared to be the policy of the city, in the exercise of its police powers for the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare, that all of the citizens of the city be provided with emergency telephone service that is on a par with, or is equal to the best available technology. The E-911 service currently available to the citizens of the city allows caller identification and appropriate routing to an operator in the public safety answering point or emergency telecommunication center. It is the intent of the city, in the implementation of KCC 9.01.040 through 9.01.120, that all telephone systems installed in new construction must provide service or products that will interface with the E-911 system to provide these benefits to all citizens.

B. It is further declared that the installation of such products or services is not only critical to the health, safety and welfare of the general public, but also to provide an effective means for city fire, medical and police units to efficiently locate and promptly respond to any emergency.

C. The express purpose of KCC 9.01.040 through 9.01.120 is to provide for and promote the health, safety and welfare of the general public, and not to protect individuals or create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of people who will or should be especially protected or benefitted by the terms of KCC 9.01.040 through 9.01.120. The obligation of complying with the requirements of KCC 9.01.040 through 9.01.120 and the liability for failing to do so is hereby placed upon the owner and/or occupant or persons responsible for the conditions of the buildings or premises.

(Ord. No. 3012, § 2, 11-19-91)


9.01.050 Enhanced 911 (E-911) service – Scope.

KCC 9.01.040 through 9.01.120 shall apply to all buildings, appurtenant structures and premises hereafter constructed in the city, in which telephone systems are installed; and shall also apply to any building, structure or premises which is hereafter altered, rehabilitated or repaired and for which alteration, rehabilitation or repair any permit is required by any code provision or ordinance. Existing buildings, appurtenant structures and premises which have been constructed prior to November 19, 1991, shall not be affected by the requirements described herein.

(Ord. No. 3012, § 3, 11-19-91)


9.01.060 Enhanced 911 (E-911) service – Definitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in KCC 9.01.040 through 9.01.120, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

ALI means Automatic Location Identification, which is made up of the telephone number, the class of service of the phone (residence, business, coin, PBX, etc.) the date and the time of the call. ALI further includes the name, address and city of the caller’s location, the routing code of the call, the pilot number and the port or trunk that the call was received on. The name of the PSAP is listed along with the predetermined agencies which are responsible for police, fire or medical response to that address.

ANI means that data stream which is made up of a single digit which indicates the trunking of the call and the seven (7) digit telephone number of the calling party’s phone.

CTX means Centron/Centrex/Centraflex, which is a single line phone service over a dedicated central office line, delivered to individual desks in a business, with added features.

E-911 means the telephone service that enables the public to dial the three (3) digit emergency telephone number “911” and reach the appropriate public safety answering point, based on the location of the calling party, and also provides certain caller information (“ANI” and “ALI”) to the public safety answering point telecommunicator as each call is taken.

PBX means private area branch exchange, which is a private phone system allowing communication within a business and between a business and the outside world. PBX lines were designed to provide telephone communications to large groups of people without having dedicated central office lines for each station.

PSAP means the public safety answering point, which is normally based upon the calling party’s address.

Selective routing means that function of telephone service which will direct the call to the proper PSAP, based upon the calling party’s address.

(Ord. No. 3012, § 1, 11-19-91)

Cross reference(s) – Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.01.030.


9.01.070 Enhanced 911 (E-911) service – Enforcement authority.

A. The fire chief is hereby designated the city officer to exercise the powers granted under KCC 9.01.040 through 9.01.120, except that the fire chief may call upon any city department to aid in implementation and enforcement of KCC 9.01.040 through 9.01.120.

B. The fire chief is authorized to adopt such rules as are necessary to implement the requirements of KCC 9.01.040 through 9.01.120 and to carry out the duties hereunder.

(Ord. No. 3012, § 4, 11-19-91)


9.01.080 Enhanced 911 (E-911) service – Fees.

No fees shall be charged for inspection of buildings or premises for compliance with KCC 9.01.040 through 9.01.120, if such inspection is carried out in conjunction with any required inspection under the building and fire codes.

(Ord. No. 3012, § 5, 11-19-91)


9.01.090 Enhanced 911 (E-911) service – Liability.

Nothing contained in KCC 9.01.040 through 9.01.120 is intended to be nor shall be construed to create or form the basis for any liability on the part of the city, or its officers, employees, or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of an owner of property or land to comply with the provisions of KCC 9.01.040 through 9.01.120, or by reason or in consequence of any inspection, notice, order certificate, permission, or approval authorized or issued or done in connection with the implementation or enforcement of KCC 9.01.040 through 9.01.120, or by reason of any action or inaction on the part of the city related in any manner to the enforcement of KCC 9.01.040 through 9.01.120 by its officers, employees, or agents.

(Ord. No. 3012, § 6, 11-19-91)


9.01.100 Enhanced 911 (E-911) service – Service or interface products required.

A. Every building, appurtenant structure, or premises within the city shall, where a telephone system is installed, also have telephone services or products installed which will properly interface with the E-911 system by making the following ALI-ANI information available to the PSAP on the PSAP’s receiving screen when any party within the system calls 911:

1. Name.

2. Address and building number, unit number (if applicable).

3. Telephone number.

4. City.

5. Appropriate police, fire response.

6. Class of service (PBX, coin phone, residence).

B. In addition to the above, service must also be provided which will selectively route 911 calls to the appropriate PSAP jurisdiction on any phone in the building, appurtenant structure, or premises.

(Ord. No. 3012, § 8, 11-19-91)


9.01.110 Enhanced 911 (E-911) service – Enforcement.

No permit or certificate of occupancy shall issue for any construction not conforming to the requirements of KCC 9.01.040 through 9.01.120. For the purposes of KCC 9.01.040 through 9.01.120, the word permit shall mean either a building permit or tenant improvement permit.

(Ord. No. 3012, § 9, 11-19-91)


9.01.120 Enhanced 911 (E-911) service – Appeals.

Any party affected by a decision of the fire chief not to issue a permit or certification of occupancy pursuant to KCC 9.01.110 may, within fifteen (15) days after the date of the decision, only petition the superior court for review of the fire chief’s decision. Appeals from KCC 9.01.040 through 9.01.120 to the board of appeals as provided in Section 108 of the International Fire Code, adopted in KCC 13.01.010, are not allowed.

(Ord. No. 3012, § 10, 11-19-91; Ord. No. 3691, § 7, 5-4-04)


Chapter 9.02 CRIMINAL CODE

Sections:

9.02.010    Preliminary article.

9.02.020    Adoption of sections of Revised Code of Washington not specifically set forth in KCC 9.02.030 through 9.02.620.

9.02.030    Session laws not yet codified.

9.02.040    RCW Title 2, entitled “Courts of Record” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.050    RCW Title 7, entitled “Special Proceedings and Actions” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.060    RCW Title 9, entitled “Crimes and Punishments” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.070    RCW Title 9A, entitled “Washington Criminal Code” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.080    RCW Title 10, entitled “Criminal Procedure” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.090    Chapter 13.32A RCW, entitled “Family Reconciliation Act” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.100    RCW Title 16, entitled “Animals and Livestock” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.110    Chapter 17.04 RCW, entitled “Weed districts” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.120    RCW Title 19, entitled “Business Regulations – Miscellaneous” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.130    Chapter 20.01 RCW, entitled “Agricultural products – Commission merchants, dealers, brokers, buyers, agents” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.140    Chapter 22.32 RCW, entitled “General penalties” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.150    RCW Title 26, entitled “Domestic Relations” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.160    RCW Title 27, entitled “Libraries, Museums, and Historical Activities” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.170    Chapter 28A.635 RCW, entitled “Offenses relating to school property and personnel” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.180    Chapter 29A.84 RCW, entitled “Crimes and penalties” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.190    RCW Title 30A, entitled “Washington Commercial Bank Act” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.200    Chapter 30B.10 RCW, entitled “Director’s authority – Supervision and examination – Enforcement” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.210    RCW Title 31, entitled “Miscellaneous Loan Agencies” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.220    RCW Title 32, entitled “Washington Savings Bank Act” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.230    RCW Title 33, entitled “Washington Savings Associations Act” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.240    RCW Title 35, entitled “Cities and Towns” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.250    RCW Title 35A, entitled “Optional Municipal Code” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.260    RCW Title 36, entitled “Counties” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.270    RCW Title 38, entitled “Militia and Military Affairs” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.280    RCW Title 39, entitled “Public Contracts and Indebtedness” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.290    Chapter 40.16 RCW, entitled “Penal provisions” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.300    RCW Title 41, entitled “Public Employment, Civil Service, and Pensions” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.310    RCW Title 42, entitled “Public Officers and Agencies” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.320    RCW Title 43, entitled “State Government – Executive” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.330    Chapter 44.16 RCW, entitled “Legislative Inquiry” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.340    RCW Title 46, entitled “Motor Vehicles” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.350    RCW Title 47, entitled “Public Highways and Transportation” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.360    RCW Title 48, entitled “Insurance” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.370    RCW Title 49, entitled “Labor Regulations” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.380    RCW Title 50, entitled “Unemployment Compensation” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.390    RCW Title 51, entitled “Industrial Insurance” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.400    Chapter 52.12 RCW, entitled “Powers – Burning permits” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.410    RCW Title 53, entitled “Port Districts” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.420    Chapter 57.08 RCW, entitled “Powers” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.430    RCW Title 58, entitled “Boundaries and Plats” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.440    RCW Title 59, entitled “Landlord and Tenant” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.450    RCW Title 61, entitled “Mortgages, Deeds of Trust, and Real Estate Contracts” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.460    RCW Title 63, entitled “Personal Property” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.470    RCW Title 64, entitled “Real Property and Conveyances” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.480    RCW Title 65, entitled “Recording, Registration, and Legal Publication” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.490    RCW Title 66, entitled “Alcoholic Beverage Control” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.500    RCW Title 67, entitled “Sports and Recreation – Convention Facilities” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.510    RCW Title 68, entitled “Cemeteries, Morgues, and Human Remains” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.520    RCW Title 69, entitled “Food, Drugs, Cosmetics, and Poisons” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.530    RCW Title 70, entitled “Public Health and Safety” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.540    RCW Title 71, entitled “Mental Illness” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.550    Chapter 72.09 RCW, entitled “Department of corrections” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.560    Chapter 73.04 RCW, entitled “General provisions” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.570    RCW Title 74, entitled “Public Assistance” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.580    RCW Title 78, entitled “Mines, Minerals, and Petroleum” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.590    RCW Title 80, entitled “Public Utilities” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.600    RCW Title 81, entitled “Transportation” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.610    Chapter 88.02 RCW, entitled “Vessel registration” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.620    RCW Title 90, entitled “Water Rights – Environment” – Adoption by reference.

9.02.630    Obstructing public officers.

9.02.640    Disorderly conduct.

9.02.650    Prohibited conduct on transit property and transit vehicles.

9.02.660    Possession of graffiti tools.

9.02.670    Tampering or interfering with the property of another prohibited – Penalty.

9.02.680    Public disturbance.

9.02.690    Disruption of public facilities.

9.02.700    Public events – Criminal activity.

9.02.710    Public facility – Illegal activity – Exclusion.

9.02.720    Escape.

9.02.730    Damage, theft, abandonment, or improper use of an electronic home detention or monitoring device.

9.02.740    Vehicle trespass prohibited – Penalty.

9.02.750    Neglect of a child or dependent person.

9.02.760    Offenses against police dogs.

9.02.770    Provoking assault.

9.02.780    Menacing.

9.02.790    Definitions.

9.02.800    Lewd conduct.

9.02.810    Facilitating lewd conduct.

9.02.820    Prostitution loitering.

9.02.830    Stay out of areas of prostitution orders.

9.02.840    Urinating in public.

9.02.850    Possession of drug paraphernalia.

9.02.860    Contaminated property – Order of Seattle-King County department of public health prohibiting use or entry – Violation.

9.02.870    Sale, manufacture, possession of certain weapons.

9.02.880    Possession of firearms or dangerous weapons at Kent Commons – Unlawful.

9.02.890    Non-incendiary devices.

9.02.900    Hobby cannon fuse material – Sale transaction – Written record required.

9.02.910    Violation of no contact order also contempt.

9.02.920    Probation violations.

9.02.930    Court costs – Jail medical costs.

9.02.940    Violations – Penalty.


9.02.010 Preliminary article.

A. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Kent criminal code.”

B. As used in this chapter, “RCW” shall mean the Revised Code of Washington.

C. If any section, subsection, sentence, or provision of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter or the application of the section, subsection, sentence, or provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected, and to this end, the sections, subsections, sentences, and provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable.

D. By adopting state statutes, the city intends to assume jurisdiction over and become the jurisdictional authority for the enforcement and prosecution of misdemeanor and gross misdemeanor crimes that are committed within the city limits of Kent. Whenever the word “state” shall appear in any statute adopted by reference in this chapter, the word “city” shall be substituted therefor; provided, however, the term “city” shall not be substituted for the term “state” in those circumstances that set forth administrative or licensing duties of the state and its subdivisions.

E. Whenever a state statute specifically adopted in this chapter refers to another state statute not specifically adopted in this chapter, the statute referred to shall be given the force and effect necessary to enforce the statute specifically adopted in this chapter.

F. Any section of this chapter that is repealed or amended by ordinance shall remain in full force and effect until the effective date of the ordinance repealing or amending the section. Any state statute that is adopted by reference which is later amended, repealed, or recodified shall remain in full force and effect until the effective date of the legislative act that repeals, recodifies, or amends the state statute. The amendment or recodification of any state statute adopted in this chapter shall be given its full force and effect upon the effective date of its amendment or recodification.

G. When issuing a citation, information, or complaint for the violation of any section of the RCW adopted by this chapter, it shall be sufficient for a commissioned officer or prosecutor to cite to and refer to the RCW section number.

H. A copy of all statutes adopted by reference for application and enforcement within the city limits of Kent are available online for public viewing through the Washington State Legislature’s website at: http://app.leg.wa.gov/rcw/. Physical copies of these statutes are also maintained by the city clerk and available for public inspection during the regular business hours of the city clerk’s office.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.020 Adoption of sections of Revised Code of Washington not specifically set forth in KCC 9.02.030 through 9.02.620.

A. With the exception of the RCW sections set forth in subsection (C) of this section, and notwithstanding the RCW sections that are specifically adopted by reference in KCC 9.02.030 through 9.02.620, all RCW sections that constitute misdemeanors and gross misdemeanors and the RCW sections necessary for the investigation, arrest, prosecution, adjudication, sentencing, confinement, and enforcement of misdemeanors and gross misdemeanors, or necessary for the definition or interpretation of terms used therein, are hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted or as hereafter enacted, amended, or recodified from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full.

B. All class C felony crimes set forth in the RCW are hereby adopted by reference for the purposes of charging a gross misdemeanor for a violation of any of the crimes set forth in Chapter 9A.28 RCW. The adoption of class C felonies shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (A) of this section and KCC 9.02.010.

C. The following RCW sections are not adopted by the city of Kent:

RCW

9.91.025    Unlawful transit conduct.

9A.76.020    Obstructing a law enforcement officer.

9A.76.130    Escape in the third degree.

9A.84.030    Disorderly conduct.

18.108.010    Massage practitioners – Definitions.

18.108.030    Massage practitioners – Licensure or certification required.

18.108.035    Massage practitioners – Unlicensed practice – Penalties. 

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.030 Session laws not yet codified.

As the Washington State Legislature adopts new laws, those new laws occasionally become effective before the state’s Office of the Code Reviser is able to codify those new laws into the RCW. Accordingly, the following session laws, as currently enacted or as later amended or codified, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

None.

(Ord. No. 3692, § 1, 6-1-04; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.20.025)


9.02.040 RCW Title 2, entitled “Courts of Record” – Adoption by reference. 

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

2.36.010    Definitions.

2.36.165    Leave of absence from employment to be provided – Denial of promotional opportunities prohibited – Penalty – Civil action.

2.36.170    Failure of juror to appear – Penalty.

2.48.180    Definitions – Unlawful practice a crime – Cause for discipline – Unprofessional conduct – Defense – Injunction – Remedies – Costs – Attorneys’ fees – Time limit for action.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.030)


9.02.050 RCW Title 7, entitled “Special Proceedings and Actions” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

7.21.010    Definitions.

7.21.020    Sanctions – Who may impose.

7.21.030    Remedial sanctions – Payment for losses.

7.21.040    Punitive sanctions – Fines.

7.21.050    Sanctions – Summary imposition – Procedure.

7.21.070    Appellate review.

7.80.120    Monetary penalties – Restitution.

7.80.150    Notices – Record of – Cancellation prohibited, penalty – Audit.

7.80.160    Failure to exercise notice options – Failure to satisfy penalty.

7.84.060    Response to notice – Contesting determination – Mitigating circumstances – Hearing – Failure to respond or appear – Penalty.

7.84.100    Monetary penalties.

7.84.130    Failure to pay or complete community restitution – Penalty.

7.90.090    Burden of proof – Issuance of protection order – Remedies – Violations.

7.90.110    Ex parte temporary sexual assault protection orders – Issuance.

7.92.120    Ex parte temporary order for protection – Issuance.

7.92.160    Court-initiated stalking no-contact orders.

7.94.010    Purpose – Intent.

7.94.020    Definitions.

7.94.030    Petition for order.

7.94.040    Hearings on petition – Grounds for order issuance.

7.94.050    Ex parte orders.

7.94.060    Service of orders.

7.94.070    Service by publication or mail.

7.94.080    Termination and renewal of orders.

7.94.090    Firearms – Surrender.

7.94.100    Firearms – Return – Disposal.

7.94.110    Reporting of orders.

7.94.120    Penalties.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 4314, § 1, 3-5-19. Formerly 9.02.040)


9.02.060 RCW Title 9, entitled “Crimes and Punishments” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

9.01.055    Citizen immunity if aiding officer, scope – When.

9.01.110    Omission, when not punishable.

9.01.130    Sending letter, when complete.

9.02.050    Concealing birth.

9.02.120    Unauthorized abortions – Penalty.

9.02.130    Defenses to prosecution.

9.02.170    Definitions.

9.03.010    Abandoning, discarding refrigeration equipment.

9.03.020    Permitting unused equipment to remain on premises.

9.03.030    Violation of RCW 9.03.010 or 9.03.020.

9.03.040    Keeping or storing equipment for sale.

9.04.010    False advertising.

9.04.040    Advertising cures of lost sexual potency – Evidence.

9.04.050    False, misleading, deceptive advertising.

9.04.070    False, misleading, deceptive advertising – Penalty.

9.04.090    Advertising fuel prices by service stations.

9.08.030    False certificate of registration of animals – False representation as to breed.

9.08.065    Definitions.

9.08.070    Pet animals – Taking, concealing, injuring, killing, etc. – Penalty.

9.08.072    Transferring stolen pet animal to a research institution – Penalty.

9.08.074    Transferring stolen pet animal to a person who has previously sold a stolen pet animal to a research institution – Penalty.

9.08.076    Transferring stolen pet animal to a research institution by a U.S.D.A. licensed dealer – Penalty.

9.08.078    Illegal sale, receipt, or transfer of pet animals – Separate offenses.

9.08.090    Acts against animal facilities.

9.12.010    Barratry.

9.12.020    Buying, demanding, or promising reward by district judge or deputy.

9.16.005    Definitions.

9.16.010    Removing lawful brands.

9.16.020    Imitating lawful brand.

9.16.030    Counterfeit mark – Intellectual property.

9.16.035    Counterfeiting – Penalties.

9.16.041    Counterfeit items – Seizure and forfeiture.

9.16.050    When deemed affixed.

9.16.060    Fraudulent registration of trademark.

9.16.070    Form and similitude defined.

9.16.080    Petroleum products improperly labeled or graded.

9.16.100    Use of the words “sterling silver,” etc.

9.16.110    Use of words “coin silver,” etc.

9.16.120    Use of the word “sterling” on mounting.

9.16.130    Use of the words “coin silver” on mounting.

9.16.140    Unlawfully marking article made of gold.

9.16.150    “Marked, stamped or branded” defined.

9.18.080    Offender a competent witness.

9.18.120    Suppression of competitive bidding.

9.18.130    Collusion to prevent competitive bidding – Penalty.

9.18.150    Agreements outside state.

9.24.010    Fraud in stock subscription.

9.24.040    Corporation doing business without license.

9.26A.090    Telephone company credit cards – Prohibited acts.

9.26A.100    Definitions.

9.26A.110    Fraud in obtaining telecommunications service – Penalty.

9.26A.120    Fraud in operating coin-box telephone or other receptacle.

9.26A.130    Penalty for manufacture or sale of slugs to be used for coin.

9.26A.140    Unauthorized sale or procurement of telephone records – Penalties – Definitions.

9.27.015    Interference, obstruction of any court, building, or residence – Violations.

9.35.005    Definitions.

9.35.010    Improperly obtaining financial information.

9.35.020    Identity theft.

9.35.030    Soliciting undesired mail.

9.38.010    False representation concerning credit.

9.38.015    False statement by deposit account applicant.

9.38.020    False representation concerning title.

9.38.060    Digital signature violations.

9.40.040    Operating engine or boiler without spark arrester.

9.40.100    Tampering with fire alarm or fire fighting equipment – False alarm – Penalties.

9.41.010    Terms defined.

9.41.040    Unlawful possession of firearms – Ownership, possession by certain persons – Restoration of right to possess – Penalty.

9.41.050    Carrying firearms.

9.41.060    Exceptions to restrictions on carrying firearms.

9.41.070    Concealed pistol license – Application – Fee – Renewal.

9.41.080    Delivery to ineligible persons.

9.41.090    Dealer deliveries regulated – Hold on delivery.

9.41.100    Dealer licensing and registration required.

9.41.110    Dealer’s licenses, by whom granted, conditions, fees – Employees, fingerprinting and background checks – Wholesale sales excepted – Permits prohibited.

9.41.113    Firearm sales or transfers – Background checks – Requirements – Exceptions.

9.41.115    Penalties – Violations of RCW 9.41.113.

9.41.120    Firearms as loan security.

9.41.140    Alteration of identifying marks – Exceptions.

9.41.171    Alien possession of firearms – Requirements – Penalty.

9.41.173    Alien possession of firearms – Alien firearm license – Political subdivisions may not modify requirements – Penalty for false statement.

9.41.175    Alien possession of firearms – Possession without license – Conditions.

9.41.190    Unlawful firearms – Exceptions.

9.41.220    Unlawful firearms and parts contraband.

9.41.230    Aiming or discharging firearms, dangerous weapons.

9.41.240    Possession of pistol by person from eighteen to twenty-one.

9.41.250    Dangerous weapons – Penalty.

9.41.251    Dangerous weapons – Application of restrictions to law enforcement, firefighting, rescue, and military personnel.

9.41.260    Dangerous exhibitions.

9.41.270    Weapons apparently capable of producing bodily harm – Unlawful carrying or handling – Penalty – Exceptions.

9.41.280    Possessing dangerous weapons on school facilities – Penalty – Exceptions.

9.41.290    State preemption.

9.41.300    Weapons prohibited in certain places – Local laws and ordinances – Exceptions – Penalty.

9.41.335    Failure to register as felony firearm offender.

9.41.345    Return of privately owned firearm or concealed pistol license by law enforcement agency – Duties – Notice – Exception.

9.41.350    Voluntary waiver of firearm rights – Procedure – Penalty – Exemption from public disclosure.

9.41.800    Surrender of weapons or licenses – Prohibition on future possession or licensing.

9.41.810    Penalty.

9.44.080    Misconduct in signing a petition.

9.45.060    Encumbered, leased, or rented personal property – Construction.

9.45.070    Mock auctions.

9.45.080    Fraudulent removal of property.

9.45.090    Knowingly receiving fraudulent conveyance.

9.45.100    Fraud in assignment for benefit of creditors.

9.45.160    Fraud in liquor warehouse receipts.

9.45.170    Penalty.

9.45.210    Altering sample or certificate of assay.

9.45.220    Making false sample or assay of ore.

9.45.260    Fire protection sprinkler system contractors – Wrongful acts.

9.45.270    Fraudulent filing of vehicle report of sale.

9.46.0201    “Amusement game.”

9.46.0205    “Bingo.”

9.46.0209    “Bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization.”

9.46.0213    “Bookmaking.”

9.46.0217    “Commercial stimulant.”

9.46.0221    “Commission.”

9.46.0225    “Contest of chance.”

9.46.0229    “Fishing derby.”

9.46.0233    “Fund-raising event.”

9.46.0237    “Gambling.”

9.46.0241    “Gambling device.”

9.46.0245    “Gambling information.”

9.46.0249    “Gambling premises.”

9.46.0253    “Gambling record.”

9.46.0257    “Lottery.”

9.46.0261    “Member,” “bona fide member.”

9.46.0265    “Player.”

9.46.0269    “Professional gambling.”

9.46.0273    “Punchboards,” “pull-tabs.”

9.46.0277    “Raffle.”

9.46.0282    “Social card game.”

9.46.0285    “Thing of value.”

9.46.0289    “Whoever,” “person.”

9.46.170    False or misleading entries or statements, refusal to produce records.

9.46.185    Causing person to violate rule or regulation.

9.46.190    Violations relating to fraud or deceit.

9.46.195    Obstruction of public servant – Penalty.

9.46.196    Cheating – Defined.

9.46.1961    Cheating in the first degree.

9.46.1962    Cheating in the second degree.

9.46.198    Working in gambling activity without license as violation – Penalty.

9.46.215    Ownership or interest in gambling device – Penalty – Exceptions.

9.46.217    Gambling records – Penalty – Exceptions.

9.46.221    Professional gambling in the second degree.

9.46.222    Professional gambling in the third degree.

9.46.228    Gambling activities by persons under age eighteen prohibited – Penalties – Jurisdiction – In-house controlled purchase programs authorized.

9.46.240    Gambling information, transmitting or receiving.

9.47.080    Bucket shop defined.

9.47.090    Maintaining bucket shop – Penalty.

9.47.100    Written statement to be furnished – Presumption.

9.47A.010    Definition.

9.47A.020    Unlawful inhalation – Exception.

9.47A.030    Possession of certain substances prohibited, when.

9.47A.040    Sale of certain substances prohibited, when.

9.47A.050    Penalty.

9.51.010    Misconduct of officer drawing jury.

9.51.020    Soliciting jury duty.

9.51.030    Misconduct of officer in charge of jury.

9.51.040    Grand juror acting after challenge allowed.

9.51.050    Disclosing transaction of grand jury.

9.51.060    Disclosure of deposition returned by grand jury.

9.55.020    Witness refusing to attend legislature or committee or to testify.

9.61.190    Carrier or racing pigeons – Injury to.

9.61.200    Carrier or racing pigeons – Removal or alteration of identification.

9.61.230    Telephone harassment.

9.61.240    Telephone harassment – Permitting telephone to be used.

9.61.250    Telephone harassment – Offense, where deemed committed.

9.61.260    Cyberstalking.

9.62.010    Malicious prosecution.

9.62.020    Instituting suit in name of another.

9.66.010    Public nuisance.

9.66.020    Unequal damage.

9.66.030    Maintaining or permitting nuisance.

9.66.040    Abatement of nuisance.

9.66.050    Deposit of unwholesome substance.

9.68.015    Obscene literature, shows, etc. – Exemptions.

9.68.030    Indecent articles, etc.

9.68.050    “Erotic material” – Definitions.

9.68.060    “Erotic material” – Determination by court – Labeling – Penalties.

9.68.070    Prosecution for violation of RCW 9.68.060 – Defense.

9.68.080    Unlawful acts.

9.68.100    Exceptions to RCW 9.68.050 through 9.68.120.

9.68.110    Motion picture operator or projectionist exempt, when.

9.68.130    “Sexually explicit material” – Defined – Unlawful display.

9.68.140    Promoting pornography – Class C felony – Penalties.

9.68A.011    Definitions.

9.68A.050    Dealing in depictions of minor engaged in sexually explicit conduct.

9.68A.060    Sending, bringing into state depictions of minor engaged in sexually explicit conduct.

9.68A.070    Possession of depictions of minor engaged in sexually explicit conduct.

9.68A.075    Viewing depictions of a minor engaged in sexually explicit conduct.

9.68A.080    Processors of depictions of minor engaged in sexually explicit conduct – Civil immunity.

9.68A.090    Communication with minor for immoral purposes – Penalties.

9.68A.102    Promoting travel for commercial sexual abuse of a minor – Penalty – Consent of minor does not constitute defense.

9.68A.103    Permitting commercial sexual abuse of a minor – Penalty – Consent of minor does not constitute defense.

9.68A.110    Certain defenses barred, permitted.

9.68A.120    Seizure and forfeiture of property.

9.68A.150    Allowing minor on premises of live erotic performance – Definitions – Penalty.

9.69.100    Duty of witness of offense against child or any violent offense – Penalty.

9.72.090    Committal of witness – Detention of documents.

9.73.010    Divulging telegram.

9.73.020    Opening sealed letter.

9.73.030    Intercepting, recording or divulging private communication – Consent required – Exceptions.

9.73.050    Admissibility of intercepted communication in evidence.

9.73.070    Persons and activities excepted from chapter.

9.73.080    Penalties.

9.73.090    Certain emergency response personnel exempted from RCW 9.73.030 through 9.73.080 – Standards – Court authorizations – Admissibility.

9.73.100    Recordings available to defense counsel.

9.73.110    Intercepting, recording, or disclosing private communications – Not unlawful for building owner – Conditions.

9.73.230    Intercepting, transmitting, or recording conversations concerning controlled substances or commercial sexual abuse of a minor – Conditions – Written reports required – Judicial review – Notice – Admissibility – Penalties.

9.73.260    Pen registers, trap and trace devices.

9.81.010    Definitions.

9.81.030    Membership in subversive organization is felony – Penalty.

9.81.110    Misstatements are punishable as perjury – Penalty.

9.86.010    “Flag,” etc., defined.

9.86.020    Improper use of flag prohibited.

9.86.030    Desecration of flag.

9.91.010    Denial of civil rights – Terms defined.

9.91.020    Operating railroad, steamboat, vehicle, etc., while intoxicated.

9.91.060    Leaving children unattended in a parked automobile.

9.91.130    Disposal of trash in charity donation receptacle.

9.91.140    Food stamps – Unlawful sale.

9.91.142    Food stamps – Trafficking.

9.91.144    Food stamps – Unlawful redemption.

9.91.150    Tree spiking.

9.91.160    Personal protection spray devices.

9.91.170    Interfering with dog guide or service animal.

9.91.175    Interfering with search and rescue dog.

9.91.180    Violent video or computer games.

9.92.020    Punishment of gross misdemeanor when not fixed by statute.

9.92.030    Punishment of misdemeanor when not fixed by statute.

9.92.040    Punishment for contempt.

9.92.080    Sentence on two or more convictions or counts.

9.94.041    Narcotic drugs, controlled substances, alcohol, marijuana, other intoxicant, cell phone, or other form of electronic telecommunications device – Possession, etc., by prisoners – Penalty.

9.96.060    Misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor offenses, persons convicted of prostitution who committed the offense as a result of being a victim of trafficking, promoting prostitution in the first degree, promoting commercial sexual abuse of a minor, or trafficking in persons, or of violating a certain statute or rule regarding the regulation of fishing – Vacating records – Domestic violence records.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 3692, § 2, 6-1-04; Ord. No. 3877, § 1, 4-1-08; Ord. No. 3888, § 1, 8-19-08; Ord. No. 3954, § 1, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 4314, § 2, 3-5-19)


9.02.070 RCW Title 9A, entitled “Washington Criminal Code” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

9A.04.020    Purposes – Principles of construction.

9A.04.030    State criminal jurisdiction.

9A.04.040    Classes of crimes.

9A.04.050    People capable of committing crimes – Capability of children.

9A.04.060    Common law to supplement statute.

9A.04.070    Who amenable to criminal statutes.

9A.04.080    Limitation of actions.

9A.04.090    Application of general provisions of the code.

9A.04.100    Proof beyond a reasonable doubt.

9A.04.110    Definitions.

9A.08.010    General requirements of culpability.

9A.08.020    Liability for conduct of another – Complicity.

9A.08.030    Corporate and personal liability.

9A.12.010    Insanity.

9A.16.010    Definitions.

9A.16.020    Use of force – When lawful.

9A.16.060    Duress.

9A.16.070    Entrapment.

9A.16.080    Action for being detained on mercantile establishment premises for investigation – “Reasonable grounds” as defense.

9A.16.090    Intoxication.

9A.16.100    Use of force on children – Policy – Actions presumed unreasonable.

9A.16.120    Outdoor music festival, campground – Detention.

9A.20.010    Classification and designation of crimes.

9A.20.021    Maximum sentences for crimes committed July 1, 1984, and after.

9A.20.030    Alternative to a fine – Restitution.

9A.28.020    Criminal attempt.

9A.28.030    Criminal solicitation.

9A.28.040    Criminal conspiracy.

9A.36.031    Assault in the third degree.

9A.36.041    Assault in the fourth degree.

9A.36.050    Reckless endangerment.

9A.36.060    Promoting a suicide attempt.

9A.36.070    Coercion.

9A.36.080    Malicious harassment – Definition and criminal penalty.

9A.36.100    Custodial assault.

9A.36.140    Assault of a child in the third degree.

9A.36.150    Interfering with the reporting of domestic violence.

9A.36.160    Failing to summon assistance.

9A.36.161    Failing to summon assistance – Penalty.

9A.40.010    Definitions.

9A.40.040    Unlawful imprisonment.

9A.40.060    Custodial interference in the first degree.

9A.40.070    Custodial interference in the second degree.

9A.40.080    Custodial interference – Assessment of costs – Defense – Consent defense, restricted.

9A.40.090    Luring.

9A.40.110    Coercion of involuntary servitude.

9A.40.120    Enforcement of orders restricting contact.

9A.42.010    Definitions.

9A.42.030    Criminal mistreatment in the second degree.

9A.42.035    Criminal mistreatment in the third degree.

9A.42.037    Criminal mistreatment in the fourth degree.

9A.42.040    Withdrawal of life support systems.

9A.42.045    Palliative care.

9A.42.050    Defense of financial inability.

9A.42.070    Abandonment of a dependent person in the second degree – Exception.

9A.42.080    Abandonment of a dependent person in the third degree – Exception.

9A.42.090    Abandonment of a dependent person – Defense.

9A.42.110    Leaving a child in the care of a sex offender.

9A.44.010    Definitions.

9A.44.020    Testimony – Evidence – Written motion – Admissibility.

9A.44.030    Defenses to prosecution under this chapter.

9A.44.060    Rape in the third degree.

9A.44.079    Rape of a child in the third degree.

9A.44.089    Child molestation in the third degree.

9A.44.093    Sexual misconduct with a minor in the first degree.

9A.44.096    Sexual misconduct with a minor in the second degree.

9A.44.105    Sexually violating human remains.

9A.44.115    Voyeurism.

9A.44.120    Admissibility of child’s statement – Conditions.

9A.44.128    Definitions applicable to RCW 9A.44.130 through 9A.44.145, 10.01.200, 43.43.540, 70.48.470, and 72.09.330.

9A.44.130    Registration of sex offenders and kidnapping offenders – Procedures – Definition – Penalties.

9A.44.132    Failure to register as sex offender or kidnapping offender – Refusal to provide DNA.

9A.44.150    Testimony of child by closed-circuit television.

9A.44.160    Custodial sexual misconduct in the first degree.

9A.44.170    Custodial sexual misconduct in the second degree.

9A.44.180    Custodial sexual misconduct – Defense.

9A.44.190    Criminal trespass against children – Definitions.

9A.44.193    Criminal trespass against children – Covered entities.

9A.44.196    Criminal trespass against children.

9A.46.010    Legislative finding.

9A.46.020    Definition – Penalties.

9A.46.030    Place where committed.

9A.46.040    Court-ordered requirements upon person charged with crime – Violation.

9A.46.050    Arraignment – No contact order.

9A.46.060    Crimes included in harassment.

9A.46.070    Enforcement of orders restricting contact.

9A.46.080    Order restricting contact – Violation.

9A.46.085    Stalking no-contact orders – Appearance before magistrate required.

9A.46.090    Nonliability of peace officer.

9A.46.100    “Convicted,” time when.

9A.46.110    Stalking.

9A.46.120    Criminal gang intimidation.

9A.48.010    Definitions.

9A.48.040    Reckless burning in the first degree.

9A.48.050    Reckless burning in the second degree.

9A.48.060    Reckless burning – Defense.

9A.48.080    Malicious mischief in the second degree.

9A.48.090    Malicious mischief in the third degree.

9A.48.100    Malicious mischief – “Physical damage” defined.

9A.48.105    Criminal street gang tagging and graffiti.

9A.48.110    Defacing a state monument.

9A.49.001    Findings.

9A.49.010    Definitions.

9A.49.020    Unlawful discharge of a laser in the first degree.

9A.49.030    Unlawful discharge of a laser in the second degree.

9A.49.040    Civil infraction, when.

9A.49.050    Exclusions.

9A.50.010    Definitions.

9A.50.020    Interference with health care facility.

9A.50.030    Penalty.

9A.50.060    Informational picketing.

9A.52.010    Definitions.

9A.52.050    Other crime in committing burglary punishable.

9A.52.060    Making or having burglar tools.

9A.52.070    Criminal trespass in the first degree.

9A.52.080    Criminal trespass in the second degree.

9A.52.090    Criminal trespass – Defenses.

9A.52.095    Vehicle prowling in the first degree.

9A.52.100    Vehicle prowling in the second degree.

9A.52.105    Removal of unauthorized persons – Declaration – Liability – Rights.

9A.52.115    Removal of unauthorized persons – Declaration form – Penalty for false swearing.1

9A.56.010    Definitions.

9A.56.020    Theft – Definition, defense.

9A.56.040    Theft in the second degree.

9A.56.050    Theft in the third degree.

9A.56.060    Unlawful issuance of checks or drafts.

9A.56.063    Making or possessing motor vehicle theft tools.

9A.56.075    Taking motor vehicle without permission in the second degree.

9A.56.083    Theft of livestock in the second degree.

9A.56.096    Theft of rental, leased, lease-purchased, or loaned property.

9A.56.100    Theft and larceny equated.

9A.56.110    Extortion – Definition.

9A.56.130    Extortion in the second degree.

9A.56.140    Possessing stolen property – Definition – Presumption.

9A.56.160    Possessing stolen property in the second degree – Other than firearm or motor vehicle.

9A.56.170    Possessing property in the third degree.

9A.56.180    Obscuring the identity of a machine.

9A.56.220    Theft of subscription television services.

9A.56.230    Unlawful sale of subscription television services.

9A.56.240    Forfeiture and disposal of device used to commit violation.

9A.56.260    Connection of channel converter.

9A.56.262    Theft of telecommunication services.

9A.56.264    Unlawful manufacture of telecommunication device.

9A.56.266    Unlawful sale of telecommunication device.

9A.56.270    Shopping cart theft.

9A.56.280    Credit, debit cards, checks, etc. – Definitions.

9A.56.290    Credit, payment cards – Unlawful factoring of transactions.

9A.56.320    Financial fraud – Unlawful possession, production of instruments of.

9A.56.330    Possession of another’s identification.

9A.56.340    Theft with the intent to resell.

9A.56.350    Organized retail theft.

9A.56.360    Retail theft with special circumstances.

9A.56.370    Mail theft.

9A.56.380    Possession of stolen mail.

9A.56.390    Mail theft – Possession of stolen mail – Commission of other crime.

9A.58.010    Definitions.

9A.58.020    Possessing, or reading or capturing, information contained on another person’s identification document – Exceptions.

9A.60.010    Definitions.

9A.60.020    Forgery.

9A.60.030    Obtaining a signature by deception or duress.

9A.60.040    Criminal impersonation in the first degree.

9A.60.045    Criminal impersonation in the second degree.

9A.60.050    False certification.

9A.60.060    Fraudulent creation or revocation of a mental health advance directive.

9A.60.070    False academic credentials – Unlawful issuance or use – Definitions – Penalties.

9A.61.010    Definitions.

9A.61.020    Defrauding a public utility.

9A.61.040    Defrauding a public utility in the second degree.

9A.61.050    Defrauding a public utility in the third degree.

9A.61.060    Restitution and costs.

9A.64.010    Bigamy.

9A.64.020    Incest.

9A.64.030    Child selling – Child buying.

9A.68.020    Requesting unlawful compensation.

9A.68.030    Receiving or granting unlawful compensation.

9A.68.040    Trading in public office.

9A.68.050    Trading in special influence.

9A.72.010    Definitions.

9A.72.030    Perjury in the second degree.

9A.72.040    False swearing.

9A.72.050    Perjury and false swearing – Inconsistent statements – Degree of crime.

9A.72.060    Perjury and false swearing – Retraction.

9A.72.070    Perjury and false swearing – Irregularities no defense.

9A.72.080    Statement of what one does not know to be true.

9A.72.085    Unsworn statements, certification – Standards for subscribing to an unsworn statement.

9A.72.120    Tampering with a witness.

9A.72.140    Jury tampering.

9A.72.150    Tampering with physical evidence.

9A.76.010    Definitions.

9A.76.023    Disarming a law enforcement or corrections officer.

9A.76.025    Disarming a law enforcement or corrections officer – Commission of another crime.

9A.76.027    Law enforcement or corrections officer engaged in criminal conduct.

9A.76.030    Refusing to summon aid for a peace officer.

9A.76.040    Resisting arrest.

9A.76.050    Rendering criminal assistance – Definition of term.

9A.76.060    Relative defined.

9A.76.070    Rendering criminal assistance in the first degree.

9A.76.080    Rendering criminal assistance in the second degree.

9A.76.090    Rendering criminal assistance in the third degree.

9A.76.100    Compounding.

9A.76.150    Introducing contraband in the second degree.

9A.76.160    Introducing contraband in the third degree.

9A.76.170    Bail jumping.

9A.76.175    Making a false or misleading statement to a public servant.

9A.76.177    Amber alert – Making a false or misleading statement to a public servant.

9A.76.200    Harming a police dog, accelerant detection dog, or police horse – Penalty.

9A.80.010    Official misconduct.

9A.82.010    Definitions.

9A.82.045    Collection of unlawful debt.

9A.82.055    Trafficking in stolen property in the second degree.

9A.82.070    Influencing outcome of sporting event.

9A.82.080    Use of proceeds of criminal profiteering – Controlling enterprise or realty – Conspiracy or attempt.

9A.82.100    Remedies and procedures.

9A.82.120    Criminal profiteering lien – Authority, procedures.

9A.82.130    Criminal profiteering lien – Trustee of real property.

9A.82.160    Criminal profiteering lien – Trustee’s failure to comply, evasion of procedures or lien.

9A.82.170    Financial institution records – Inspection and copying – Wrongful disclosure.

9A.84.010    Criminal mischief.

9A.84.020    Failure to disperse.

9A.84.040    False reporting.

9A.86.010    Disclosing intimate images.

9A.88.010    Indecent exposure.

9A.88.030    Prostitution.

9A.88.040    Prosecution for prostitution under RCW 9A.88.030 – Affirmative defense.

9A.88.050    Prostitution – Sex of parties immaterial – No defense.

9A.88.060    Promoting prostitution – Definitions.

9A.88.080    Promoting prostitution in the second degree.

9A.88.085    Promoting travel for prostitution.

9A.88.090    Permitting prostitution.

9A.88.110    Patronizing a prostitute.

9A.88.120    Additional fee assessments.

9A.88.130    Additional requirements.

9A.88.140    Vehicle impoundment – Fees – Fines.

9A.88.150    Seizure and forfeiture.

9A.90.030    Definitions.

9A.90.040    Computer trespass in the first degree.

9A.90.050    Computer trespass in the second degree.

9A.90.060    Electronic data service interference.

9A.90.070    Spoofing.

9A.90.080    Electronic data tampering in the first degree.

9A.90.090    Electronic data tampering in the second degree.

9A.90.100    Electronic data theft.

9A.90.110    Commission of other crime.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 3692, § 3, 6-1-04; Ord. No. 3878, § 1, 4-15-08; Ord. No. 4129, § 1, 11-18-14; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 4314, § 3, 3-5-19)


9.02.080 RCW Title 10, entitled “Criminal Procedure” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

10.01.070    Corporations – Amenable to criminal process – How.

10.01.090    Corporations – Judgment against.

10.01.100    Corporations – Penalties – Fines in lieu of other punishments.

10.01.180    Fine or costs – Default in payment – Contempt of court – Enforcement, collection procedures.

10.14.120    Disobedience of order – Penalties.

10.14.170    Criminal penalty.

10.21.015    Pretrial release program.

10.21.030    Conditions of release – Judicial officer may amend order.

10.21.045    Conditions of release – Drugs and intoxicating liquors – Testing.

10.21.050    Conditions of release – Judicial officer to consider available information.

10.31.030    Service – How – Warrant not in possession, procedure – Bail.

10.31.040    Officer may break and enter.

10.31.050    Officer may use force.

10.31.060    Arrest by telegraph or teletype.

10.31.100    Arrest without warrant.

10.31.110    Arrest – Individuals with mental disorders.

10.66.010    Definitions.

10.66.020    When order may be issued.

10.66.040    Ex parte temporary order – Hearing – Notice.

10.66.050    Additional relief – PADT area.

10.66.090    Penalties.

10.66.100    Additional penalties.

10.66.110    Jurisdiction.

10.66.120    Venue.

10.79.040    Search without warrant unlawful – Penalty.

10.88.290    Rights of person arrested.

10.88.300    Delivery of person in violation of RCW 10.88.290 – Penalty.

10.99.010    Purpose – Intent.

10.99.020    Definitions.

10.99.030    Law enforcement officers – Training, powers, duties – Domestic violence reports.

10.99.040    Duties of court – No-contact order.

10.99.045    Appearances by defendant – Defendant’s history – No-contact order.

10.99.050    Victim contact – Restriction, prohibition – Violation, penalties – Written order – Procedures – Notice of change.

10.99.055    Enforcement of orders.

10.99.060    Prosecutor’s notice to victim – Description of available procedures.

10.99.070    Liability of peace officers.

10.99.080    Penalty assessment (as amended by 2015 c 275).

10.99.100    Sentencing – Factors – Defendant’s criminal history.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 4314, § 4, 3-5-19)


9.02.090 Chapter 13.32A RCW, entitled “Family Reconciliation Act” – Adoption by reference. 

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

13.32A.080    Unlawful harboring of a minor – Penalty – Defense – Prosecution of adult for involving child in commission of offense.

13.32A.082    Providing shelter to minor – Requirement to notify parent, law enforcement, or department.

13.32A.084    Providing shelter to minor – Immunity from liability.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.100 RCW Title 16, entitled “Animals and Livestock” – Adoption by reference. 

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

16.36.116    Civil infraction – Live nonambulatory livestock – Monetary penalty – Authorization by director – Issuance of notices – Enforcement.

16.52.011    Definitions – Principles of liability.

16.52.015    Enforcement – Law enforcement agencies and animal care and control agencies.

16.52.080    Transporting or confining in unsafe manner – Penalty.

16.52.085    Removal of animals for feeding and care – Examination – Notice – Euthanasia.

16.52.090    Docking horses – Misdemeanor.

16.52.095    Cutting ears – Misdemeanor.

16.52.100    Confinement without food and water – Intervention by others.

16.52.110    Old or diseased animals at large.

16.52.117    Animal fighting – Prohibited behavior – Class C felony – Exceptions.

16.52.165    Punishment – Conviction of misdemeanor.

16.52.180    Limitations on application of chapter.

16.52.185    Exclusions from chapter.

16.52.190    Poisoning animals – Penalty.

16.52.193    Poisoning animals – Strychnine sales – Records – Report on suspected purchases.

16.52.200    Sentences – Forfeiture of animals – Liability for costs –Penalty – Education, counseling.

16.52.205    Animal cruelty in the first degree.

16.52.207    Animal cruelty in the second degree – Penalty.

16.52.210    Destruction of animal by law enforcement officer – Immunity from liability.

16.52.225    Nonambulatory livestock – Transporting or accepting delivery – Gross misdemeanor – Definition.

16.52.300    Dogs or cats used as bait – Seizure – Limitation.

16.52.305    Unlawful use of hook – Gross misdemeanor.

16.52.310    Dog breeding – Limit on the number of dogs – Required conditions – Penalty – Limitation of section – Definitions.

16.52.320    Maliciously killing or causing substantial bodily harm to livestock belonging to another – Penalty.

16.52.330    Veterinarians – Animal cruelty – Liability immunity.

16.52.340    Leave or confine any animal in unattended motor vehicle or enclosed space – Class 2 civil infraction – Officers’ authority to reasonably remove animal.

16.52.350    Dog tethering – Penalties.

16.57.010    Definitions.

16.57.120    Removal or alteration of brand – Penalty.

16.57.260    Removal of cattle or horses from state – Inspection certificate required.

16.57.267    Failure to present animal for inspection.

16.57.270    Unlawful to refuse assistance in establishing identity and ownership of livestock.

16.57.280    Possession of cattle or horse marked with another’s brand – Penalty.

16.57.405    Microchip in a horse – Removal with intent to defraud – Gross misdemeanor.

16.57.440    Unlawful transport or delivery of cattle or horses.

16.58.170    General penalties – Subsequent offenses.

16.65.440    Penalty.

16.70.050    Violations – Penalty.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 3692, § 4, 6-1-04; Ord. No. 3954, § 2, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 4314, § 5, 3-5-19)


9.02.110 Chapter 17.04 RCW, entitled “Weed districts” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW section, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

17.04.280    Officials of district may enter lands – Penalty for prevention.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.120 RCW Title 19, entitled “Business Regulations – Miscellaneous” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

19.06.010    Labels – Contents – Requirements – Prohibited acts.

19.06.030    Advertising limitations.

19.06.040    Penalty.

19.25.010    Definitions.

19.25.020    Reproduction of sound without consent of owner unlawful – Fine and penalty.

19.25.030    Use of recording of live performance without consent of owner unlawful – Fine and penalty.

19.25.040    Failure to disclose origin of certain recordings unlawful – Fine and penalty.

19.25.050    Contraband recordings – Disposition, forfeiture, penalty.

19.25.100    Truth in music advertising.

19.25.800    Chapter not applicable to broadcast by commercial or educational radio or television.

19.25.810    Chapter not applicable to certain nonrecorded broadcast use.

19.25.820    Chapter not applicable to defined public record.

19.27A.080    Definitions.

19.27A.090    Portable oil-fueled heaters – Sales and use – Approval required.

19.27A.100    Portable oil-fueled heaters – Requirements for approval.

19.27A.110    Portable oil-fueled heaters – Jurisdiction over approval – Sale and use governed exclusively.

19.27A.120    Violations – Penalty.

19.48.010    Definitions.

19.48.110    Obtaining hotel, restaurant, lodging house, ski area, etc., accommodations by fraud – Penalty.

19.60.010    Definitions.

19.60.025    Duty to record information – Precious metal property.

19.60.042    Report to chief law enforcement officer – Precious metal dealers.

19.60.057    Retention of precious metal property – Inspection.

19.60.066    Prohibited acts – Penalty.

19.60.067    Secondhand precious metal dealers – Prohibited acts – Penalty.

19.60.077    Precious metal dealers – Licensure required.

19.60.085    Exemptions.

19.60.095    Precious metal sales – Hosted home parties.

19.68.010    Rebating prohibited – Disclosure – List of alternative facilities.

19.76.100    Labels on bottles, etc. – Filing – Publication.

19.76.110    Refilling bottles, etc. – Forbidden.

19.76.120    Refilling bottles, etc. – Possession as evidence.

19.76.130    Refilling bottles, etc. – Penalty.

19.83.010    License required to use or furnish trading stamps, coupons, or similar devices.

19.83.020    Issuance of license – Fee.

19.83.030    Furnishing or selling trading stamps, coupons, or similar devices geographically limited.

19.83.040    Coupons or similar devices – Exemptions.

19.83.050    Penalty.

19.84.010    Redeemable cash value to be printed on face.

19.84.020    Must redeem at cash value.

19.84.030    Distributor liable.

19.84.040    Criminal penalty.

19.192.010    Identification cards – Distinguishing official and not official proofs of identification – Penalties.

19.194.010    Recordkeeping by retail establishments – Contents – Inspection – Definitions.

19.194.030    Prohibited acts – Gross misdemeanor.

19.194.040    Application.

19.210.010    Definitions.

19.210.020    Prohibited sales.

19.210.030    Chapter not applicable – Trade show, certain persons.

19.210.040    Penalties.

19.235.010    Motion picture – Unauthorized recording – Penalty.

19.290.010    Definitions.

19.290.020    Nonferrous metal property – Records required.

19.290.030    Metal property and metallic wire – Requirements for transactions.

19.290.040    Scrap metal businesses – Record of commercial accounts.



19.290.050    Reports to law enforcement – Records exempt from public disclosure – Private civil liability.

19.290.070    Violations – Penalty.

19.290.090    Exemptions from chapter.

19.290.100    Scrap metal license – Penalties.

19.290.110    Scrap metal license – Application, renewal – Required information.

19.290.120    Scrap metal license application – Department of licensing to issue license – Display of certificate.

19.290.230    Seizure and forfeiture.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 3877, § 2, 4-15-08; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.110, 9.02.115)


9.02.130 Chapter 20.01 RCW, entitled “Agricultural products – Commission merchants, dealers, brokers, buyers, agents” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW section, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

20.01.460    Prohibited acts – Penalties.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.140 Chapter 22.32 RCW, entitled “General penalties” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

22.32.010    Warehouse operator or carrier refusing to issue receipt.

22.32.020    Fictitious bill of lading and receipt.

22.32.030    Fraudulent tampering with or mixing goods.

22.32.040    Issuance of second receipt not marked “duplicate.”

22.32.050    Delivery of goods without taking up receipt.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.150 RCW Title 26, entitled “Domestic Relations” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

26.04.110    Penalty for failure to deliver certificates.

26.04.240    Penalty for unlawful solemnization – Code 1881.

26.04.250    Penalty for unlawful solemnization – 1909 c 249.

26.09.300    Restraining orders – Notice – Refusal to comply – Arrest – Penalty – Defense – Peace officers, immunity.

26.10.220    Restraining orders – Notice – Refusal to comply – Arrest – Penalty – Defense – Peace officers, immunity.

26.20.030    Family abandonment – Penalty – Exception.

26.20.035    Family nonsupport – Penalty – Exception.

26.20.071    Evidence – Spouse or domestic partner as witness.

26.20.080    Proof of wilfulness – Application of penalty provisions.

26.26.138    Restraining order – Knowing violation – Penalty – Law enforcement immunity.

26.26.210    Surrogate parenting – Definitions.

26.26.220    Surrogate parenting – Persons excluded from contracting.

26.26.230    Surrogate parenting – Compensation prohibited.

26.26.240    Surrogate parenting – Contract for compensation void.

26.26.250    Surrogate parenting – Provisions violated – Penalty.

26.26.450    Confidentiality of genetic testing – Penalty.

26.28.060    Child labor – Penalty.

26.28.070    Certain types of employment prohibited – Penalty.

26.28.080    Selling or giving tobacco to minor – Belief of representative capacity, no defense – Penalty.

26.28.085    Applying tattoo to a minor – Penalty.

26.33.370    Permanent care and custody of a child – Assumption, relinquishment, or transfer except by court order or statute, when prohibited – Penalty.

26.34.010    Compact enacted – Provisions.

26.34.030    “Appropriate public authorities” defined.

26.34.040    “Appropriate authority of the receiving state” defined.

26.34.070    “Executive head” defined – Compact administrator.

26.34.080    Violations – Penalty.

26.44.015    Limitations of chapter.

26.44.020    Definitions.

26.44.030    Reports – Duty and authority to make – Duty of receiving agency – Duty to notify – Case planning and consultation – Penalty for unauthorized exchange of information – Filing dependency petitions – Investigations – Interviews of children – Records – Risk assessment process.

26.44.040    Reports – Oral, written – Contents.

26.44.060    Immunity from civil or criminal liability – Confidential communications not violated – Actions against state not affected – False report, penalty.

26.44.063    Temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction – Enforcement – Notice of modification or termination of restraining order.

26.44.067    Temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction – Contents – Notice – Noncompliance – Defense – Penalty.

26.44.080    Violation – Penalty.

26.44.150    Temporary restraining order restricting visitation for persons accused of sexually or physically abusing a child – Penalty for violating court order.

26.50.010    Definitions.

26.50.110    Violation of order – Penalties.

26.50.120    Violation of order – Prosecuting attorney or attorney for municipality may be requested to assist – Costs and attorney’s fee.

26.50.140    Peace officers – Immunity.

26.50.250    Disclosure of information.

26.52.010    Definitions.

26.52.020    Foreign protection orders – Validity.

26.52.050    Peace officer immunity.

26.52.070    Violation of foreign orders – Penalties.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.120)


9.02.160 RCW Title 27, entitled “Libraries, Museums, and Historical Activities” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

27.12.010    Definitions.

27.12.330    Penalty for injury to property.

27.12.340    Wilfully retaining books – Infraction.

27.44.040    Protection of Indian graves – Penalty.

27.44.055    Skeletal human remains – Duty to notify – Ground disturbing activities – Coroner determination – Definitions.

27.53.030    Definitions.

27.53.040    Archaeological resources – Declaration.

27.53.045    Abandoned archaeological resources – Declaration.

27.53.060    Disturbing archaeological resource or site – Permit required – Conditions – Exceptions – Penalty.

27.53.090    Violations – Penalty.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.170 Chapter 28A.635 RCW, entitled “Offenses relating to school property and personnel” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

28A.635.010    Abusing or insulting teachers, liability for – Penalty.

28A.635.020    Willfully disobeying school administrative personnel or refusing to leave public property, violations, when – Penalty.

28A.635.030    Disturbing school, school activities or meetings – Penalty.

28A.635.040    Examination questions – Disclosing – Penalty.

28A.635.050    Certain corrupt practices of school officials – Penalty.

28A.635.070    Property, failure of officials or employees to account for – Mutilation by – Penalties.

28A.635.090    Interference by force or violence – Penalty.

28A.635.100    Intimidating any administrator, teacher, classified employee, or student by threat of force or violence unlawful – Penalty.

28A.635.110    Violations under RCW 28A.635.090 and 28A.635.100 – Disciplinary authority exception.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 3692, § 5, 6-1-04; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.130)


9.02.180 Chapter 29A.84 RCW, entitled “Crimes and penalties” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

29A.84.020    Violations by officers.

29A.84.040    Political advertising, removing or defacing.

29A.84.050    Tampering with registration form, ballot declaration.

29A.84.110    Officials’ violations.

29A.84.120    Disenfranchisement or discrimination.

29A.84.130    Voter violations.

29A.84.140    Unqualified registration.

29A.84.150    Misuse, alteration of registration database.

29A.84.210    Violations by officers.

29A.84.220    Violations – Corrupt practices – Recall petitions.

29A.84.230    Violations by signers – Initiative, referendum petitions – Penalty.

29A.84.240    Violations by signers, officers – Recall petitions – Penalty.

29A.84.250    Violations – Corrupt practices – Initiative, referendum petitions.

29A.84.261    Petitions – Improperly signing.

29A.84.311    Candidacy declarations, nominating petitions.

29A.84.410    Unlawful appropriation, printing, or distribution.

29A.84.420    Unauthorized examination of ballots, election materials – Revealing information.

29A.84.510    Acts prohibited in voting center – Prohibited practices.

29A.84.520    Electioneering at voting center or ballot drop location by election officers forbidden.

29A.84.530    Refusing to leave voting booth.

29A.84.540    Ballots – Removing from voting center or ballot drop location.

29A.84.545    Paper record from direct recording electronic voting device – Removing from voting center.

29A.84.550    Tampering with materials.

29A.84.560    Voting machines, devices – Tampering with – Extra keys.

29A.84.610    Deceptive, incorrect vote recording.

29A.84.620    Hindering or bribing voter.

29A.84.630    Influencing voter to withhold vote.

29A.84.640    Solicitation of bribe by voter.

29A.84.650    Repeaters.

29A.84.655    Tabulation of invalid ballots.

29A.84.660    Unqualified persons voting.

29A.84.680    Ballots – Violation.

29A.84.711    Documents regarding nomination, election, candidacy – Frauds and falsehoods.

29A.84.720    Officers – Violations generally.

29A.84.730    Divulging ballot count.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.190 RCW Title 30A, entitled “Washington Commercial Bank Act” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

30A.04.010    Definitions.

30A.04.020    Use of words indicating bank or trust company – Penalty.

30A.04.075    Examination reports and information – Confidentiality – Disclosure – Penalty.

30A.04.260    Legal services, advertising of – Penalty.

30A.04.405    Bank acquisition or control – Notice or application – Registration statement – Violations – Penalties.

30A.12.047    Removal of a director, officer, or employee of a bank or holding company – Violation of final order – Penalty.

30A.12.110    Commission, etc., for procuring loan – Penalty.

30A.12.190    General penalty – Effect of conviction.

30A.16.010    Certification – Effect – Penalty.

30A.42.290    Compliance – Violations – Penalties.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.200 Chapter 30B.10 RCW, entitled “Director’s authority – Supervision and examination – Enforcement” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW section, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

30B.10.100    Effect of final orders against officers, directors, employees, and agents.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.210 RCW Title 31, entitled “Miscellaneous Loan Agencies” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

31.04.027    Violations of chapter.

31.04.175    Violations – No penalty prescribed – Gross misdemeanor – Good faith exception.

31.12.565    Examination reports and specified other information confidential – Exceptions – Penalty.

31.45.105    Violations of chapter – Enforceability of transaction.

31.45.180    Violation – Misdemeanor.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.220 RCW Title 32, entitled “Washington Savings Bank Act” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

32.04.130    General penalty.

32.04.220    Examination reports and other information – Confidential – Privileged – Penalty.

32.16.097    Penalty for violation of order issued under RCW 32.16.093.

32.32.228    Acquisition of control of a converted savings bank – State reciprocity – Definitions.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.230 RCW Title 33, entitled “Washington Savings Associations Act” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

33.04.110    Examination reports and information – Confidential and privileged – Exceptions, limitations and procedure – Penalty.

33.08.010    Compliance required – Use of words in name or advertising – Penalty – Saving.

33.24.360    Acquisition of control of association – Unlawful, when – Application – Contents – Notice to other associations – Penalty.

33.36.010    Illegal loans or investments.

33.36.020    Purchase at discount of accounts or certificates.

33.36.030    Preference in case of insolvency.

33.36.040    Falsification of books – Exhibiting false document – Making false statement of assets or liabilities.

33.36.050    False statement affecting financial standing.

33.36.060    Suppressing, secreting, or destroying evidence or records.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.240 RCW Title 35, entitled “Cities and Towns” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

35.17.150    Officers and employees – Passes, free services prohibited, exceptions – Penalty.

35.32A.090    Budget mandatory – Other expenditures void – Liability of public officials – Penalty.

35.33.170    Violations and penalties.

35.34.280    Violations and penalties.

35.67.350    Penalty for sewer connection without permission.

35.75.020    Use of bicycle paths for other purposes prohibited.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.250 RCW Title 35A, entitled “Optional Municipal Code” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

35A.33.160    Violations and penalties.

35A.34.280    Violations and penalties.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.260 RCW Title 36, entitled “Counties” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

36.13.070    County census authorized – Penalty.

36.28.060    Duplicate receipts – Penalties.

36.29.060    Warrant calls – Penalty for failure to call.

36.32.210    Inventory of county capitalized assets – County commission inventory statement – Filing and public inspection – Penalty – Prosecutions – Taxpayer’s action.

36.40.240    Penalty.

36.43.040    Penalty for violation of code or regulation.

36.49.070    Penalty.

36.58.020    Rules and regulations as to use – Penalty.

36.68.080    Penalty for violations of regulations.

36.69.180    Violation of rules – Penalty.

36.71.060    Peddler’s license – Penalty for peddling without license.

36.71.070    Hawkers, auctioneers, and barterers must procure license – Exceptions.

36.75.130    Approaches to county roads – Rules regarding construction – Penalty.

36.75.270    Limitation of type or weight of vehicles authorized – Penalty.

36.75.290    General penalty.

36.86.060    Restrictions on use of oil at intersections or entrances to county roads.

36.95.190    Penalty for false statement as to tax exemption.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.270 RCW Title 38, entitled “Militia and Military Affairs” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

38.32.090    Penalty for physician making false certificate.

38.32.100    Buying and receiving military property.

38.32.120    Authority of commanding officer.

38.40.040    Interference with employment – Penalty.

38.40.050    Discharge from employment – Penalty.

38.40.110    Employment or membership in other organizations – Discrimination prohibited – Penalty – Civil cause of action.

38.40.120    Authorized military organizations.

38.42.050    Protection of service members and their dependents against default judgments.

38.42.150    Civil investigative demands – Standards – Limitations – Enforcement.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.280 RCW Title 39, entitled “Public Contracts and Indebtedness” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

39.04.110    Penalty for false entries.

39.84.050    Public corporations – Directors – Conflicts of interest.

39.110.020    Economic development finance authority – Creation – Dissolution – Requirements – Penalty.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.290 Chapter 40.16 RCW, entitled “Penal provisions” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

40.16.010    Injury to public record.

40.16.030    Offering false instrument for filing or record.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.300 RCW Title 41, entitled “Public Employment, Civil Service, and Pensions” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

41.08.210    Penalty – Jurisdiction.

41.12.210    Penalty – Jurisdiction.

41.14.220    Penalty – Jurisdiction.

41.32.055    Falsification – Penalty.

41.35.120    False statements – Penalty.

41.37.120    False statements – Penalty.

41.40.055    Penalty for false statements.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.310 RCW Title 42, entitled “Public Officers and Agencies” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

42.17A.750    Civil remedies and sanctions – Referral for criminal prosecution.

42.20.020    Powers may not be delegated for profit.

42.20.030    Intrusion into and refusal to surrender public office.

42.20.040    False report.

42.20.050    Public officer making false certificate.

42.20.060    Falsely auditing and paying claims.

42.20.080    Other violations by officers.

42.20.090    Misappropriation, etc., by treasurer.

42.20.100    Failure of duty by public officer a misdemeanor.

42.20.110    Improper conduct by certain justices.

42.24.100    Municipal corporations and political subdivisions – Certificates need not be sworn – Penalty for false claim.

42.24.110    Municipal corporations and political subdivisions – Approving or paying false claim – Penalties.

42.44.160    Official misconduct – Penalty.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.320 RCW Title 43, entitled “State Government – Executive” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

43.01.100    Application forms – Employment – Licenses – Mention of race or religion prohibited – Penalty.

43.04.090    Criminal penalty.

43.06.220    State of emergency – Powers of governor pursuant to proclamation.

43.06.240    State of emergency – Disorderly conduct after emergency proclaimed – Penalty.

43.06.250    State of emergency – Refusing to leave public way or property when ordered – Penalty.

43.07.210    Filing false statements – Penalty.

43.12.065    Rules pertaining to public use of state lands – Enforcement – Penalty.

43.21G.100    Penalty.

43.22.300    Compelling attendance of witnesses and testimony – Penalty.

43.22.310    Access to plants – Penalty for refusal.

43.22.340    Manufactured homes, mobile homes, recreational vehicles – Safety rules – Compliance – Penalty.

43.22.433    Violations – Penalties.

43.22.490    Factory built housing and commercial structures, regulating installation of – Violation as misdemeanor – Penalty.

43.22A.170    Notice of infraction.

43.37.200    Penalty.

43.43.320    Penalty for falsification.

43.43.690    Crime laboratory analysis fee – Court imposition – Collection.

43.43.754    DNA identification system – Biological samples – Collection, use, testing – Scope and application of section.

43.43.810    Obtaining information by false pretenses – Unauthorized use of information – Falsifying records – Penalty.

43.70.185    Inspection of property where marine species located – Prohibitions on harvest or landing – Penalties.

43.88.270    Penalty for violations.

43.215.340    Operating without a license – Penalty.

43.320.090    Borrowing money by director, deputy, or employee – Penalty.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.330 Chapter 44.16 RCW, entitled “Legislative inquiry” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW section, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

44.16.120    Punishment of recalcitrant witness.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.340 RCW Title 46, entitled “Motor Vehicles” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

46.09.495    Failure to title or register an off-road vehicle – Penalty, circumstances when.

46.10.505    Failure to register a snowmobile, circumstances when.

46.12.610    Contaminated vehicles.

46.16A.050    Registration – Requirements before issuance – Penalty – Rules.

46.16A.070    Registration – Cancellation, refusal, etc. – Appeals.

46.19.010    Criteria for natural persons – Application – Identification cards, placards, and license plates.

46.20.091    Application – Penalty for false statement – Driving records from and to other jurisdictions.

46.29.610    Surrender of license – Penalty.

46.29.620    Forged proof – Penalty.

46.35.030    Confidential information – Exceptions – Penalty.

46.52.130    Abstract of driving record – Access – Fee – Violations.

46.55.300    Vehicle immobilization.

46.68.010    Refunds, overpayments, and underpayments – Penalty for false statements.

46.70.021    License required for dealers or manufacturers – Penalties.

46.70.051    Issuance of license – Private party dissemination of vehicle database.

46.70.140    Handling “hot” vehicles – Unreported motor “switches” – Unauthorized use of dealer plates – Penalty.

46.70.170    Penalty for violations.

46.72.100    Unprofessional conduct – Bond/insurance policy – Penalty.

46.72A.060    Insurance – Amount – Penalty.

46.72A.070    Vehicle certificates – Issuance of new or duplicate certificate – Penalty.

46.80.020    License required – Penalty.

46.80.080    Records – Penalty.

46.80.110    License penalties, civil fines, criminal penalties.

46.80.130    All storage at place of business – Screening required – Penalty.

46.80.170    Violations – Penalties.

46.82.390    Penalty.

46.87.290    Refusal, cancellation of application, cab card – Procedures, penalties.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 4314, § 6, 3-5-19)


9.02.350 RCW Title 47, entitled “Public Highways and Transportation” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

47.04.090    Penalty.

47.08.110    Misuse of county or city road funds – General penalty.

47.38.010    Rules governing use and control of rest areas, historic sites, viewpoints, etc. – Penalties.

47.40.080    Penalty for destroying native flora on state lands, highways, parks.

47.41.070    Violations – Penalty – Abatement as public nuisance.

47.42.080    Public nuisance – Abatement – Penalty.

47.44.060    Penalties.

47.48.040    Penalty.

47.48.050    Transportation of radioactive or hazardous cargo – Definition – Violation, penalty.

47.68.220    Operating aircraft recklessly or under influence of intoxicants or drugs.

47.68.230    Aircraft, airman, and airwoman certificates required.

47.68.240    Penalties for violations.

47.68.255    Evasive registration.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.360 RCW Title 48, entitled “Insurance” – Adoption by reference. 

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

48.01.080    Penalties.

48.07.060    Corrupt practices – Penalty.

48.08.040    Illegal dividends, reductions – Penalty against directors.

48.15.180    Surplus line broker’s fiduciary capacity – Violations.

48.17.480    Reporting and accounting for premiums.

48.17.600    Separation of premium funds.

48.18.070    Alteration of application.

48.18.180    Stated premium must include all charges.

48.30.110    Contributions to candidates for insurance commissioner.

48.30.190    Illegal dealing in premiums.

48.30.210    Misrepresentation in application for insurance.

48.30.220    Destruction, injury, secretion, etc., of property.

48.30.230    False claims or proof – Penalty.

48.30A.015    Unlawful acts – Penalties.

48.31.105    Conduct of proceedings – Requirement to cooperate – Definitions – Violations – Penalties.

48.36A.360    Penalties.

48.44.015    Registration by health care service contractors required – Penalty.

48.44.060    Penalty.

48.46.027    Registration, required – Issuance of securities – Penalty.

48.46.420    Penalty for violations.

48.56.030    License – Required – Fees – Information to be furnished – Penalty.

48.80.030    Making false claims, concealing information – Penalty – Exclusions.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.370 RCW Title 49, entitled “Labor Regulations” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

49.12.130    Witness protected – Penalty.

49.12.170    Penalty.

49.12.175    Wage discrimination due to sex prohibited – Penalty – Civil recovery.

49.12.410    Child labor laws – Violations – Criminal penalties.

49.17.190    Violations – Criminal penalties.

49.24.060    Penalty.

49.24.380    Penalty.

49.26.140    Asbestos projects – Enforcement – Penalties.



49.28.010    Eight hour day, 1899 act – Public works contracts – Emergency overtime – Penalty.

49.28.080    Hours of domestic employees – Exception – Penalty.

49.28.100    Hours of operators of power equipment in waterfront operations – Penalty.

49.38.060    Penalty.

49.40.030    Fraud in securing advances – Penalty.

49.44.010    Blacklisting – Penalty.

49.44.020    Bribery of labor representative.

49.44.030    Labor representative receiving bribe.

49.44.040    Obtaining employment by false letter or certificate.

49.44.050    Fraud by employment agent.

49.44.060    Corrupt influencing of agent.

49.44.080    Endangering life by refusal to labor.

49.44.100    Bringing in out-of-state persons to replace employees involved in labor dispute – Penalty.

49.44.120    Requiring lie detector tests – Penalty.

49.46.100    Prohibited acts of employer – Penalty.

49.48.020    Penalty for noncompliance with RCW 49.48.010 through 49.48.030 and 49.48.060.

49.48.040    Enforcement of wage claims – Issuance of subpoenas – Compliance.

49.52.050    Rebates of wages – False records – Penalty.

49.52.090    Rebates of wages on public works – Penalty.

49.60.310    Misdemeanor to interfere with or resist commission.

49.60.360    Refueling services for disabled drivers – Violation – Investigation – Intentional display of plate or placard invalid or not legally issued prohibited – Fine – Notice to disabled persons.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.380 RCW Title 50, entitled “Unemployment Compensation” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

50.36.010    Violations generally.

50.36.020    Violations by employers.

50.36.030    Concealing cause of discharge.

50.40.010    Waiver of rights void.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.390 RCW Title 51, entitled “Industrial Insurance” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

51.14.100    Notice of compliance to be posted – Penalty.

51.16.140    Premium liability of worker.

51.48.020    Employer’s false reporting or failure to secure payment of compensation – False information by claimants – Unlawful actions – Penalties.

51.48.040    Inspection of employer’s records.

51.48.050    Liability for illegal collections for medical aid.

51.48.103    Engaging in business without certificate of coverage – Unlawful actions – Penalties.

51.48.270    Criminal liability of persons making false statements or concealing information.

51.48.280    Kickbacks, bribes, and rebates – Representation fees – Criminal liability – Exceptions.

51.52.120    Attorney’s fee before department or board – Unlawful attorney’s fees.

51.52.132    Unlawful attorney’s fees.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.400 Chapter 52.12 RCW, entitled “Powers – Burning permits” – Adoption by reference. 

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

52.12.105    Burning permits – Penalty.

52.12.106    Burning permits – Penalty.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.410 RCW Title 53, entitled “Port Districts” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

53.08.220    Regulations authorized – Adoption as part of ordinance or resolution of city or county, procedure – Enforcement – Penalty for violation.

53.34.190    Bylaws, rules for management, uses, charges – Penalty for violation.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.420 Chapter 57.08 RCW, entitled “Powers” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW section, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

57.08.180    Sewer, drainage, and water connections without district permission – Penalties.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.430 RCW Title 58, entitled “Boundaries and Plats” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

58.04.015    Disturbing a survey monument – Penalty – Cost.

58.17.300    Violations – Penalties.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.440 RCW Title 59, entitled “Landlord and Tenant” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

59.12.230    Forcible entry and detainer – Penalty.

59.18.125    Inspections by local municipalities – Frequency – Number of rental properties inspected – Notice – Appeals – Penalties.

59.21.110    Violations – Penalty.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.450 RCW Title 61, entitled “Mortgages, Deeds of Trust, and Real Estate Contracts” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

61.12.030    Removal of property from mortgaged premises – Penalty.

61.30.150    False swearing – Penalty – Failure to comply with chapter – Liability.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.460 RCW Title 63, entitled “Personal Property” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

63.14.170    Violations – Penalties.

63.29.340    Interest and penalties.

63.29.350    Penalty for excessive fee for locating abandoned property – Consumer protection act application.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.470 RCW Title 64, entitled “Real Property and Conveyances” – Adoption by reference. 

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

64.36.020    Registration required before advertisement, solicitation, or offer – Requirements for registration – Exemption authorized – Penalties.

64.36.210    Unlawful acts – Penalties.

64.44.040    Orders declaring property unfit and prohibiting use – City, county action – Entrance upon property prohibited.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.480 RCW Title 65, entitled “Recording, Registration, and Legal Publication” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

65.12.730    Certificate subject of theft – Penalty.

65.12.740    Perjury.

65.12.750    Fraud – False entries – Penalty.

65.20.130    General penalties.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.490 RCW Title 66, entitled “Alcoholic Beverage Control” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

66.04.010    Definitions.

66.08.130    Inspection of books and records – Goods possessed or shipped – Refusal as violation.

66.08.140    Inspection of books and records – Financial dealings – Penalty for refusal.

66.12.010    Wine or beer manufactured for home use.

66.16.090    Record of individual purchases confidential – Penalty for disclosure.

66.20.100    Physician may prescribe or administer liquor – Penalty.

66.20.110    Dentist may administer liquor – Penalty.

66.20.120    Hospital, etc., may administer liquor – Penalty.

66.20.200    Unlawful acts relating to identification or certification card – Penalties.

66.20.340    Alcohol servers – Violation of rules – Penalties.

66.24.481    Public place or club – License or permit required – Penalty.

66.28.090    Licensed premises or banquet permit premises open to inspection – Failure to allow, violation.

66.28.200    Keg registration – Special endorsement for grocery store licensee – Requirements of seller.

66.28.210    Keg registration – Requirements of purchaser.

66.28.220    Keg registration – Identification of containers – Rules – Fees – Sale in violation of rules unlawful.

66.28.230    Keg registration – Furnishing to minors – Penalties.

66.44.010    Local officers to enforce law – Authority of board – Liquor enforcement officers.

66.44.040    Sufficiency of description of offenses in complaints, informations, process, etc.

66.44.060    Proof of unlawful sale establishes prima facie intent.

66.44.070    Certified analysis is prima facie evidence of alcoholic content.

66.44.080    Service of process on corporation.

66.44.090    Acting without license.

66.44.100    Opening or consuming liquor in a public place – Penalty.

66.44.120    Unlawful use of seal.

66.44.130    Sales of liquor by drink or bottle.

66.44.140    Unlawful sale, transportation of spirituous liquor without stamp or seal – Unlawful operation, possession of still or mash.

66.44.150    Buying liquor illegally.

66.44.160    Illegal possession, transportation of alcoholic beverages.

66.44.170    Illegal possession of liquor with intent to sell – Prima facie evidence, what is.

66.44.175    Violations of law.

66.44.180    General penalties – Jurisdiction for violations.

66.44.200    Sales to persons apparently under the influence of liquor – Purchases or consumption by persons apparently under the influence of liquor on licensed premises – Penalty – Notice – Separation of actions.

66.44.210    Obtaining liquor for ineligible person.

66.44.270    Furnishing liquor to minors – Possession, use – Penalties – Exhibition of effects – Exceptions.

66.44.280    Minor applying for permit.

66.44.290    Minor purchasing or attempting to purchase liquor – Penalty.

66.44.292    Sales to minors by licensee or employee – Board notification to prosecuting attorney to formulate charges against minors.

66.44.300    Treats, gifts, purchases of liquor for or from minor, or holding out minor as at least twenty-one, in public place where liquor sold.

66.44.310    Minors frequenting off-limits area – Misrepresentation of age – Penalty – Classification of licensees.

66.44.316    Certain persons eighteen years and over permitted to enter and remain upon licensed premises during employment.

66.44.318    Employees aged eighteen to twenty-one stocking, merchandising, and handling beer and wine.

66.44.325    Unlawful transfer to a minor of age identification.

66.44.328    Preparation or acquisition and supply to persons under age twenty-one of facsimile of official identification card – Penalty.

66.44.340    Employees eighteen years and over allowed to sell and handle beer and wine for certain licensed employers.

66.44.350    Employees eighteen years and over allowed to serve and carry liquor, clean up, etc., for certain licensed employers.

66.44.370    Resisting or opposing officers in enforcement of title.

66.44.380    Powdered alcohol.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 3692, § 6, 6-1-04; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.140)


9.02.500 RCW Title 67, entitled “Sports and Recreation – Convention Facilities” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

67.04.010    Penalty for bribery in relation to baseball game.

67.04.020    Penalty for acceptance of bribe.

67.04.050    Corrupt baseball playing – Penalty.

67.04.150    Contract with minor – Penalty for violation.

67.08.015    Duties of department – Exemptions – Rules.

67.08.140    Penalty for conducting events without license – Penalty.

67.08.150    General penalty.

67.14.060    Liquor sales, keeping games, without license – Penalty.

67.16.060    Prohibited practices – Parimutuel system permitted – Race meet as public nuisance.

67.42.070    Penalty.

67.70.120    Sale to minor prohibited – Exception – Penalties.

67.70.150    Penalty for false or misleading statement or entry or failure to produce documents.

67.70.160    Penalty for violation of chapter – Exceptions.

67.70.170    Penalty for violation of rules – Exceptions.

67.70.180    Persons prohibited from purchasing tickets or shares or receiving prizes – Penalty.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.510 RCW Title 68, entitled “Cemeteries, Morgues, and Human Remains” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

68.05.115    Sale or transfer of cemetery authority or creation of a new cemetery – Penalty for noncompliance.

68.05.240    Interment, certificate of authority required – Penalty.

68.05.330    Violation – Penalty – Unfair practice – Other laws applicable.

68.05.390    Permit or endorsement required for cremation – Penalty.

68.24.130    Sale for resale prohibited – Penalty.

68.24.140    Commission on sales prohibited – Penalty.

68.24.150    Unlawful employment of others to dispose of human remains.

68.24.190    Opening road through cemetery – Penalty.

68.28.060    Improper construction a nuisance – Penalty.

68.40.085    Representing fund as perpetual – Penalty.

68.40.090    Penalty.

68.44.060    Unauthorized loans – Penalty.

68.50.020    Notice to coroner – Penalty.

68.50.050    Removal or concealment of body – Penalty.

68.50.100    Dissection, when permitted – Autopsy of person under the age of three years.

68.50.108    Autopsies, postmortems – Consent to embalm or cremate body – Time limitation.

68.50.120    Holding body for debt – Penalty.

68.50.130    Unlawful disposal of remains.

68.50.140    Unlawful disturbance, removal, or sale of human remains – Penalty.

68.50.185    Individual cremation – Exception – Penalty.

68.50.645    Skeletal human remains – Duty to notify – Ground disturbing activities – Coroner determination – Definitions.

68.56.010    Unlawful damage to graves, markers, shrubs, etc. – Interfering with funeral.

68.56.040    Nonconforming cemetery a nuisance – Penalty.

68.56.050    Defendant liable for costs.

68.60.040    Protection of cemeteries – Penalties.

68.60.050    Protection of historic graves – Penalty.

68.60.055    Skeletal human remains – Duty to notify – Ground disturbing activities – Coroner determination – Definitions.

68.64.150    Illegal purchases or sales – Felony.

68.64.160    Illegal financial gain – Altering a document, amendment, or revocation of gift – Felony.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.520 RCW Title 69, entitled “Food, Drugs, Cosmetics, and Poisons” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW 

69.04.040    Prohibited acts.

69.04.060    Criminal penalty for violations.

69.04.070    Additional penalty.

69.04.933    Food fish and shellfish labeling – Identification of species – Exceptions – Penalty.

69.04.934    Salmon labeling – Identification as farm-raised or commercially caught – Exceptions – Penalty.

69.04.938    Misbranding of food fish or shellfish – Penalties.

69.06.060    Penalty.

69.07.150    Violations – Penalties.

69.22.090    Penalties.

69.25.150    Penalties – Liability of employer – Defense.

69.28.185    Penalty.

69.30.140    Penalties.

69.36.060    Penalty.

69.38.040    Inspection of poison register – Penalty for failure to maintain register.

69.38.050    False representation – Penalty.

69.38.060    Manufacturers and sellers of poisons – License required – Penalty.

69.40.055    Selling repackaged poison without labeling – Penalty.

69.41.010    Definitions.

69.41.030    Sale, delivery, or possession of legend drug without prescription or order prohibited – Exceptions – Penalty.

69.41.050    Labeling requirements – Penalty.

69.41.060    Search and seizure.

69.41.072    Violations of Chapter 69.50 RCW not to be charged under Chapter 69.41 RCW – Exception.

69.41.170    Coercion of pharmacist prohibited – Penalty.

69.41.320    Practitioners – Restricted use – Medical records.

69.41.350    Penalties.

69.43.010    Report to pharmacy quality assurance commission – List of substances – Modification of list – Identification of purchasers – Report of transactions – Penalties.

69.43.020    Receipt of substance from source outside state – Report – Penalty.

69.43.030    Exemptions.

69.43.035    Suspicious transactions – Report – Penalty.

69.43.040    Reporting form.

69.43.043    Recordkeeping requirements – Penalty.

69.43.048    Reporting and recordkeeping requirements – Submission of computer readable data, copies of federal reports.

69.43.080    False statement in report or record – Class C felony.

69.43.090    Permit to sell, transfer, furnish, or receive substance – Exemptions – Application for permit – Fee – Renewal – Penalty.

69.43.105    Ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine – Sales restrictions – Record of transaction – Exceptions – Penalty.

69.43.110    Ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine – Sales restrictions – Electronic sales tracking system – Penalty.

69.43.120    Ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine – Possession of more than fifteen grams – Penalty – Exceptions.

69.43.130    Exemptions – Pediatric products – Products exempted by the pharmacy quality assurance commission.

69.43.135    Iodine, methylsulfonylmethane – Sales restrictions – Recording of transactions – Penalties.

69.50.101    Definitions.

69.50.102    Drug paraphernalia – Definitions.

69.50.202    Nomenclature.

69.50.204    Schedule I.

69.50.206    Schedule II.

69.50.208    Schedule III.

69.50.210    Schedule IV.

69.50.212    Schedule V.

69.50.315    Medical assistance – Drug-related overdose – Prosecution for possession.

69.50.401    Prohibited acts: A – Penalties.

69.50.4011    Counterfeit substances – Penalties.

69.50.4012    Delivery of substance in lieu of controlled substance – Penalty.

69.50.4013    Possession of controlled substance – Penalty – Possession of useable marijuana, marijuana concentrates, or marijuana-infused products.

69.50.4014    Possession of forty grams or less of marijuana – Penalty.

69.50.4015    Involving a person under eighteen in unlawful controlled substance transaction – Penalty.

69.50.4016    Provisions not applicable to offenses under RCW 69.50.410.

69.50.402    Prohibited acts: B – Penalties.

69.50.403    Prohibited acts: C – Penalties.

69.50.404    Penalties under other laws.

69.50.405    Bar to prosecution.

69.50.407    Conspiracy.

69.50.408    Second or subsequent offenses.

69.50.410    Prohibited acts: D – Penalties.

69.50.412    Prohibited acts: E – Penalties.

69.50.4121    Drug paraphernalia – Selling or giving – Penalty.

69.50.416    Counterfeit substances prohibited – Penalties.

69.50.435    Violations committed in or on certain public places or facilities – Additional penalty – Defenses – Construction – Definitions.

69.50.445    Opening package of or consuming marijuana, useable marijuana, marijuana-infused products, or marijuana concentrates in view of general public or public place – Penalty.

69.50.450    Butane or other explosive gases.

69.50.465    Conducting or maintaining marijuana club – Penalty.

69.50.505    Seizure and forfeiture.

69.50.506    Burden of proof; liabilities.

69.50.509    Search and seizure of controlled substances.

69.50.510    Search and seizure at rental premises – Notification of landlord.

69.50.560    Controlled purchase programs – Persons under age twenty-one – Violation – Criminal penalty – Exceptions.

69.51A.005    Purpose and intent.

69.51A.010    Definitions.

69.51A.030    Acts not constituting crimes or unprofessional conduct – Health care professionals not subject to penalties or liabilities.

69.51A.040    Compliance with chapter – Qualifying patients and designated providers not subject to penalties – Law enforcement not subject to liability.

69.51A.043    Failure to register – Affirmative defense.

69.51A.045    Possession of plants, marijuana concentrates, useable marijuana, or marijuana-infused products exceeding lawful amount – Affirmative defense.

69.51A.050    Medical marijuana, lawful possession – State not liable.

69.51A.055    Limitations of chapter – Persons under supervision.

69.51A.060    Crimes – Limitations of chapter.

69.51A.085    Collective gardens.

69.51A.130    State and municipalities – Not subject to liability.

69.51A.210    Qualifying patients or designated providers – Authorization – Health care professional may include recommendations on amount of marijuana.

69.51A.240    Unlawful actions – Criminal penalty.

69.51A.260    Housing unit – No more than fifteen plants may be grown or located – Exception – Civil penalties.

69.52.010    Legislative findings.

69.52.020    Definitions.

69.52.030    Violations – Exceptions.

69.52.040    Seizure of contraband.

69.52.045    Seizure at rental premises – Notification of landlord.

69.52.070    Violations – Juvenile driving privileges.

69.53.010    Unlawful use of building for drug purposes – Liability of owner or manager – Penalty.

69.53.020    Unlawful fortification of building for drug purposes – Penalty.

69.53.030    Unlawful use of fortified building – Penalty.

69.55.010    Theft of ammonia.

69.55.020    Unlawful storage of ammonia.

69.55.030    Damages – Liability.

69.75.010    Definitions.

69.75.020    Retail sales – Proof of age from purchaser – Unlawful acts, exceptions – Penalties.

69.75.040    Construction of chapter.

69.75.050    Preemption.

69.90.010    Definitions.

69.90.020    Sale of “kosher” and “kosher style” food products prohibited if not kosher – Representations – Penalty.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 3692, § 7, 6-1-04; Ord. No. 4068, § 1, 1-15-13; Ord. No. 4129, § 2, 11-18-14; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.150)


9.02.530 RCW Title 70, entitled “Public Health and Safety” – Adoption by reference. 

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

70.02.330    Obtaining confidential records under false pretenses – Penalty.

70.05.120    Violations – Remedies – Penalties.

70.24.022    Interviews, examination, counseling, or treatment of infected persons or persons believed to be infected – Dissemination of false information – Penalty.

70.24.080    Penalty.

70.28.033    Treatment, isolation, or examination order of health officer – Violation – Penalty.

70.41.170    Operating or maintaining unlicensed hospital or unapproved tertiary health service – Penalty.

70.42.180    Operating without a license – Injunctions or other remedies – Penalty.

70.54.010    Polluting water supply – Penalty.

70.54.020    Furnishing impure water – Penalty.

70.54.030    Pollution of watershed of city in adjoining state – Penalty.

70.54.050    Exposing contagious disease – Penalty.

70.54.065    Ambulances and drivers – Penalty.

70.54.070    Door of public buildings to swing outward – Penalty.

70.54.080    Liability of person handling steamboat or steam boiler.

70.54.090    Attachment of objects to utility poles – Penalty.

70.54.160    Public restrooms – Pay facilities – Penalty.

70.54.350    Electrology and tattooing – Practitioners to comply with rules – Penalty.

70.54.400    Retail restroom access – Customers with medical conditions – Penalty.

70.58.280    Penalty.

70.62.280    Violations – Penalty.

70.74.010    Definitions.

70.74.022    License required to manufacture, purchase, sell, use, possess, transport, or store explosives – Penalty – Surrender of explosives by unlicensed person – Other relief.

70.74.160    Unlawful access to explosives.

70.74.272    Malicious placement of an imitation device – Penalties.

70.74.275    Intimidation or harassment with an explosive – Class C felony.

70.74.295    Abandonment of explosives.

70.74.300    Explosive containers to be marked – Penalty.

70.74.310    Gas bombs, explosives, stink bombs, etc.

70.74.400    Seizure and forfeiture.

70.75.040    Sale of nonstandard equipment as misdemeanor – Exceptions.

70.84.010    Declaration – Policy.

70.84.060    Unauthorized use of white cane, dog guide, or service animal.

70.84.070    Penalty for violations.

70.85.010    Definitions.

70.85.020    Refusal to yield line – Penalty.

70.85.030    Request for line on pretext of emergency – Penalty.

70.86.040    Penalty.

70.87.145    Order to discontinue operation – Notice – Conditions – Contents of order – Recision of order – Violation – Penalty – Random inspections.

70.87.180    Violations.

70.90.205    Criminal penalties.

70.94.430    Penalties.

70.95.240    Unlawful to dump or deposit solid waste without permit – Penalties – Litter cleanup restitution payment.

70.95.515    Fee on the retail sale of new replacement vehicle tires – Failure to collect, pay to department – Penalties.

70.95.560    Waste tires – Violation of RCW 70.95.555 – Penalty.

70.95B.140    Penalties for violations – Injunctions.

70.95D.100    Penalties.

70.95I.040    Oil sellers – Education responsibility – Penalty.

70.95I.060    Disposal of used oil – Penalty.

70.95J.060    Violations – Punishment.

70.97.140    Unlicensed operation – Criminal penalty.

70.105.085    Violations – Criminal penalties.

70.107.070    Rules relating to motor vehicles – Violations – Penalty.

70.108.130    Penalty.

70.108.150    Firearms – Penalty.

70.110.040    Compliance required.

70.111.030    Unsafe cribs – Prohibition – Definition – Penalty.

70.119.130    Violations – Penalties.

70.122.090    Criminal conduct – Penalties.

70.124.070    Failure to report is gross misdemeanor.

70.127.020    Licenses required after July 1, 1990 – Penalties.

70.128.055    Operating without a license – Misdemeanor.

70.138.070    Criminal penalties.

70.148.060    Disclosure of reports or information – Penalty.

70.155.050    Sampling prohibited – Penalty.

70.155.080    Purchasing, possessing by persons under eighteen – Civil infraction –Jurisdiction.

70.155.140    Shipping or transporting tobacco products ordered or purchased by mail or through the internet prohibited – Penalty.

70.158.060    Penalties – Application of consumer protection act.

70.170.070    Penalties.

70.175.090    Participants authorized to contract – Penalty – Secretary and state exempt from liability.

70.185.080    Participants authorized to contract – Penalty – Secretary and state exempt from liability.

70.230.070    Denial, suspension, or revocation of license – Investigating complaints – Penalties.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 3954, § 3, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.160)


9.02.540 RCW Title 71, entitled “Mental Illness” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

71.05.680    Treatment records – Access under false pretenses, penalty.

71.12.460    License to be obtained – Penalty.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.550 Chapter 72.09 RCW, entitled “Department of corrections” – Adoption by reference. 

The following RCW section, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

72.09.540    Inmate name change – Limitations on use – Penalty.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.560 Chapter 73.04 RCW, entitled “General provisions” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW section, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

73.04.020    Pension papers – Fees not to be charged – Penalty.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.570 RCW Title 74, entitled “Public Assistance” – Adoption by reference. 

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

74.04.060    Records, confidential – Exceptions – Penalty.

74.04.330    Annual reports by assistance organizations – Penalty.

74.04.380    Federal and other surplus food commodities – Agreements – Personnel – Facilities – Cooperation with other agencies – Discontinuance of program.

74.04.385    Unlawful practices relating to surplus commodities – Penalty.

74.08.331    Unlawful practices – Obtaining assistance – Disposal of realty – Penalties.

74.08.582    Electronic benefit cards – Names of two or more persons.

74.09.270    Failure to maintain trust funds in separate account – Penalties.

74.15.150    Penalty for operating without license.

74.20.060    Cooperation by person having custody of child – Penalty.

74.20.260    Financial statements by parent whose absence is basis of application for public assistance.

74.34.020    Definitions.

74.34.021    Vulnerable adult – Definition.

74.34.035    Reports – Mandated and permissive – Contents – Confidentiality.

74.34.040    Reports – Contents – Identity confidential.

74.34.050    Immunity from liability.

74.34.053    Failure to report – False reports – Penalties.

74.34.145    Protection of vulnerable adults – Notice of criminal penalties for violation – Enforcement under RCW 26.50.110.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.170)


9.02.580 RCW Title 78, entitled “Mines, Minerals, and Petroleum” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

78.04.050    Penalty for violations under RCW 78.04.040.

78.12.061    Safety cage in mining shaft – Regulations.

78.44.260    Operating without permit – Penalty.

78.52.550    Violations – Penalty.

78.60.290    Violations – Penalty.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.590 RCW Title 80, entitled “Public Utilities” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

80.04.385    Penalties – Violations by officers, agents, and employees of public service companies.

80.04.390    Penalties – Violations by persons.

80.08.120    Penalty against individuals.

80.24.050    Penalty for failure to pay fees – Disposition of fines and penalties.

80.28.190    Gas companies – Certificate – Violations – Commission powers – Penalty – Fees.

80.50.150    Enforcement of compliance – Penalties.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.600 RCW Title 81, entitled “Transportation” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

81.04.385    Penalties – Violations by officers, agents, and employees of public service companies and persons or entities acting as public service companies.

81.04.390    Penalties – Violations by persons.

81.08.120    Penalty against individual.

81.24.080    Penalty for failure to pay fees – Disposition of fees and penalties.

81.29.040    Penalty for violations.

81.40.060    Purchase of apparel by employees – Penalty.

81.40.080    Employee shelters – Penalty.

81.40.130    Cost of records or medical examinations – Unlawful to require employee or applicant to pay – Penalty – Definitions.

81.44.085    First aid kits and drinking water – Penalty.

81.48.020    Obstructing or delaying train – Penalty.

81.48.060    Penalty for violation of duty endangering safety.

81.54.030    Reimbursement of inspection cost.

81.68.010    Definitions.

81.68.015    Application of chapter restricted.

81.68.020    Compliance with chapter required.

81.68.080    Penalty.

81.77.020    Compliance with chapter required – Exemption for cities.

81.77.090    Penalty.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.610 Chapter 88.02 RCW, entitled “Vessel registration” – Adoption by reference.

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

88.02.350    Refunds, overpayments, and underpayments – Penalty for false statement.

88.02.360    Contaminated vessels.

88.02.380    Penalties – Disposition of moneys collected – Enforcement authority.

88.02.400    Evasive registration and excise tax evasion – Penalty.

88.02.740    Vessel dealer license required – Penalty.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.620 RCW Title 90, entitled “Water Rights – Environment” – Adoption by reference. 

The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW

90.36.050    Penalty – 1901 c 121.

90.44.120    Penalty for waste or unauthorized use of water.

90.58.220    General penalty.

(Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.02.630 Obstructing public officers.

A. A person is guilty of obstructing a public officer if, with knowledge that the person is a public officer, he or she:

1. Intentionally and physically interferes with a public officer;

2. Intentionally hinders or delays a public officer by disobeying an order to stop given by such officer;

3. Intentionally refuses to cease an activity or behavior that creates a risk of injury to any person when ordered to do so by a public officer;

4. Intentionally destroys, conceals, or alters or attempts to destroy, conceal, or alter any material that he or she knows the public officer is attempting to obtain, secure, or preserve during an investigation, search, or arrest;

5. Intentionally refuses to leave the scene of an investigation of a crime while an investigation is in progress after being requested to leave by a public officer; or

6. Intentionally hinders or delays a public officer in the discharge of his or her official duties by making any untrue or misleading statement, report, or identification.

B. No person shall be convicted of violating this section if the judge determines with respect to the person charged with violating this section that the public officer is not acting lawfully in a governmental function.

C. For purposes of this section, a public officer means those individuals responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of the Kent City Code and empowered to make arrests or issue citations for violations under the code or those individuals responsible for the enforcement of the criminal laws of the state.

D. Obstructing a public officer is a gross misdemeanor.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.180) 


9.02.640 Disorderly conduct.

A. A person is guilty of disorderly conduct if he or she:

1. Uses abusive language and thereby intentionally creates a risk of assault;

2. Intentionally disrupts any lawful assembly or meeting of persons without lawful authority;

3. Intentionally obstructs pedestrian or vehicular traffic without lawful authority; or

4. Aggressively solicits in a public place.

B. The following definitions shall apply in this section:

1. Aggressively solicit means to solicit and engage in conduct that would likely intimidate a reasonable person, including touching, following, persistently soliciting after being refused, using violent or threatening language or gestures, or taking similar actions for the purpose of inducing another person into giving goods, services, money, signatures, or any other item, tangible or intangible, sought by the solicitor.

2. Lawful authority includes but is not limited to oral permission, or a permit or license when issued by a person or entity with authority to issue the permission, permit, or license, or a court order or authorization issued by a court of proper jurisdiction.

3. Obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic means to walk, stand, sit, lie, grasp a person, or place an object in such a manner as to block passage by another person or a vehicle, or to require another person or a driver of a vehicle to take evasive action to avoid physical contact, and shall also include action which is intended to prohibit or delay vehicular or pedestrian traffic from entering a public or private place; provided, that an act which is specifically authorized by a state or federal court with jurisdiction and which has been determined by the court to be a valid exercise of one’s right to picket or legally protest shall not constitute obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

4. Public place means an area generally visible to public view and includes alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, plazas, sidewalks, and streets open to the general public, including places that serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.

5. Solicit means to request, petition, or seek something from another person, or persons, or business or businesses, by words, physical gestures, or written or symbolic signs or displays in a public place.

C. Disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor. 

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 4071, § 1, 2-19-13; Ord. No. 4146, § 1, 4-21-15; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.190)


9.02.650 Prohibited conduct on transit property and transit vehicles.

A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply:

1. Public transportation services means providing, at scheduled times and places, transit vehicles to carry members of the public from one location to another upon public highways or other roads, or upon any railway used for light rail or interurban passenger service provided by a regional transit authority authorized by Chapter 81.112 RCW, as currently enacted or hereafter amended; provided, this definition shall not include activities related to the transporting of members of the public by other public or private railroad entities, such as Amtrak.

2. Transit center means any location within the city of Kent, such as bus stations and train or light rail stations, that serves as a hub or transfer point for transit vehicles, enabling passengers to connect with different transit routes.

3. Transit property shall mean all facilities, structures, lands, interest in lands, air rights over lands, and rights-of-way of all kinds that are owned, leased, held, or used within the city of Kent by a public or private agency or municipal corporation for purposes of providing or directly supporting public transportation services, including, but not limited to, park and ride lots or parking structures for passengers; transit centers; designated bus, trolley, light rail, or train stops and waiting areas; and transit vehicle maintenance or storage facilities.

4. Transit vehicle means every motor vehicle, bus, trolley, streetcar, train, light rail train, or other vehicle owned or operated by a public or private entity that provides public transportation services within the city of Kent; provided this definition shall not include taxicabs or “for-hire” vehicles as those vehicles are defined under the Kent City Code.

B. Misdemeanor offenses on transit property and transit vehicles. The following actions are prohibited in, on, or against all transit properties and transit vehicles. A person who commits one of the following acts is guilty of a misdemeanor:

1. Smoking or carrying a lighted or smoldering pipe, cigar, or cigarette while in a transit vehicle;

2. Discarding litter other than in designated receptacles;

3. Playing a radio, tape recorder, audible game device, or any other sound-producing equipment, except when the equipment is connected to earphones that limit the sound to the individual listener, with knowledge that this conduct is prohibited. However, the use of communication devices in the line of duty by city of Kent employees, transit agency or county employees, or police, fire, or other public safety officers is permitted, as is the use of private communication devices used to summon, notify, or communicate with other individuals (such as “beepers” or portable telephones);

4. Spitting, expectorating, urinating, or defecating, except in restroom facilities;

5. Carrying flammable liquids, flammable or nonflammable explosives, acid, or any other article or material of a type or in a manner that is likely to cause harm to others. However, cigarette, cigar, or pipe lighters, firearms, weapons, and ammunition may be carried if in a form or manner that is not otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance;

6. Intentionally obstructing or impeding the flow of transit vehicle or passenger movement, intentionally hindering or preventing access to transit property, intentionally causing unreasonable delays in boarding or exiting, intentionally reclining or occupying more than one seat, or in any way intentionally interfering with the provision or use of transit services;

7. Unreasonably disturbing others by engaging in loud, raucous, unruly, harmful, abusive, or harassing behavior;

8. Drinking an alcoholic beverage or possessing an open container of an alcoholic beverage by a passenger in a transit vehicle, or in public areas of transit properties during hours when those areas are open to the public; provided, possessing and drinking an alcoholic beverage is not prohibited on transit property if authorized as part of a scheduled special event for which all required permits have been obtained and when said facilities are not in use for transit purposes; provided further, drinking by passengers is not prohibited with respect to transit vehicles that have been commercially chartered for group use and that have obtained any required permits to serve alcohol;

9. Dumping any materials whatsoever on transit property, including but not limited to chemicals and automotive fluids;

10. Throwing an object at transit property or at any person in transit property;

11. Failing to present a valid, unexpired pass, transfer, or ticket or otherwise failing to pay the appropriate fare as required;

12. Possessing an unissued transfer or tendering an unissued transfer as proof of fare payment;

13. Falsely representing oneself as eligible for a special or reduced fare or obtaining any permit or pass related to the transit system by making a false representation;

14. Falsely claiming to be a transit operator or other transit employee; or through words, actions, and/or the use of clothes, insignia, or equipment resembling department-issued uniforms and equipment, intentionally creating a false impression that he or she is a transit operator or other transit employee;

15. Engaging in gambling or any game of chance for the winning of money or anything of value; and

16. Discharging a laser-emitting device on a transit vehicle, directing such a device from a transit vehicle toward any other moving vehicle, or directing such a device toward any transit operator or passenger.

C. Infractions. The following actions are prohibited in, on, or against all transit properties and transit vehicles. A person who commits one of the following acts in, on, or in relation to transit property is guilty of a civil infraction to which Chapter 7.80 RCW applies:

1. Allowing any animal to occupy a seat on transit property, to run at large without a leash, to unreasonably disturb others, or to obstruct the flow of passenger or bus traffic; but animals may occupy a passenger’s lap while in a transit vehicle or in a transit property; provided, dogs that have been declared dangerous shall not be allowed on transit vehicles or transit property;

2. Allowing his or her animal to leave waste on transit property or in a transit vehicle;

3. Rollerskating, rollerblading, or skateboarding;

4. Riding a bicycle, motorcycle, or other vehicle except for the purpose of entering or leaving passenger facilities on roadways designed for that use. Bicycles must be walked at all times and may not be transported on escalators. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to commissioned peace officers or city employees engaged in authorized activities in the course of their employment;

5. Eating or drinking on transit vehicles, or in any area of transit property that has been posted as prohibiting eating or drinking;

6. Bringing onto a transit passenger vehicle any package or other object which blocks an aisle or stairway or occupies a seat if to do so would, in the vehicle operator’s sole discretion, cause a danger to passengers or displace passengers or expected passengers;

7. Operating, stopping, standing, or parking a vehicle in any roadway or location restricted for use only by transit vehicles or otherwise restricted;

8. Riding transit vehicles for the purpose of sleeping, or using benches, floors, or other areas in transit facilities for the purpose of sleeping rather than for their intended transportation-related purposes;

9. Camping in or on transit property; storing personal property on benches, floors, or other areas of transit property;

10. Entering upon or crossing a road or rail tracks used by transit vehicles, except in marked crosswalks or at the direction of transit employees or public safety personnel;

11. Intentionally extending an object or a portion of one’s body through the door or window of a transit vehicle while it is in motion;

12. Intentionally hanging or swinging on bars or stanchions, with feet off the floor, inside a transit vehicle or on other transit property; intentionally hanging onto or otherwise attaching oneself at any time to the exterior of a transit vehicle or other transit property;

13. Engaging in any sports on transit property without permission;

14. Parking a vehicle in a designated passenger parking area on transit property for more than 72 consecutive hours;

15. Using transit property for residential parking or unauthorized commercial parking purposes;

16. Unless authorized, cleaning or performing nonemergency repairs to a vehicle parked on transit property; and

17. Conducting driver training on transit property.

(Ord. No. 3877, § 2, 4-1-08; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.192)


9.02.660 Possession of graffiti tools.

A. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess graffiti tools.

B. A person possesses graffiti tools when they possess any paint, marking pen, glass-cutting tool, glass-etching tool, materials, instruments, or any other item adapted, designed, or commonly used for committing or facilitating the commission of an offense involving damaging, defacing, or destroying public or private property, and they possess the item under circumstances evincing an intent to use or employ, or allow the same to be used or employed, in the commission of such an offense, or under circumstances evincing an intent that some other person will use or employ the thing possessed in the commission of such offense.

C. Defacing as used in subsection (B) of this section shall include, but not be limited to, the writing, painting, inscribing, drawing, scratching, cutting, etching, or scribbling upon any wall or surface owned, operated, or maintained by any property owner or the city unless the city or the property owner grants written permission for such writing, painting, inscribing, drawing, scratching, cutting, etching, or scribbling.

D. The unlawful possession of graffiti tools is a misdemeanor.

(Ord. No. 4005, § 1, 10-18-11; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.193)


9.02.670 Tampering or interfering with the property of another prohibited – Penalty.

A. A person commits the offense of tampering or interfering with the property of another if, without privilege, permission, or license to do so, he or she intentionally tampers or interferes with the property of another. 

B. For the purposes of this section, the terms tampers and interferes include, but are not limited to: 

1. Discarding items belonging to another; 

2. Withholding the property of another; or 

3. Placing of a substance, such as a bodily fluid or bodily waste, food products, food waste or food containers, dying or dead vegetation, trash, or other object, upon the property of another thereby creating the need for an expenditure of effort, time, money, or other activity in order to return the property to its previous condition. 

C. Tampering or interfering with the property of another is a misdemeanor.

(Ord. No. 3836, § 1, 4-17-07; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.195)


9.02.680 Public disturbance.

A. A person is guilty of public disturbance if he or she:

1. Causes a public disturbance or is in possession or control of property on which a public disturbance occurs. A public disturbance includes the following sounds that unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort, and repose of a reasonable person of ordinary sensitivities:

a. The frequent, repetitive, or continuous sounding of any horn or siren attached to a motor vehicle, except when used as a warning of danger or as specifically permitted or required by law.

b. The creation of frequent, repetitive, or continuous sounds in connection with the starting, operating, repairing, rebuilding, or testing of any motor vehicle, motorcycle, off-highway vehicle, or internal combustion engine within a residential district.

c. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on or near the public streets, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

d. The creation of frequent, repetitive, or continuous sounds which emanate from any building, structure, apartment, condominium, or yard adjacent thereto, such as sounds from musical instruments, audio sound systems, band sessions, or social gatherings.

e. The creating of frequent, repetitive, or continuous sounds made by any animal, such as barking or howling, except that such sounds made in animal shelters, commercial kennels, veterinary hospitals, pet shops, or pet kennels licensed under and in compliance with Chapter 8.03 KCC shall be exempt from this provision.

f. Sound from portable audio equipment, such as tape players, radios, and compact disc players, operated at a volume so as to be audible greater than 50 feet from the source, and if not operated upon the real property of the operator. This provision shall not apply to such sounds emitted from scheduled events or activities at parks and recreational facilities such as public address systems for park or game events or concerts or similar park or recreation activities.

g. The creation of frequent, repetitive, or continuous sounds made in connection with outdoor construction or the movement of construction related materials, including noise made by devices capable of producing sound by either striking or cutting objects, such as hammers, saws, or other equipment with internal combustion engines; provided, however, such sounds shall be exempt from the provisions of this code under the following circumstances:

i. During the hours of 7:00 a.m. through 8:00 p.m., Monday through Sunday; or

ii. In commercial areas not adjacent to residential areas.

B. The foregoing enumeration of acts and noises shall not be construed as excluding other acts and noises which offend the public peace.

C. Public disturbance is a misdemeanor.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 4072, § 1, 2-19-13; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.200)


9.02.690 Disruption of public facilities.

A. A person is guilty of disruption of a public facility if he or she enters or remains in a public facility and:

1. Intentionally interferes with the proper functioning of the public facility by causing a substantial disruption of the public facility or the activities occurring at the public facility; or 

2. Intentionally interferes with the use of the public facility by other members of the public and such interference is caused while the person is using the public facility in a manner other than that for which the public facility was intended.

B. As used in this section, the term public facility shall include, but not be limited to, the facilities commonly referred to as the Kent Commons, the Kent Resource Center, the Kent Senior Activity Center, the Riverbend Golf Complex, the Kent Library, Kent City Hall, the Centennial Center, the Kent Municipal Court, the Kent Corrections Facility, the ShoWare Center located at 625 W. James Street, and any other building, structure, equipment, and adjoining grounds and appurtenances of city, county, state, and federal government offices.

C. A violation of this section is a misdemeanor.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 3910, § 1, 2-17-09; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.210)


9.02.700 Public events – Criminal activity.

A. Interference with public events. No person shall physically interfere with any public event activity in a manner which: (1) disrupts the activity to the extent it makes it difficult for the activity to continue; or (2) causes viewers or participants (including vendors) to be distracted to the extent the viewing of or the participation in the activity is obstructed, restrained, or inhibited. For purposes of this section, activity shall include any parade, performance, processing, race, game, exhibition, or similar activity that is conducted on a public street or public place and is an official part of a public event. The term public event shall mean any event(s) sponsored or cosponsored by, in conjunction with, or endorsed by any public, quasi-public, or civic entity for the benefit of the public.

B. Violation/penalty. Any violation of subsection (A) of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor.

C. Criminal trespass. Any person who:

1. Violates this section of the Kent City Code;

2. Commits any offense against public peace as set forth in this chapter, including, but not limited to, indecent exposure, urinating in public, public disturbance, disorderly conduct, and failure to disperse, while attending or in conjunction with a public event;

3. Commits a crime against a person as set forth in this chapter, including, but not limited to, assault in the fourth degree and provoking assault, while attending or in conjunction with a public event; or

4. Commits a felony while attending or in conjunction with a public event;

may be ordered removed from the property on which the event is held by any person(s) having lawful authority over the event or by a law enforcement officer. Such an order may prohibit the person from returning to the property on which the event is held for the duration of the event if there is cause to believe that further violations would occur if the person were allowed to return. Such order shall apply to event areas both on and off public streets and public places. Any violation of such an order lawfully issued shall constitute criminal trespass pursuant to Chapter 9A.52 RCW.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.220)


9.02.710 Public facility – Illegal activity – Exclusion.

A. The city council finds that, from time to time, the right of the general public to enjoy public facilities provided by the city is infringed upon by persons who engage in disruptive, unsafe, or otherwise prohibited activity at the public facilities. This behavior is often engaged in by a comparatively small number of repeat offenders. The city council further finds that the right of persons who engage in such activities to remain at or frequent public facilities is outweighed by the right of law-abiding citizens to use such facilities without the interference or fear of the illegal activity of others.

B. Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a person has committed any act set forth in subsection (F) of this section on or at any public facility as described in subsection (G) of this section, the officer may, by written order, exclude that person from entering the public facility where the act was committed; provided, further, that if the public facility where the act was committed is part of a public facility assemblage as described in subsection (H) of this section, the officer may, by written order, exclude that person from entering all public facilities within that assemblage.

C. If the offender:

1. Has not been issued an exclusion notice within one year prior to the violation or the current violation is not a felony violation, a weapon violation, or a violation involving an act of violence or threat of violence, then the officer may exclude the offender from the public facility or public facility assemblage in which the current violation occurred for a period of 45 days from the date of the exclusion notice.

2. Has been issued an exclusion notice within the one year prior to the current violation or the current violation is a felony violation, a weapon violation, or a violation involving an act of violence or threat of violence, then the officer may exclude the offender from the public facility or public facility assemblage in which the current violation occurred for a period of 90 days from the date of the exclusion notice.

3. Has been issued two or more exclusion notices from the same public facility or public facility assemblage in which the current violation has occurred within the one year prior to the current violation, then the officer may exclude the offender from the public facility or public facility assemblage in which the current violation occurred for a period of 364 days from the date of the exclusion notice.

4. Has been issued two or more exclusion notices within the one year prior to the current violation and, in combination, the current violation and those prior violations did not occur at the same public facility or within the same public facility assemblage, or if the offender has been issued one exclusion notice based on a felony violation, a weapon violation, or a violation involving an act of violence or threat of violence within the one year prior to the current violation, then the officer may exclude the offender from all public facilities for a period of 364 days from the date of the exclusion notice.

D. The exclusion notice shall be in writing and shall contain the date of issuance, shall specify the duration and location of exclusion, and shall be signed by the issuing officer. A warning of the consequences for failure to comply with the exclusion notice, as well as procedures for seeking review of the exclusion, shall be contained within the exclusion notice.

E. The person subject to the exclusion notice shall have the right to a hearing to seek the modification or rescission of the exclusion. For the purposes of exclusion modification or rescission hearings, the city’s hearing officer shall be the city of Kent’s director of parks, recreation, and community services or his/her designee, or the person acting in the position of the director or designee in his/her absence.

1. A request for hearing shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by a copy of the exclusion notice for which the hearing is sought. The request shall contain the address of the offender, and it shall be the responsibility of the offender to notify the hearing officer of any change of address. The hearing shall occur and a decision be rendered within 10 business days after the city’s hearing officer receives the request for hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be effective upon the third business day after placement of the notice in the mail to the address provided by the offender.

2. The parties to the hearing shall be the city and the offender. At the hearing, the violation that forms the basis for the exclusion notice must be proved by a preponderance of the evidence in order to uphold the exclusion. The offender need not be charged with a crime or civil infraction in a court of law, and need not be convicted or found to have committed the alleged violation in a court of law for the exclusion to be upheld. The city’s hearing officer shall consider the exclusion notice and a sworn report or a declaration made under penalty of perjury as authorized by RCW 9A.72.085, written by the police officer who issued the exclusion notice, without further evidentiary foundation. Both the city and the offender may submit physical or written evidence, or call witnesses to testify. The city’s hearing officer may consider information and evidence that would not be admissible in a court of law under the evidence rules but which the hearing officer considers relevant and trustworthy. Each party shall be responsible for securing the attendance of any witnesses it intends to call to testify.

3. If the violation is proved, the exclusion notice shall be upheld; however, upon good cause shown, the city’s hearing officer may shorten the duration of the exclusion. If the violation is not proved by a preponderance of the evidence the city’s hearing officer shall rescind the exclusion. If an exclusion is rescinded, it shall not be considered a prior exclusion for the purposes of subsection (C) of this section.

4. The decision of the city’s hearing officer is final. An offender seeking judicial review of a decision of the city’s hearing officer shall file an appeal or an application for a writ of review in the King County superior court within 14 days of the date of the decision.

5. The exclusion shall remain effective during the pendency of any administrative or judicial proceeding.

6. The determination of the city’s hearing officer shall not have any collateral estoppel effect on a subsequent criminal prosecution or civil proceeding and shall not preclude litigation of those same facts in a subsequent criminal prosecution or civil proceeding.

F. An act which may result in the issuance of a written order excluding a person from a public facility or public facility assemblage may consist of any of the following when committed on or at a public facility:

1. Any act that qualifies as a felony crime;

2. Any act that qualifies as a gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor crime, excluding all traffic offenses except for violations of RCW 46.61.500, 46.61.502, 46.61.503, 46.61.504, and 46.61.525;

3. Any act that qualifies as a violation of RCW 66.44.100 or 69.50.445;

4. Any act that qualifies as a violation of:

a. KCC 4.01.020 Same – Damaging property.

b. KCC 4.01.030 Same – Animals.

c. KCC 4.01.040 Same – Discharging weapons, fireworks.

d. KCC 4.01.080 Prohibited activities – Speed limits, vehicles, and horses.

e. KCC 4.01.100 Same – Littering.

f. KCC 4.01.120 Same – Fires.

g. KCC 4.01.130 Same – Alcoholic beverages.

h. KCC 4.01.140 Same – Golf.

i. KCC 4.01.150 Use of facilities.

j. KCC 4.01.160 Hours.

k. KCC 4.01.190 Sales of refreshments.

l. KCC 4.01.210 Traffic regulations.

5. Any act that qualifies as a violation of KCC 9.02.840, Urinating in public.

G. For the purpose of this section, a public facility consists of the buildings, structures, and equipment, and the adjoining grounds, appurtenances, and parking areas of any of the following when located within the city of Kent:

1. Any building maintained or operated by the city of Kent, King County, or the state of Washington.

2. Any park maintained by the city of Kent, King County, or the state of Washington.

3. Any recreational area maintained by the city of Kent, King County, or the state of Washington, including but not limited to any skateboard park, the Kent Commons, the Kent Senior Activity Center, the Kent Resource Center, the Riverbend Golf Complex, the Green River Trail, the Green River Natural Resources Area, and the Interurban Trail.

4. The city’s ShoWare Center, located at 625 W. James Street.

5. The bodies of water known as Lake Meridian and Lake Fenwick and associated boat ramps and areas of ingress and egress.

6. Any public school maintained by the city of Kent, the Kent School District, King County, or the state of Washington.

7. The watershed areas owned and operated by the city of Kent, including Armstrong Springs, Clark Springs, and Kent Springs.

8. Any public library or pool maintained by the city of Kent, King County, or the state of Washington.

H. For the purpose of this section, a public facility assemblage consists of a group of public facilities so related to one another geographically that exclusion from one public facility within the group would be ineffective without exclusion from the other or others in the same group. A violation occurring at any public facility within a public facility assemblage shall be deemed to have occurred within the public facility assemblage. Public facility assemblages include the following:

1. Downtown public facility assemblage, consisting of Town Square Plaza, Burlington Green/Yangzhou Park, Kaibara Park, Kherson Park, Mill Creek Canyon Earthworks Park, Rosebed Park, Titus Railroad Park, Uplands Playfield, and the Kent Library.

I. The violation of an exclusion notice is a misdemeanor.

(Ord. No. 3955, § 2, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4076, § 1, 3-19-13; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.230)


9.02.720 Escape.

A. A person is guilty of escape if:

1. Without lawful authority, he or she intentionally removes himself or herself from the custody of a court, police officer, detention facility, registered location where work is performed pursuant to work release, or registered location where he or she is serving any portion of jail time on electronic home monitoring or detention; or

2. He or she fails to return himself or herself to the custody of the court, police officer, or detention facility following temporary leave lawfully granted by a court or Kent corrections.

B. For the purposes of this section, custody means:

1. Restraint by a police officer pursuant to a lawful arrest for an offense; or

2. Restraint pursuant to an order of a court, including:

a. The detention of a person pursuant to a court issued arrest warrant;

b. A verbal or written order to detain a person during a court appearance;

c. The detention of a person pending and during trial;

d. Detention of a person pending sentencing or pursuant to a sentence of a court;

e. Detention of a person pursuant to the revocation of a period of a sentence initially suspended by a court;

f. Detention of a person pursuant to an electronic home monitoring or electronic home detention program, regardless of the location that the person who is in custody is registered or required to be;

g. Detention of a person pursuant to a work release or work crew program, regardless of the location that the person who is in custody has listed or registered as the location of their work; or

h. Detention of a person pursuant to a day reporting program, regardless of the location that the person who is in custody has listed or registered as the location that he or she reports to.

C. A person who violates this section shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.240)


9.02.730 Damage, theft, abandonment, or improper use of an electronic home detention or monitoring device.

A. A person is guilty of damage, theft, abandonment, or improper use of an electronic home detention or monitoring device if:

1. The person intentionally causes damage to any component of the electronic home detention or monitoring device;

2. The person exerts unauthorized control over an electronic home detention or monitoring device;

3. The person abandons the electronic home detention or monitoring device; or

4. The person fails to return the electronic home detention or monitoring device to Kent corrections or its lawful owner within 24 hours of interrupting or terminating the proper use of the device.

B. For the purposes of this section, the term damage shall have the same meaning as damages as that term is defined in RCW 9A.48.010.

C. For the purposes of this section, the phrase exerts unauthorized control shall be defined as it is in RCW 9A.56.010.

D. A person who violates this section shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.250)


9.02.740 Vehicle trespass prohibited – Penalty.

A. A person is guilty of vehicle trespass if he or she knowingly enters or remains unlawfully in a vehicle belonging to another.

B. As used in this section:

1. The word enter shall include the entrance of the person, or the insertion of any part of his or her body, or any instrument or weapon held in his or her hand.

2. A person enters or remains unlawfully in or upon a vehicle when he or she is not licensed, invited, or otherwise privileged to so enter or remain.

C. Vehicle trespass is a misdemeanor.

(Ord. No. 3835, § 1, 4-17-07; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.265)


9.02.750 Neglect of a child or dependent person.

A. A person is guilty of the crime of neglect of a child or dependent person if the person is a parent of a child, a person entrusted with the physical custody of a child or other dependent person, or a person employed to provide to the child or dependent person any of the basic necessities of life, and with criminal negligence, the person:

1. Withholds any of the basic necessities of life; or

2. Maintains living conditions that place the child or dependent person at a significant risk of disease, illness, or bodily injury; or

3. Supervises the child or dependent person and:

a. As a result of such supervision, the child or dependent person suffers bodily injury; or

b. The supervision creates a substantial risk that the child or dependent person will suffer bodily injury; or

4. Fails to supervise the child or dependent person and:

a. As a result of such failure, the child or dependent person suffers bodily injury; or

b. Such failure creates a substantial risk that the child or dependent person will suffer bodily injury.

B. In any prosecution for neglect of a child or dependent person, it shall be a defense that the withholding of the basic necessities of life or the maintenance of living conditions that place the child or dependent person at a significant risk of disease, illness, or bodily injury is due to financial inability only if the person charged has made a reasonable effort to obtain adequate assistance. This defense is available to a person employed to provide the basic necessities of life only when the agreed-upon payment has not been made.

C. A person is criminally negligent or acts with criminal negligence when he or she fails to be aware of a substantial risk that a wrongful act may occur and his or her failure to be aware of such substantial risk constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care that a reasonable person would exercise in the same situation.

D. Child means a person under 18 years of age.

E. Dependent person means a person who, because of physical or mental disability or because of advanced age, is dependent upon another person to provide the basic necessities of life. A resident of a nursing home as defined in RCW 18.51.010, a resident of an adult family home as defined in RCW 70.128.010, and a frail, elderly, or vulnerable adult as defined in RCW 74.34.020(13) is presumed to be a dependent person for purposes of this section.

F. For the purposes of this section, bodily injury means physical pain, injury, illness, or impairment of physical condition that is more than minor or transient.

G. Neglect of a child or dependent person is a gross misdemeanor.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.270)


9.02.760 Offenses against police dogs. 

No person shall willfully or maliciously torment, beat, kick, or strike any dog owned or being used by the police department in the performance of its official duties. No person shall willfully hinder, delay, or obstruct any dog used by a law enforcement officer in discharging or attempting to discharge his official duties. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.280)


9.02.770 Provoking assault.

Every person who shall, by word, sign, or gesture, willfully provoke or attempt to provoke another person to commit an assault or breach of the peace shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.290)


9.02.780 Menacing.

A person is guilty of the crime of menacing when he or she intentionally follows or surveils another person and/or engages in a course of conduct that is intended to place a person in reasonable fear of “bodily injury” as that phrase is defined in RCW 9A.04.110.

A. Follows, as used in this section, means deliberately maintaining visual observation and/or physical proximity of a specific person or persons over a continuous period of time.

B. Violation of this section is a misdemeanor, the maximum penalty of which is 90 days in jail and a $1,000 fine.

(Ord. No. 4087, § 1, 9-3-13; Ord. No. 4107, § 1, 3-18-14; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.293.)


9.02.790 Definitions.

The following words and phrases, wherever used in KCC 9.02.800, 9.02.810, 9.02.820 and 9.02.830, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where otherwise defined and unless the context shall clearly indicate to the contrary: 

A. Expressive conduct means any dance, opera, musical, dramatic work, or other exhibition or performance, whether or not part of an organized or formal event that constitutes protected speech under the federal or state constitution.

B. Known prostitute, a person known to patronize prostitutes, or a person known to advance prostitution means a person who within one year previous to the date of arrest for violation of this section has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted of an offense of prostitution, patronizing a prostitute, prostitution loitering, permitting prostitution, or promoting prostitution whether or not such conviction occurs under the Revised Code of Washington or comparable laws of municipalities in the state of Washington.

C. Patronizing a prostitute shall have the same meaning as set forth in RCW 9A.88.110 as now enacted or later amended or recodified.

D. Prostitution means to engage or agree or offer to engage in sexual conduct for a fee, reward, exchange of any item or service, or promise, but does not include sexual conduct engaged in as part of any stage performance, play, or other lawful and properly licensed entertainment open to the public.

E. Public place means an area generally visible to public view including streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, automobiles (whether moving or not) and any place in which the general public has a right to be present or view, whether or not conditioned upon payment of a fee, and includes, but is not limited to, buildings open to the general public, including those which serve food or drink or provide entertainment or sell product, and the windows, doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them, and structures from which customers can be served through a drive-up or walk-up window, door, or other means, whether or not access is restricted according to age.

F. Public place provided or set apart for nudity means an enclosed public restroom, an enclosed functional shower or locker room facility, an enclosed sauna, a motel room or hotel room designed and intended for sleeping accommodations, the location of a bona fide private club whose membership as a whole engages in social nudism or naturalism (a nudist resort or camp), and any similar public places in which nudity is necessarily and customarily expected outside of the home.

G. Sexual conduct shall mean “sexual intercourse” or “sexual contact” as defined in RCW 9A.44.010 as currently enacted or later amended or recodified.

H. Walking or otherwise conducting oneself in a sexual manner shall mean the swaying of hips, drawing attention to one’s buttocks, legs, or breasts, grabbing oneself in the genitals or breasts, blowing kisses, or using one’s body or any part thereof to simulate sexual conduct.

(Ord. No. 4102, § 1, 1-21-14; Ord. No. 4107, § 2, 3-18-14; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.295)


9.02.800 Lewd conduct.

A. A person is guilty of lewd conduct if, in a public place and under circumstances where such conduct is likely to be observed by a member of the public, the person intentionally:

1. Exposes any of his or her body parts without a full and opaque covering:

a. Any part of the male or female genitals, pubic hair, pubic area, perineum, anus, or bottom one-half of the anal cleft;

b. Any part of the areola or nipple of the female breast; or

c. More than one-half of the part of the female breast located below the top of the areola; 

2. Exposes the male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if fully and opaquely covered;

3. Touches, caresses, or fondles the genitals or female breast, whether clothed or unclothed with the intention of sexual arousal of one’s self or others;

4. Masturbates; or

5. Engages in sexual intercourse or sexual contact as those terms are defined in Chapter 9A.44 RCW.

B. Body paint, body dye, tattoos, latex, tape, or any similar substance applied to the skin surface, any substance that can be washed off the skin, or any substance designed to simulate or by which by its nature simulates the appearance of the anatomical area beneath it, is not full and opaque covering within the meaning of this section.

C. This section shall not be construed to prohibit:

1. The act of breastfeeding or expressing breast milk;

2. Classes, seminars, and lectures held for serious scientific or educational purposes;

3. Expressive conduct that is not obscene, subject to the time, place, and manner restrictions contained in Chapter 5.10 KCC or other law;

4. Conduct of licensed adult entertainers within adult entertainment dance studios operating pursuant to Chapter 5.10 KCC;

5. Conduct of licensed employees working in adult businesses operating pursuant to Chapter 5.10 KCC, provided the conduct is not exposed to a person under 18 years of age; or

6. Conduct of a child under 10 years of age.

D. Lewd conduct is a misdemeanor.

(Ord. No. 4102, § 1, 1-21-14; Ord. No. 4107, § 2, 3-18-14; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.296)


9.02.810 Facilitating lewd conduct.

The owner, lessee, manager, operator, or other person in charge of a public place is guilty of facilitating lewd conduct if the person knowingly permits, encourages, or causes to be committed lewd conduct as defined in KCC 9.02.800. Facilitating lewd conduct is a misdemeanor.

(Ord. No. 4102, § 1, 1-21-14; Ord. No. 4107, § 2, 3-18-14; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.297)


9.02.820 Prostitution loitering.

A. A person is guilty of prostitution loitering if he or she intentionally solicits, induces, entices, or procures another to commit the crime of prostitution or patronizing a prostitute.

B. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether the actor intentionally solicits, induces, entices, or procures another to commit the crime of prostitution or patronizing a prostitute are that he or she:

1. Repeatedly beckons to, stops, or attempts to stop passersby, or engages passersby in conversation;

2. Repeatedly stops or attempts to stop occupants of a motor vehicle or motorcycle by hailing, waving, or beckoning to the occupants using words or conduct, or attempts to obtain the attention of the occupants by walking or otherwise conducting oneself in a sexual manner;

3. Circles or repeatedly returns to an area and repeatedly beckons to, contacts, or attempts to stop pedestrians;

4. Circles or repeatedly returns to an area known by the police as an area of prostitution;

5. Is a known prostitute, a person known to patronize prostitutes, or a person known to promote, permit, or advance prostitution;

6. Inquires whether another is a police officer, searches for articles that would identify a police officer, or exposes his or her genitals or her breasts, or requests the other to touch his or her genitals or her breasts to prove that the other is not a police officer; or

7. Utilizes Internet websites, publications or social media including but not limited to Backpage.com, Craigslist.com, or the Stranger to solicit, induce, entice, or procure another to commit the crime of prostitution or patronizing a prostitute.

C. The crime of prostitution loitering may be deemed to have been committed either at the physical location where the loitering occurred or at the location where the person agrees to meet someone they solicit for acts of prostitution as defined in Chapter 9A.88 RCW.

D. Prostitution loitering is a misdemeanor.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 3715, § 1, 10-5-04; Ord. No. 4102, § 2, 1-21-14; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.300)


9.02.830 Stay out of areas of prostitution orders. 

A. Findings. The high risk prostitution areas set forth in subsection (E) of this section are frequented by persons who seek out or provide prostitution services. These high risk prostitution areas attract prostitutes, persons who patronize prostitutes, and those who promote prostitution. Many of these areas extend beyond the jurisdiction of the city of Kent, and the problem is present in the surrounding cities of Federal Way, Des Moines, SeaTac, Tukwila, and Renton. These surrounding cities have enacted similar ordinances as a tool to combat the prostitution problem. Due to the volume of persons involved in the prostitution trade, adjacent private property owners suffer economic loss due to trash, human waste, and lost business. Community members suffer from traffic congestion and an increased risk to public health and safety. The high risk prostitution areas set forth in subsection (E) of this section suffer a much higher incidence of prostitution-related crimes than other areas of the city.

B. Stay out of areas of prostitution orders, hereinafter known as “SOAP” orders, may be issued by the Kent municipal court to anyone charged with prostitution, permitting prostitution, prostitution loitering, or patronizing a prostitute under this chapter or Chapter 9A.88 RCW as a condition of pretrial release.

C. SOAP orders may be issued by the Kent municipal court to anyone convicted of prostitution, permitting prostitution, prostitution loitering, or patronizing a prostitute under this chapter or Chapter 9A.88 RCW as a condition of probation.

D. Whenever a police officer shall have probable cause to believe that a person has received a SOAP order as a condition of pretrial release or of probation and in the officer’s presence is seen violating or failing to comply with any requirement or restriction imposed by the court as a condition of such pretrial release or probation, such officer may arrest the violator without warrant or other process for violation of the SOAP order and bring such person before the court issuing the order.

E. The SOAP order shall warn the person named in the order to stay out of the following “high risk prostitution areas”:

1. Pacific Highway South from the south side of South 272nd Street to State Route 516 (also known as Kent-Des Moines Road), including all adjacent businesses.

2. 30th Avenue South from South 240th Street to State Route 516 (also known as Kent-Des Moines Road), including all adjacent businesses.

3. South 240th Street from the 2700 block through the 3200 block, including all adjacent businesses.

4. Central Avenue North/84th Avenue South from Novak Lane to South 222nd Street, including all adjacent businesses.

5. 83rd Avenue South from South 228th Street to South 224th Street, including all adjacent businesses.

F. A person is deemed to have notice of the SOAP order when:

1. The signature of the person named in the order, or the signature of his or her attorney, is affixed to the bottom of the order, signifying that he or she has read the order and has knowledge of the contents of the order; or

2. The order recites that the person named in the order or the person’s attorney appeared in person before the court.

G. The written SOAP order shall contain the court’s directives and shall bear the legend: “Violation of this order is a criminal offense under Ch. 9.02 KCC and will subject the violator to arrest.”

H. Whenever a SOAP order is issued under this section, and the person named in the order knows of the order, a violation of the provisions of the order is a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.

I. Pursuant to Section 1(1)(b) of Engrossed Substitute House Bill 1362 (Laws of 2009, ch. 387 § 1), the high risk prostitution areas identified in subsection (E) of this section are the areas where vehicles are subject to impoundment for a suspected violation of patronizing a prostitute, promoting prostitution in the first degree, promoting prostitution in the second degree, promoting travel for prostitution, commercial sexual abuse of a minor, promoting commercial sexual abuse of a minor, or promoting travel for commercial sexual abuse of a minor. These high risk prostitution areas shall be identified by the placement of clear and conspicuous signs.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 3920, § 1, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 4102, § 2, 1-21-14; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.310)


9.02.840 Urinating in public.

A. A person is guilty of urinating in public if the person intentionally urinates or defecates in a public place, other than a washroom or toilet room, under circumstances where such act could be observed by any member of the public.

B. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be an infraction, and any person found in violation shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $250.00.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.320)


9.02.850 Possession of drug paraphernalia.

It is unlawful for any person to possess drug paraphernalia, as defined in RCW 69.50.102. A person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.330)


9.02.860 Contaminated property – Order of Seattle-King County department of public health prohibiting use or entry – Violation. 

A. Whenever an order is issued pursuant to RCW 64.44.030, as that law is now enacted or later amended or recodified, which restrains a person or the public from entering upon or using property, and that order is posted in a conspicuous place on the property, a violation of the provisions restraining use or entry shall be a gross misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than one year, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than $5,000, or by both such imprisonment and fine. 

B. Whenever an order is issued pursuant to RCW 64.44.030, as that law is now enacted or later amended or recodified, which restrains a person or the public from entering upon or using property, and that order is posted in a conspicuous place on the property, the removal or damage of such order shall be a gross misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than one year, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than $5,000, or by both such imprisonment and fine. 

(Ord. No. 3716, § 1, 10-5-04; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.335)


9.02.870 Sale, manufacture, possession of certain weapons.

Any person who sells, manufactures, purchases, possesses, or carries:

1. Any device commonly known as nunchuka sticks, consisting of two or more lengths of wood, metal, plastic, or similar substance connected with wire, rope, or other means; or

2. Any device commonly known as throwing stars, which are multipointed, metal objects designed to embed upon impact from any aspect in a manner, under circumstances, and at a time and place that either manifests an intent to intimidate another or that warrants alarm for the safety of other persons; 

is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.340)


9.02.880 Possession of firearms or dangerous weapons at Kent Commons – Unlawful.

A. Subject to the exceptions set forth in subsections (B) and (C) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess a firearm; a dagger, sword, or knife with a blade in excess of three inches; or any other weapon apparently capable of producing bodily harm, inside of the premises known as the Kent Commons located at 525 North Fourth Avenue in the city of Kent.

B. The prohibition to possession of a firearm shall not apply to a person licensed to carry a concealed weapon pursuant to RCW 9.41.070 or a person exempted from the licensing requirement by RCW 9.41.060.

C. This section shall not apply during shows, demonstrations, or lectures involving the exhibition of firearms or other weapons.

D. For the purposes of this section, firearm means a weapon or device from which a projectile or projectiles may be fired by an explosive such as gunpowder.

E. This section shall only apply to those areas of the Kent Commons that are within the Kent Commons building or that are contained to an area adjacent to the building by a temporary barrier during use for an event hosted by the Kent Commons.

F. A person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.350)


9.02.890 Nonincendiary devices.

A. For the purposes of this chapter, a nonincendiary device shall include, without limitation, any stink bomb, stink paint, tear bomb, tear shell, explosive, or flame-producing device, acid bomb, dry ice bomb, or any other device, material, chemical, or substance, that, when exploded, opened, used, or otherwise deployed does or will annoy, injure, endanger, or inconvenience any person or persons.

B. Any person who shall: (1) deposit, leave, place, spray, scatter, spread, throw, or otherwise deploy in any building or any place; (2) counsel, aid, assist, encourage, incite, or direct any other person or persons to deposit, leave, place, spray, scatter, spread, throw, or otherwise deploy in any building or any place; (3) have in his or her possession for the purpose of depositing, leaving, placing, spraying, scattering, spreading, throwing, or otherwise deploying in any building or any place; (4) counsels, aids, assists, encourages, incites, or directs any other person or persons to deposit, leave, place, spray, scatter, spread, throw, or otherwise deploy in any building or any place; any non-incendiary device shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor.

C. Anyone who enhances any nonincendiary device by adding, either internally or externally, any additional material that would create greater damage by becoming fragmentation or shrapnel will be subject to a mandatory minimum penalty of 90 days in jail that cannot be served on work release or electronic home monitoring.

D. This section shall not apply to persons in the military service or commissioned law enforcement officers actually engaged in the performance of his or her duty or training or in the course of any training acting pursuant to orders from competent authority, nor shall this section apply to any property owner or person acting under his or her authority in providing protection against the commission of a felony.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.360)


9.02.900 Hobby cannon fuse material – Sale transaction – Written record required.

A. Every gun store, gun dealer, or gun show doing business in the city shall maintain a written record of any sale or exchange of fuse material used for the purpose of detonating hobby cannons. This record shall be in English and shall be written or electronically stored in an easily obtainable manner. The following information must be documented for each sale or exchange transaction:

1. The signature of the person with whom the transaction is made;

2. The date and time of the transaction;

3. The name of the person or employee or the identification number of the person or employee conducting the transaction;

4. The name, date of birth, sex, address, and telephone number of the person with whom the transaction is made;

5. The type of identification, including identifying number, used by the person with whom the transaction was made; and

6. The amount of cannon fuse purchased.

B. The type of identification relied upon for the sale or exchange must consist of:

1. A valid driver’s license or identification card issued by any state; or

2. Two pieces of identification issued by a governmental agency, one of which shall be descriptive of the person identified.

At all times, at least one piece of current governmental identification will be required.

C. This record shall at all times during the ordinary hours of business, or at reasonable times if ordinary hours of business are not kept, be open for inspection by any commissioned law enforcement officer. The person or entity who conducted the sale or exchange shall maintain these records for at least three years following the date of the transaction.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.370)


9.02.910 Violation of no contact order also contempt.

The violation of any order issued by the Kent municipal court pursuant to Chapter 10.99 RCW shall also constitute contempt of court, and is subject to the penalties prescribed by law.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.380)


9.02.920 Probation violations.

A. For purposes of this section, the word probationer means any person who, after conviction of violation of an ordinance of the city or a law of the state, or after entry of a deferred prosecution, has been placed on probation in connection with a suspended sentence, deferred sentence, or deferred prosecution by either a district court, municipal court, or superior court.

B. Whenever a police officer shall have probable cause to believe that a probationer, prior to the termination of his probation, is in such police officer’s presence and is violating or failing to comply with any requirement or restriction imposed by the court as a condition of such probation, the police officer may cause the probationer to be brought before the court wherein sentence was deferred or suspended and, for such purpose, the police officer may arrest such probationer without warrant or other process.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 3737, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.390)


9.02.930 Court costs – Jail medical costs.

A. In addition to the penalties set forth in KCC 9.02.940, costs in all criminal actions may be imposed as authorized by law or court rule. 

B. As part of any judgment and sentence, the court may order a defendant to repay all or part of the medical costs incurred by the city or any medical care provider during confinement of the defendant. Any costs not paid by a defendant that are due and owing shall be collected by the court in the same manner that other costs are collected. 

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.400)


9.02.940 Violations – Penalty.

Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by:

1. Gross misdemeanor. Every person convicted of a gross misdemeanor shall be punished by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than one year, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than $5,000, or by both such imprisonment and fine.

2. Misdemeanor. Every person convicted of a misdemeanor shall be punished by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than 90 days, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than $1,000, or by both such imprisonment and fine.

(Ord. No. 3621, § 2, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 4195, § 1, 4-19-16. Formerly 9.02.410)1

 RCW 9A.52.110, 9A.52.120, and 9A.52.130 were repealed and replaced by the newly created Washington Cybercrime Act. See Chapter 9A.90 RCW. 


Chapter 9.03 REWARDS FOR INFORMATION LEADING TO ARREST*

Sections:

9.03.010    Reward established.

9.03.020    Reward eligibility.

9.03.030    Payment from general fund.

9.03.040    Posting of notice of reward.

9.03.050    Certain persons ineligible.

*Cross reference(s) – Damaging parks and recreation property, § 4.01.020.


9.03.010 Reward established.

In the public interest, a standing reward in the sum up to five hundred dollars ($500) is hereby established for information leading to the arrest and prosecution of the person responsible for each act of damage to and/or destruction of any city property.

(Ord. No. 2568, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.31.010)


9.03.020 Reward eligibility.

In order to be eligible for a reward pursuant to KCC 9.03.010, the individual furnishing such information must testify or be willing to testify at any hearing or trial held to determine the guilt or liability of the person or persons alleged to be responsible for each act of damage to, and/or destruction of, city property. The testimony shall be as to facts and circumstances known to the individual and furnished to the city.

(Ord. No. 2568, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.31.020)


9.03.030 Payment from general fund.

Reward payment shall be charged against the general fund upon certification from the city administrator upon consultation with the city attorney and affected department.

(Ord. No. 2568, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.31.030)


9.03.040 Posting of notice of reward.

The offer of reward, established by this chapter, shall be posted in conspicuous public places throughout the city as the city administrator shall direct, and shall be widely distributed to the news media within this area.

(Ord. No. 2568, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.31.040)


9.03.050 Certain persons ineligible.

The officers and employees of the city, members of their immediate families and their kindred to the fourth degree are excluded from application of the provisions of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 2568, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 2.31.050)


Chapter 9.04 MASSAGE AND REFLEXOLOGY SERVICES Revised 2/20

Sections: 

9.04.010    Purpose.

9.04.020    Definitions. Revised 2/20

9.04.030    References to Revised Code of Washington and Washington Administrative Code. Revised 2/20

9.04.040    Owner, director, manager – Proof.

9.04.050    Exemptions – Limitations – Name or structure of business.

9.04.060    Inspections.

9.04.070    Massage practitioner or reflexologist – License or certificate required – Violation.

9.04.080    Massage practitioner or reflexologist – Owner, director, manager, or other person in charge to ensure valid license or certificate – Violation.

9.04.090    Display of massage practitioner or reflexologist license or certificate required – Violation.

9.04.100    Receipt of massage or reflexology services from unlicensed massage practitioner or reflexologist – Unlawful.

9.04.110    Minors practicing massage or reflexology – Responsibility of owner, director, manager, or other person in charge – Receipt of massage or reflexology services from minor unlawful.

9.04.120    Advertising.

9.04.125    Practice requirements and limitations – Responsibility of owner, director, manager, or other person in charge. Revised 2/20

9.04.130    Violations – Penalty. Revised 2/20


9.04.010 Purpose.

The Kent city council recognizes the health and wellness benefits of massage and reflexology, and that massage and reflexology businesses in the city of Kent serve a legitimate and beneficial purpose in the community. The council also recognizes that there are some businesses that hold themselves out as massage or reflexology businesses, but employ unlicensed persons to provide massage and uncertified persons to provide reflexology who fail to follow state health and licensing requirements, and do not have the proper training required to obtain a state license or certification. In addition, these businesses that employ unlicensed or uncertified persons to provide massage and reflexology can be used to facilitate the commission of various criminal acts, including but not limited to prostitution. These businesses that permit unlicensed or uncertified persons to perform massage and reflexology or permit the commission of unlawful acts threaten the business and reputation of legitimate and licensed businesses and practitioners, and present a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare. This chapter is intended to inhibit the ability of an individual or businesses to engage in the practice of providing unlicensed massage and reflexology, and support the legitimate provision of these services by licensed massage practitioners and reflexologists. 

(Ord. No. 4156, § 1, 6-16-15) 


9.04.020 Definitions. Revised 2/20

For purposes of this chapter, the terms and phrases below shall have the meanings that follow:

A. Advertise includes, but is not limited to, signs located at a massage business or reflexology business; signs located in places other than at a massage business or reflexology business; advertisements on vehicles; advertisements in paper media such as newspapers, magazines, fliers, cards, or business cards; or advertisements in electronic media such as Internet websites, social media, electronic classified advertisements, cell phone applications, and television or radio advertisements.

B. Breast massage shall have the same meaning as set forth in WAC 246-830-005(7).

C. Certified reflexologist, massage business, massage, massage practitioner, massage therapist, massage therapy, reflexology, and reflexology business shall have the meanings set forth in RCW 18.108.010.

D. Conspicuously display shall mean the display of licenses and certificates in a manner that can be viewed and read by a person immediately upon entry into the initial common area of a massage business or reflexology business without having to request to see the license or certification.

E. Gross misdemeanor and misdemeanor shall have the same meaning as set forth in RCW 9A.20.021.

F. License, certificate and certification mean a license, certificate or certification issued pursuant to Chapter 18.108 RCW.

G. Reflexologist means a person who practices reflexology.

H. Represent himself or herself as a massage practitioner shall have the same meaning as set forth in RCW 18.108.030(1)(b).

I. Represent himself or herself as a reflexologist shall have the same meaning as set forth in RCW 18.108.030(2)(b).

J. Violation shall mean a conviction after trial, a plea of guilty or a finding of guilt after an Alford plea, Newton plea, or plea of no contest or nolo contendere, or the entry of a deferred sentence, deferred prosecution, or stipulated order of continuance.

(Ord. No. 4156, § 1, 6-16-15; Ord. No. 4353, § 1, 1-21-20)


9.04.030 References to Revised Code of Washington and Washington Administrative Code. Revised 2/20

References in this chapter to chapters or specific sections or subsections of the Revised Code of Washington, or to chapters or specific sections or subsections of the Washington Administrative Code, shall include the chapter and sections or subsections as currently enacted and as amended or recodified in the future.

(Ord. No. 4156, § 1, 6-16-15; Ord. No. 4353, § 2, 1-21-20)


9.04.040 Owner, director, manager – Proof.

A. For purposes of this chapter, whether a person is an owner, director, manager, or other person in charge of a massage business or reflexology business may be established from evidence such as, but not limited to:

1. The person holds himself or herself out as an owner, director, manager, or some other like title evidencing control over business decisions;

2. The person is responsible for the general business decisions of the business;

3. The person is considered by those who provide massage or reflexology services as an owner, director, manager, or other person in charge;

4. The person is in control or partial control of when, how, or how much those who provide massage or reflexology services work or are paid, or whether those who provide massage or reflexology services are employees or contractors retained to provide services on behalf of the business;

5. The person is listed as a registered agent of the business;

6. The person is listed as a “governing person” by the Washington State Business Licensing Service;

7. The person is an applicant or is listed as an owner on a city or state business license or license application;

8. The person receives income from the business that is dependent on revenue generated by another person providing massage or reflexology services on behalf of or at the business;

9. The person has signed a lease or rental agreement for property at which the business is operated or is responsible for lease or rent payments;

10. The person has signed for a loan on behalf of the massage or reflexology business;

11. The person is financially responsible for the massage business or reflexology business utilities or services such as water, electricity, garbage, sewer, telephone, Internet, cable television, security, cleaning, maintenance, or accounting;

12. The person pays taxes on behalf of the business; or

13. The person is responsible for ensuring the business is properly supplied with resources necessary to carry out the work of the business or maintain the business.

B. The presence of any of the circumstances described in subsection (A) of this section shall be sufficient to establish that a person is the owner, director, manager, or other person in charge of a massage business or reflexology business. The circumstances described in subsection (A) of this section are not exclusive and other evidence may demonstrate a person is an owner, director, manager, or other person in charge of a massage business or reflexology business. 

(Ord. No. 4156, § 1, 6-16-15) 


9.04.050 Exemptions – Limitations – Name or structure of business.

A. This chapter shall not apply to the following:

1. Activities set forth in RCW 18.108.050 when performed as provided in that statute; or

2. Massage or reflexology that is not provided in exchange for a fee, property, or other consideration.

B. The exemptions set forth in subsection (A) of this section shall not apply to any person who practices or represents himself or herself as a massage practitioner or who practices reflexology or represents himself or herself as a reflexologist and who advertises for the massage or reflexology services, to any business that advertises for massage or reflexology services, or to any person who provides massage or reflexology services at a business that advertises for such services.

C. The exemptions set forth in subsection (A) of this section shall not apply to any person who obtains massage or reflexology services from a person who advertises for the massage or reflexology services, from a business that advertises for massage or reflexology services, or from any person who provides massage or reflexology services at a business that advertises for such services.

D. The fact that a person or business that provides massage or reflexology services describes or advertises such services by a name other than massage or reflexology shall not exempt that person or business from this chapter.

E. In the event the services provided fall within the definition of massage or reflexology, the manner in which a business is incorporated or structured shall be of no consequence in determining if a business provides massage or reflexology services.

F. A club or cooperative arrangement in which a person pays a fee to become a member of the club or cooperative, and as a result of such membership, he or she obtains massage or reflexology services, shall be considered a massage business or reflexology business. 

(Ord. No. 4156, § 1, 6-16-15)


9.04.060 Inspections.

A. Law enforcement personnel shall have the authority to inspect the premises of any massage business or reflexology business in order to ensure:

1. Compliance with the requirement that licenses and certifications are conspicuously displayed and valid;

2. That those providing massage or reflexology services are validly licensed and of proper age; and

3. Compliance with the advertising requirements of KCC 9.04.120.

B. Inspections shall be limited to times when the massage or reflexology business is open.

C. Inspections shall be limited to the common areas of the massage or reflexology business. This section shall not authorize entry or inspection of rooms in which massage or reflexology is provided and which are separated from the common area of the massage business or reflexology business absent consent, a warrant, or other lawful basis.

D. This section shall not be interpreted as limiting the use by law enforcement of any lawful investigatory techniques. 

(Ord. No. 4156, § 1, 6-16-15)


9.04.070 Massage practitioner or reflexologist – License or certificate required – Violation.

A. It shall be unlawful for any person to practice massage or represent himself or herself as a massage practitioner in the city of Kent without a valid and current massage practitioner’s license.

B. It shall be unlawful for any person to practice reflexology or represent himself or herself as a reflexologist in the city of Kent without a valid and current massage practitioner’s license or certificate in reflexology.

C. An unissued license or certificate, or an expired, revoked, or suspended license or certificate, shall not be considered a valid license or certificate. 

(Ord. No. 4156, § 1, 6-16-15) 


9.04.080 Massage practitioner or reflexologist – Owner, director, manager, or other person in charge to ensure valid license or certificate – Violation.

A. It shall be the responsibility of any owner, director, manager, or other person in charge of a massage business or reflexology business in the city of Kent to ensure that each person who practices massage, or represents himself or herself as a massage practitioner, is validly and currently licensed, and to ensure that each person who practices reflexology or represents himself or herself as a reflexologist is validly and currently licensed as a massage practitioner or certified as a reflexologist.

B. It shall be unlawful for any owner, director, manager, or other person in charge of a massage business or reflexology business to facilitate or, with knowledge or criminal negligence, permit a person who does not have a valid and current massage practitioner’s license to practice massage or represent himself or herself as a massage practitioner.

C. It shall be unlawful for any owner, director, manager, or other person in charge of a massage business or reflexology business to facilitate or, with knowledge or criminal negligence, permit a person who does not have a valid and current massage practitioner’s license or who is not a certified reflexologist to practice reflexology or represent himself or herself as a reflexologist.

D. A person with an unissued license or certificate, or whose license or certificate is expired, revoked, or suspended, shall not be considered validly licensed or certified.

E. For the purposes of this section, the failure of the owner, director, manager, or other person in charge of a massage business or reflexology business to confirm the validity of a massage license or reflexology certificate through the Washington Department of Health shall constitute criminal negligence. 

(Ord. No. 4156, § 1, 6-16-15)


9.04.090 Display of massage practitioner or reflexologist license or certificate required – Violation.

A. At any massage business or reflexology business, a copy of the valid and current license of each person who practices massage or represents himself or herself as a massage practitioner at or on behalf of the massage business or reflexology business, and the valid and current massage practitioner’s license or reflexology certificate of each person who practices reflexology or represents himself or herself as a reflexologist at or on behalf of the massage business or reflexology business, shall be conspicuously displayed and shall be made available to persons receiving massage or reflexology services or to law enforcement for inspection upon request.

B. It shall be unlawful for any owner, director, manager, or other person in charge of a massage business or reflexology business to fail to conspicuously display the valid and current massage practitioner’s license of each person who practices massage or represents himself or herself as a massage practitioner at or on behalf of the massage business or reflexology business.

C. It shall be unlawful for any owner, director, manager, or other person in charge of a massage business or reflexology business to fail to conspicuously display the valid and current massage practitioner’s license or certificate to practice reflexology of each person who practices reflexology or represents himself or herself as a reflexologist at or on behalf of the massage business or reflexology business.

D. Each person who practices massage or represents himself or herself as a massage practitioner, and each person who practices reflexology or represents himself or herself as a reflexologist, shall have his or her valid and current license or certificate at each location in which he or she practices massage or represents himself or herself as a massage practitioner, and at each location in which he or she practices reflexology or represents himself or herself as a reflexologist, and the valid and current license or certificate shall be provided to the person receiving the massage or reflexology service or to law enforcement for inspection upon request.

E. It shall be unlawful for any person who practices massage or represents himself or herself as a massage practitioner to fail to have his or her valid and current massage practitioner’s license at each location in which massage services are provided, or display his or her valid and current license to the person receiving the massage service or to law enforcement for inspection when requested.

F. It shall be unlawful for each person who practices reflexology or represents himself or herself as a reflexologist to fail to have his or her valid and current massage practitioner’s license or reflexology certificate at each location in which reflexology services are provided, or display his or her valid and current license or certificate to the person receiving the reflexology service or to law enforcement for inspection when requested.

G. It shall be unlawful for any person to present or conspicuously display an expired, altered, fake, or fraudulently obtained license, certificate, or certification. It shall be unlawful for an owner, director, manager, or other person in charge of a massage business or reflexology business to facilitate or permit another to present or conspicuously display an expired, altered, fake, or fraudulently obtained license, certificate, or certification. 

(Ord. No. 4156, § 1, 6-16-15) 


9.04.100 Receipt of massage or reflexology services from unlicensed massage practitioner or reflexologist – Unlawful.

A. It shall be unlawful for any person to receive massage services from another whom the recipient knows, or reasonably should know, is not validly or currently licensed to provide massage services. It shall be unlawful for any person to receive reflexology services from another whom the recipient knows, or reasonably should know, is not validly or currently licensed as a massage practitioner or certified to provide reflexology services.

B. It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of this section that the person receiving the massage or reflexology services inquired of the license or certification status of the person providing the services and was provided a document purporting to be a valid and current license of the massage practitioner or valid and current certificate of the reflexologist. 

(Ord. No. 4156, § 1, 6-16-15)


9.04.110 Minors practicing massage or reflexology – Responsibility of owner, director, manager, or other person in charge – Receipt of massage or reflexology services from minor unlawful.

A. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, director, manager, or other person in charge of a massage business or reflexology business to verify that each person who provides massage or reflexology services has attained the age of eighteen (18). It shall be unlawful for any owner, director, manager, or other person in charge of a massage business or reflexology business to permit or facilitate the provision of massage or reflexology services by a person who has not reached the age of eighteen (18).

B. It shall be unlawful for any person to receive massage or reflexology services from another whom the recipient knows, or reasonably should know, has not reached the age of eighteen (18). It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of this section that the person receiving the massage or reflexology services inquired of the age of the person providing the services and was provided a document purporting to be a valid and current license of the massage practitioner or valid and current certificate of the reflexologist. 

(Ord. No. 4156, § 1, 6-16-15)


9.04.120 Advertising.

It shall be unlawful to advertise the practice of massage or practice of reflexology except in accordance with RCW 18.108.040. 

(Ord. No. 4156, § 1, 6-16-15)


9.04.125 Practice requirements and limitations – Responsibility of owner, director, manager, or other person in charge. Revised 2/20

A. It is unlawful for any person who practices massage therapy or represents himself or herself as a massage therapist, or who practices reflexology or represents himself or herself as a reflexologist, to touch the body parts identified in WAC 246-830-550(1).

B. It is unlawful for any person who practices massage therapy or represents himself or herself as a massage therapist, or who practices reflexology, or represents himself or herself as a reflexologist to perform breast massage except in accordance with WAC 246-830-555.

C. It is unlawful for any person who practices massage therapy or represents himself or herself as a massage therapist, or who practices reflexology or represents himself or herself as a reflexologist, to fail to comply with the coverage and draping requirements of WAC 246-830-560.

D. It is unlawful for any person who practices massage therapy or represents himself or herself as a massage therapist, or who practices reflexology or represents himself or herself as a reflexologist, to fail to comply with the equipment, sanitation, and hygiene requirements of WAC 246-830-500 and 246-830-510.

E. It is unlawful for any person who practices massage therapy or represents himself or herself as a massage therapist, or who practices reflexology or represents himself or herself as a reflexologist, to fail to comply with the recordkeeping requirements of WAC 246-830-565 and 246-830-570.

F. It shall be unlawful for any owner, director, manager, or other person in charge of a massage business or reflexology business to facilitate or, with knowledge or criminal negligence, permit another person to violate any provision of this section.

(Ord. No. 4353 § 3, 1-21-20)


9.04.130 Violations – Penalty. Revised 2/20

A. The first violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor.

B. Each subsequent violation of this chapter, whether alleged in the same prosecution as the first violation or in subsequent prosecutions, shall constitute a gross misdemeanor.

C. Upon a determination that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the court shall order the forfeiture of all Kent-issued massage or reflexology business licenses held by the violator. As a condition of any sentence, suspension of sentence, or deferral of sentence for a violation of this chapter, the court shall prohibit the violator from applying for, attempting to obtain, or obtaining a license from the city of Kent to engage in any activity set forth in KCC 9.04.020(C), or working at, being present at, or having an interest in any business at which the activities set forth in KCC 9.04.020(C) occur.

(Ord. No. 4156, § 1, 6-16-15; Ord. No. 4353, § 4, 1-21-20) 


Chapter 9.05 SEIZURE, FORFEITURE, AND DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY, FIREARMS, AND PROPERTY ASSOCIATED WITH CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES*

Sections:

9.05.010    Disposal of unclaimed property.

9.05.020    Forfeiture of firearms.

9.05.030    Drug seizure and forfeiture.

*Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3405, § 1, adopted July 1, 1998, repealed Ch. 9.05, §§ 9.05.010 – 9.05.050, which pertained to disposal of forfeited firearms. Section 3 of said ordinance added provisions designated as a new Ch. 9.05 to read as herein set out.


9.05.010 Disposal of unclaimed property.

The following sections of Chapter 63.32 RCW are hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full.

A.    RCW 63.32.010	Methods of disposition – Notice – Sale, retention, destruction, or trade.

B.    RCW 63.32.020	Notice of sale.

C.    RCW 63.32.030	Disposition of proceeds.

D.    RCW 63.32.040	Reimbursement to owner.

E.    RCW 63.32.050	Donation of unclaimed bicycles and toys to charity.

(Ord. No. 3405, § 1, 7-7-98)


9.05.020 Forfeiture of firearms.

RCW 9.41.098 entitled “Forfeiture of firearms – Disposition – Confiscation” is hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full.

(Ord. No. 3405, § 1, 7-7-98)


9.05.030 Drug seizure and forfeiture.

RCW 69.50.505 entitled “Seizure and forfeiture” is hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full.

(Ord. No. 3405, § 1, 7-7-98)




Chapter 9.08 AUDIBLE INTRUSION ALARMS

Sections:

9.08.04    Outside audible intrusion alarm systems prohibited.

9.08.08    Duration of alarm limited.

9.08.12    Exceptions.

9.08.20    Automatic telephone dialing systems prohibited.

9.08.24    False alarm charge.

9.08.32    Notification of police department.

9.08.36    Penalties.


9.08.04 Outside audible intrusion alarm systems prohibited.

There shall no longer be allowed any outside audible intrusion alarm systems within the city in conjunction with commercial, business or industrial facilities or buildings.

(Ord. No. 1860, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.08.04)


9.08.08 Duration of alarm limited.

Any residence building within the city or any motor vehicle operating within the city that has an outside audible intrusion alarm system connected thereto shall be equipped with a device that shall limit the duration of any such alarm for a period not to exceed five (5) minutes and such system shall preclude any recycling of the alarm system.

(Ord. No. 1860, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.08.08)


9.08.12 Exceptions.

Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to prohibit or limit the use of outside audible fire alarm systems activated by heat, smoke or fire or by the flowing of water.

(Ord. No. 1860, § 3. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.08.12)


9.08.20 Automatic telephone dialing systems prohibited.

It shall be a violation of the terms of this chapter to connect any automatic telephone dialing systems to the police department alarm system.

(Ord. No. 1860, § 5. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.08.20)


9.08.24 False alarm charge.

The police department is granted the discretion to order a maximum charge of ten dollars ($10) for each false alarm received or responded to by the police department.

(Ord. No. 1860, § 6. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.08.24)


9.08.32 Notification of police department.

It shall be the obligation of anyone connecting an outside audible intrusion alarm to any residence building located within the city to immediately upon the placement of such alarm system, give written notification thereof to the police department.

(Ord. No. 1860, § 8. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.08.32)


9.08.36 Penalties.

A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall result in a fine of up to one hundred dollars ($100) for each separate violation.

(Ord. No. 1860, § 9. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.08.36)


Chapter 9.09 CURFEW AND PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR JUVENILES

Sections:

9.09.010    Purpose.

9.09.020    Definitions.

9.09.030    Juvenile curfew.

9.09.040    Parental responsibility.

9.09.050    Exemptions.

9.09.060    Enforcement.

9.09.070    Violations and penalties.

9.09.080    Severability.


9.09.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to:

A. Protect juveniles and other citizens, residents and visitors of the city from the dangers of crimes which occur on sidewalks, streets, and public places during the late night and early morning hours;

B. Decrease the amount of criminal activity engaged in by juveniles;

C. Promote and enhance parental control over juveniles;

D. Adopt and implement policies relating to juveniles that would minimize impacts on juveniles engaging in and traveling to or from a lawful activity or event; and

E. Preserve the public safety and to reduce acts of violence by or against juveniles that are occurring in Kent at rates beyond the capacity of the police to assure public safety without the aid of a juvenile curfew.

(Ord. No. 3355, § 2, 7-15-97)


9.09.020 Definitions.

In this chapter:

Aid and abet means that a parent or guardian, with knowledge that it will promote or facilitate the commission of a curfew violation, either:

1. Solicits, commands, encourages, helps, assists, or requests a juvenile to commit the violation; or

2. Aids or agrees to aid a juvenile or another person in planning or committing the violation. The word “aid” means all assistance whether given by words, acts, encouragement, support, presence or neglect of parental or custodial responsibilities for a juvenile required by any existing or hereafter enacted statute of this state.

Curfew hours mean 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. daily.

Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any store, shop, restaurant, bowling alley, cafe, theater, drug store, golf course, pool room, shopping center, video arcade, and any other place open to the general public and devoted to business, amusement, or entertainment of the general public or other lawful purpose.

Guardian means:

1. A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a juvenile; or

2. A public or private agency with whom a juvenile has been placed by a court; or

3. A person who is at least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a juvenile.

Juvenile means any person under eighteen (18) years of age.

Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation.

Parent means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, stepparent, or foster parent of a juvenile.

Public place means any street, alley, highway, parking lot, sidewalk, park, playground or place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose. Public place shall include, but not be limited to any public facility or any establishment such as a store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling alley, cafe, theater, drug store, golf course, pool room, shopping center, and any other place open to the general public and devoted to business, amusement or entertainment of the general public or other lawful purpose, whether publicly or privately owned or operated. It shall also include the front or immediate area of the above, including, but not limited to, roads, sidewalks, alleyways, parking lots, parks or other similar ares open to the general public.

Remain means to:

1. Linger or stay; or

2. Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises of any establishment or other public place.

Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.

(Ord. No. 3355, § 2, 7-15-97)


9.09.030 Juvenile curfew.

Except as set forth in KCC 9.09.050, it shall be a civil infraction for any juvenile to remain in any public place within the city during curfew hours.

(Ord. No. 3355, § 2, 7-15-97)


9.09.040 Parental responsibility.

Except as set forth in KCC 9.09.050, it shall be a civil infraction for any parent or guardian having custody or control of any juvenile to knowingly aid or abet the juvenile to commit a curfew violation.

(Ord. No. 3355, § 2, 7-15-97)


9.09.050 Exemptions.

A. It shall not be a violation of KCC 9.07.030 and/or KCC 9.09.040 that the juvenile was:

1. Accompanied by the juvenile’s parent or guardian;

2. On an errand at the direction of the juvenile’s parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;

3. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;

4. Engaged in an employment activity, or, going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;

5. Involved in an emergency;

6. On the sidewalk abutting the juvenile’s residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the juvenile’s presence;

7. Attending an official school, religious, recreational, or other activity supervised by adults or sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the juvenile, or going to or returning home from such activity, without any detour or stop;

8. Lawfully present within or upon an establishment or going to or returning home from such establishment without any detour or stop;

9. Going to or returning from the residence of another without any detour or stop.

10. Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise or religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or

11. Married and thus has achieved the age of majority pursuant to RCW 26.28.020, or has become emancipated in accordance with Chapter 13.64 RCW.

B. It shall not be a violation of KCC 9.09.040 when any parent or guardian, unable to control the whereabouts and activities of a juvenile in their care, custody, or control, has contacted the city or police department and reported such juvenile as possibly appearing in locations and at times that would violate this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3355, § 2, 7-15-97)


9.09.060 Enforcement.

A. Prior to the issuance of a verbal or written warning or a notice of civil infraction, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s name, age, address, and the reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a warning or citation or take further action under this section unless the officer reasonably believes a violation has occurred and that based on any response and other circumstances, no exemption exists under KCC 9.07.050.

B. Pursuant to RCW 13.32A.050(1)(b), a police officer, who reasonably believes that a juvenile is in violation of KCC 9.09.030, shall have the authority to take the juvenile into custody. Pursuant to RCW 13.32A.060, an officer taking a juvenile into custody shall inform the juvenile of the reason for such custody and shall either:

1. Transport the juvenile to his or her home or to a parent or guardian at his or her place of employment, if no parent or guardian is at home. The parent or guardian may request that the officer take the juvenile to the home of an adult extended family member, responsible adult, crisis residential center, the Department of Social and Health Services, or a licensed youth shelter. In responding to the request of the parent or guardian, the officer shall take the juvenile to a requested place which, in the officer’s belief, is within a reasonable distance of the parent or guardian’s home. The officer releasing a juvenile into the custody of a parent, guardian, an adult extended family member, responsible adult, or a licensed youth shelter shall inform the person receiving the child of the reason for taking the child into custody and inform all parties of the nature and location of appropriate services available in the community; or

2. After attempting to notify the parent or guardian, take the juvenile to a designated crisis residential center’s secure facility, or a center’s semi-secure facility if a secure facility is full, not available, or not located within a reasonable distance: 

a. If a juvenile expresses fear or distress at the prospect of being returned to his or her home which leads the officer to believe there is a possibility that the child is experiencing some type of child abuse or negligence, as defined in RCW 26.44.020;

b. If it is not practical to transport the juvenile to his or her home or place of the parent or guardian’s employment; or

c. If there is no parent or guardian available to accept custody of the child; or

3. After attempting to notify the parent or guardian, if a crisis residential center is full, not available, or not located within a reasonable distance, the officer may request the Department of Social and Health Services to accept custody of the juvenile. If the Department determines that an appropriate placement is currently available, the Department shall accept custody and place the juvenile in an out-of-home placement. If the Department declines to accept custody of the juvenile, the officer may release the juvenile after attempting to take the juvenile to the following, in the order listed:

a. The home of an adult extended family member;

b. A responsible adult;

c. A licensed youth shelter.

The officer shall immediately notify the Department of Social and Health Services if no placement option is available and the child is released.

C. An officer’s responsibilities under subsection (B) of this section, after taking a juvenile into custody for a curfew violation, shall be changed, expanded or limited without further amendment to be consistent with the provisions of RCW 13.32A.050 and 13.32A.060 as now or hereafter amended.

(Ord. No. 3355, § 2, 7-15-97)


9.09.070 Violations and penalties.

A. It shall be a civil infraction to commit a violation of KCC 9.09.030 or 9.09.040. The Kent municipal court shall have jurisdiction over all civil infractions issued under this chapter. Civil infractions shall be issued and processed in accordance with Chapter 7.80 RCW as currently enacted or as hereinafter amended, which is incorporated herein by reference.

B. A person found to have committed a civil infraction shall be assessed a monetary penalty as follows:

1. The first violation shall be subject to a verbal or written warning.

2. The second violation within a one (1) year period shall be subject to a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100).

3. The third or subsequent violation within a one (1) year period shall be subject to a civil penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250).

(Ord. No. 3355, § 2, 7-15-97)


9.09.080 Severability.

If any one (1) or more sections, subsections, or sentences of this chapter are held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this chapter and the same shall remain in full force and effect.

(Ord. No. 3355, § 2, 7-15-97)


Chapter 9.12 NARCOTICS AND BARBITURATES*

Sections:

9.12.04    Unlawful to use or be under influence of narcotics – Exception.

9.12.08    Unlawful to possess narcotics without proper license or prescription.

9.12.12    Unlawful to sell or give away narcotics without prescription.

9.12.16    Prescribing narcotics.

9.12.20    Sale, possession or use of dangerous drugs.

9.12.22    Reserved.

9.12.24    Unlawful to possess without prescription.

9.12.28    Unlawful to possess unless specifically prescribed for person in possession.

9.12.32    Unlawful to administer except as prescribed.

9.12.36    Unlawful to be under influence in public place.

9.12.40    Prosecution for violation.

9.12.44    Reserved.

9.12.48    Possession as prima facie evidence of violation.

9.12.52    Unlawful to aid or abet furnishing certain drugs to persons in jail or custody of police.

9.12.56    Places of resort for users of narcotics and/or dangerous drugs declared nuisance.

9.12.60    Abatement of places of resort.

9.12.64    Unlawful to frequent or be in place where narcotics and/or dangerous drugs are unlawfully kept, used or disposed of.

9.12.68    Penalty for violations.

9.12.70    Drug-free zones.

9.12.75    Drug-traffic loitering.

*State law reference(s) – Uniform controlled substances act, RCW 69.50.101 et seq.; drugs requiring prescriptions, RCW 69.41.010 et seq.


9.12.04 Unlawful to use or be under influence of narcotics – Exception.

It shall be unlawful, except when lawfully administered in good faith by a physician or other person authorized by law to do so, for any person to use or be under the influence of opium, morphine, cocaine, hydrate of chloral, isonipecaine, amidone, isosmidone, keto-bemidone or any other substance neither chemically nor physically distinguishable from any one (1) of them or any opiate or narcotic or derivative thereof. An individual is “under the influence” of narcotics for the purpose of this section when any of his normal faculties are substantially affected or impaired as a result of the use of such opiate or narcotic or derivative thereof.

(Ord. No. 1787, § 1; Ord. No. 2933, § 1(9.12.04), 7-19-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.12.04)


9.12.08 Unlawful to possess narcotics without proper license or prescription.

It shall be unlawful for any person not being registered or licensed as is required by the federal act of December 17, 1914, commonly known as the Harrison Act, Section 3221, Title 26, Ch. 27, United States Code Annotated, and the Controlled Substance Act of October 27, 1980; Public Law 91-513, to possess any opium, morphine, cocaine, hydrate of chloral, isonipecaine, amidone, isosmidone, keto-bemidone or any other substance neither chemically nor physically distinguishable from any one (1) of them, or any opiate or narcotics or derivative thereof unless purchased by the possessor thereof upon prescription of a physician or other person licensed by law to dispense such narcotic or narcotic drug.

(Ord. No. 1787, § 2; Ord. No. 2933, § 1(9.12.08), 7-19-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.12.08)


9.12.12 Unlawful to sell or give away narcotics without prescription.

A. It shall be unlawful for any apothecary, pharmacist, druggist or other person to sell, give away, exchange, barter or otherwise dispose of any of the following to any person except a physician, surgeon or dentist, for use in his profession or calling, or upon the written prescription of a physician, surgeon or other person licensed to issue such prescription:

1. Opium;

2. Morphine;

3. Cocaine;

4. Hydrate of chloral;

5. Isonipecaine;

6. Amidone;

7. Isosmidone;

8. Keto-bemidone;

9. Any other substance which is neither chemically nor physically distinguishable from subsections (A)(1) through (A)(8) above;

10. Any narcotic, the principal ingredient of which is opium;

11. Any narcotic substance or preparation derived in any part from and containing as its principal ingredient any of the following:

a. Opium;

b. Morphine;

c. Cocaine;

d. Hydrate of chloral;

e. Isonipecaine;

f. Amidone;

g. Isosmidone;

h. Keto-bemidone; or

i. Any other substance neither chemically nor physically distinguishable from subsections (A)(11)(a) through (A)(11)(h) above or any narcotic.

B. The apothecary, pharmacist, druggist or other person shall keep in a suitable and well-bound book, kept and used for that purpose only, a true and consecutive memorandum record of every such sale, gift, exchange, barter or disposition, showing the time when, the place where, the name of the proprietor or other person by whom, and the name of the person to whom, the sale, gift, exchange, barter or disposition was made, and the quantity and kind of narcotic, and the name of the physician or surgeon upon whose prescription the sale, gift, exchange, barter or disposition was made, if made upon a prescription, and the number of the prescription. The apothecary, pharmacist, druggist or other person shall place and keep on file all such prescriptions consecutively numbered. Such book and prescriptions shall be a public record and shall be open at all reasonable times to the inspection of the mayor, the director of health and any accredited officer of the Department of Health and Sanitation, the chief of police or any police officer, the city attorney, and any persons specially authorized by the mayor. It shall be unlawful for any such apothecary, pharmacist, druggist or other person to fail or refuse to exhibit such book and prescriptions to any of the above named officers upon demand.

(Ord. No. 1787, § 3; Ord. No. 2933, § 1(9.12.12), 7-19-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.12.12)


9.12.16 Prescribing narcotics.

It shall be unlawful to prescribe opium, morphine, cocaine, hydrate of chloral, isonipecaine, amidone, isosmidone, keto-bemidone, or any other substance neither chemically nor physically distinguishable from any one (1) of them, or any opiate or narcotic drug or derivative thereof, in such a manner as to leave the quantity of the dose or the frequency of the taking of any dose to the discretion of the person to whom such prescription is issued. It shall be unlawful for any person dispensing any such narcotic or narcotic drug to furnish the same upon any such prescription.

(Ord. No. 1787, § 4; Ord. No. 2933, § 1(9.12.16), 7-19-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.12.16)


9.12.20 Sale, possession or use of dangerous drugs.

A. It is unlawful to sell, offer to sell, purchase, offer to purchase, give away, barter, exchange, distribute, possess or use any dangerous drug except as now or hereafter authorized or permitted by the laws of the state or except upon the written or oral order or prescription of a physician, surgeon, dentist, or veterinary surgeon, licensed to practice in the state, which order or prescription shall not be refilled without the written or oral order of the prescriber.

B. The term “dangerous drug” for the purpose of this chapter shall mean and include marijuana (cannabis sativa) and any controlled substance classified in Schedule I, II, III or IV of Chapter 69.50 RCW, as it now exists or shall hereafter be added to, deleted from, modified or amended.

(Ord. No. 1787, § 5; Ord. No. 2933, § 1(9.12.20), 7-19-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.12.20)


9.12.22 Reserved.	

Editor’s note – Ordinance No. 3350, § 4, adopted May 21, 1997, repealed § 9.12.22 in its entirety. Formerly, such section pertained to possession of marijuana and derived from Ord. No. 2971, § 1, 3-20-91; Ord. No. 3103, § 1, 4-20-93.


9.12.24 Unlawful to possess without prescription.

It is unlawful to possess any drug mentioned in KCC 9.12.08 and 9.12.20 purchased or acquired pursuant to an order or prescription except in the container in which purchased or acquired.

(Ord. No. 1787, § 6; Ord. No. 2933, § 1(9.12.24), 7-19-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.12.24)


9.12.28 Unlawful to possess unless specifically prescribed for person in possession.

It is unlawful to possess any drug mentioned in KCC 9.12.08 and 9.12.20 unless the possessor of the drug is licensed to have the drug in his possession, or be the party for whom the drug in question has been specifically prescribed by a physician or other person licensed by law to dispense the drug or be the duly authorized representative of the party for whom the drug has been prescribed.

(Ord. No. 1787, § 7; Ord. No. 2933, § 1(9.12.28), 7-19-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.12.28)


9.12.32 Unlawful to administer except as prescribed.

It is unlawful to use or administer any drug mentioned in KCC 9.12.08 and 9.12.20 hereof except in the amount, for the purposes, and as prescribed by the order of prescription pursuant to which the drug was acquired.

(Ord. No. 1787, § 8; Ord. No. 2933, § 1(9.12.32), 7-19-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.12.32)


9.12.36 Unlawful to be under influence in public place.

It is unlawful to be under the influence of any drug within the purview of this chapter in any private premises or house to the annoyance of any individual or in a public place, in a vehicle in or on a public place or in a place open to the public view or to which the public has access. An individual is “under the influence” of a drug for the purpose of this section when any of his normal faculties are substantially affected or impaired as a result of the use of such drug.

(Ord. No. 1787, § 9; Ord. No. 2933, § 1(9.12.36), 7-19-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.12.36)


9.12.40 Prosecution for violation.

In any prosecution for violation of this chapter it shall not be necessary to negate any exception, proviso or exemption contained in such chapter and the burden of proof of such exception, proviso or exemption shall be upon the defendant.

(Ord. No. 1787, § 10; Ord. No. 2933, § 1(9.12.40), 7-19-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.12.40)


9.12.44 Reserved.	

Editor’s note – Ordinance No. 3350, § 5, adopted May 21, 1997, repealed § 9.12.44 in its entirety. Formerly, such section pertained to unlawful possession of injection devices and derived from § 9.12.44 of the 1986 Code; Ord. No. 2933, § 1(9.12.44), 7-19-90.


9.12.48 Possession as prima facie evidence of violation.

In any prosecution under this chapter it shall be competent to prove that any person has in his possession any of the narcotics or narcotic drugs named herein, or their derivatives, and/or any drug mentioned in KCC 9.12.08 and 9.12.20, or possession and the proof thereof shall be prima facie evidence that the narcotic or dangerous drug was so held in violation of the terms of this chapter, except under circumstances where the substance in question was prescribed by a physician or doctor or other licensed person for the party who has the drug in his possession and such substance is in the container in which it was purchased or acquired, or the party in possession is the duly authorized representative of the person for whom the substance was prescribed.

(Ord. No. 1787, § 12; Ord. No. 2933, § 1(9.12.48), 7-19-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.12.48)


9.12.52 Unlawful to aid or abet furnishing certain drugs to persons in jail or custody of police.

It is unlawful for any person not acting under the direction of the director of public health to furnish or aid or abet the furnishing of any opium, morphine, cocaine, hydrate of chloral, isonipecaine, amidone, isosmidone, keto-bemidone or any substance neither chemically nor physically distinguishable from any one (1) of them or any opiate or narcotic, or narcotic derivative thereof or any of the “dangerous drugs” mentioned in KCC 9.12.20 to any person confined in the city jail or in the custody of the police department, unless the substance in question is lawfully prescribed for the person by a doctor or physician and is given to such person under the direction of that person’s physician or doctor.

(Ord. No. 1787, § 13; Ord. No. 2933, § 1(9.12.52), 7-19-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.12.52)


9.12.56 Places of resort for users of narcotics and/or dangerous drugs declared nuisance.

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or agent, holding, leasing, renting, occupying or having charge and control of, any building, structure or premises or room or rooms therein to permit the same to be used as a place of resort for persons known to be users of narcotics, narcotic drugs or dangerous drugs mentioned in KCC 9.12.08 and 9.12.20 or to permit therein the unlawful sale, gift or distribution of narcotics, narcotic drugs or dangerous drugs mentioned in KCC 9.12.08 and 9.12.20 and any such place or any place which is a resort for users of narcotics, narcotic drugs or dangerous drugs mentioned in KCC 9.12.08 and 9.12.20 is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated as such in the manner provided by this chapter.

(Ord. No. 1787, § 14; Ord. No. 2933, § 1(9.12.56), 7-19-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.12.56)


9.12.60 Abatement of places of resort.

Any building, structure, premises or room or rooms therein constituting a nuisance as defined in this chapter may be abated in a civil action in the manner provided by law or the court upon final judgment of conviction for violation of this chapter of any person found therein at the time of his arrest may forthwith and as a part of the same proceeding direct the chief of police to abate any such place as a nuisance. The chief of police, upon ascertaining that any such place is a nuisance as defined by this chapter, may proceed to summarily abate the same. Such abatement shall be effected by closing and securely locking the place abated and excluding all persons therefrom. It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, lessee, tenant, person in charge or occupant, to enter, use or occupy any building, structure or premises or room or rooms therein abated as a nuisance under the provisions of this chapter, from and for a period of one (1) year after the date of such abatement, unless he as principal shall therefor give and file with the city clerk a good and sufficient surety bond to be approved by the court making the order of abatement or in case of summary abatement to be approved by the chief of police in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000) payable to the city conditioned that such building, structure, premises or room or rooms therein will not thereafter be used in violation of this chapter and that he will pay all fines, costs and damages assessed against him for any violation of this chapter. In case of the violation of any of the conditions of such bond, the whole amount may be recovered as a penalty for the use of the city.

(Ord. No. 1787, § 15; Ord. No. 2933, § 1(9.12.60), 7-19-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.12.60)


9.12.64 Unlawful to frequent or be in place where narcotics and/or dangerous drugs are unlawfully kept, used or disposed of.

It is unlawful for anyone, not lawfully authorized to frequent, enter, be in, or be found in any place where narcotics, narcotic drugs, their derivatives, or dangerous drugs mentioned in KCC 9.12.08 and 9.12.20 are unlawfully used, kept or disposed of.

(Ord. No. 1787, § 16; Ord. No. 2933, § 1(9.12.64), 7-19-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.12.64)


9.12.68 Penalty for violations.

A person who is convicted of a misdemeanor violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours, and by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250). On a second or subsequent conviction, the fine shall not be less than five hundred dollars ($500). These fines shall be in addition to any other fine or penalty imposed. Unless the court finds that the imposition of the minimum imprisonment will pose a substantial risk to the defendant’s physical or mental well-being or that local jail facilities are in an overcrowded condition, the minimum term of imprisonment shall not be suspended or deferred. If the court finds such risk or overcrowding exists, it shall sentence the defendant to a minimum of forty (40) hours of community service. If a minimum term of imprisonment is suspended or deferred, the court shall state in writing the reason for granting the suspension or deferral and the facts upon which the suspension or deferral is based. Unless the court finds the person to be indigent, the minimum fine shall not be suspended or deferred.

(Ord. No. 1787, § 17; Ord. No. 2894, § 1, 1-16-90; Ord. No. 2933, § 1(9.12.68), 7-19-90; Ord. No. 3030, § 1, 2-19-92. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.12.68)


9.12.70 Drug-free zones.

Pursuant to RCW 69.50.435, there are hereby established within the city drug-free zones for enhanced criminal penalties for crimes involving the manufacture, sale or delivery of controlled substances committed within such zones in areas upon surrounding schools and/or bus stops. The maps describing such zones incorporated herein by reference are hereby approved as the official locations and record of the locations and boundaries of the areas on or within one thousand (1,000) feet of the school sites of the Kent School District. The maps are on file with the city clerk and are maintained as an official record available for public inspection.

(Ord. No. 3061, § 1, 8-18-92)


9.12.75 Drug-traffic loitering.

A. As used in this section:

1. Conviction means an adjudication of guilt pursuant to RCW Title 10 or 13, or the equivalent provisions of any federal statute, state statute or ordinance of any political subdivision of this state, and includes a verdict of guilty, a finding of guilty and an acceptance of a plea of guilty.

2. Drug paraphernalia means drug paraphernalia as the term is defined in the Uniform Substance Act, RCW 69.50.102, excluding hypodermic syringes or needles in the possession of a confirmed diabetic or a person directed by his or her physician to use such items.

3. Illegal drug activity means unlawful conduct contrary to any provision of Chapter 69.41, 69.50 or 69.52 RCW, or the equivalent federal statute, state statute, or ordinance of any political subdivision of this state.

4. Known drug trafficker means a person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted within the last two (2) years in any court of any felony illegal drug activity.

5. Public place is an area generally visible to public view and includes, but is not limited to, streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, transit stations, shelters and tunnels, automobiles visible to public view (whether moving or not), and buildings, including those which serve food or drink, or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.

B. A person is guilty of drug-traffic loitering if he or she remains in a public place and intentionally solicits, induces, entices, or procures another to engage in unlawful conduct contrary to Chapter 69.50, 69.41 or 69.52 RCW.

C. The following circumstances do not by themselves constitute the crime of drug-traffic loitering. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether the actor intends such prohibited conduct are that he or she:

1. Is seen by the officer to be in possession of drug paraphernalia; or

2. Is a known drug trafficker; or

3. Repeatedly beckons to, stops or attempts to stop passersby, or engages passersby in conversation; or

4. Repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicle operators by hailing, waving of arms or any other bodily gesture; or

5. Circles an area in a motor vehicle and repeatedly beckons to, contacts, or attempts to stop pedestrians.

D. No person may be arrested for drug-traffic loitering unless probable cause exists to believe that he or she has remained in a public place and has intentionally solicited, induced, enticed or procured another to engage in unlawful conduct contrary to Chapter 69.50, 69.41, or 69.52 RCW.

E. A person convicted of drug-traffic loitering under this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000) or term of imprisonment of not more than one (1) year, or both.

(Ord. No. 3135, § 1, 10-5-93)


Chapter 9.32 CONDUCT IN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE PREMISES*

Sections:

9.32.04    Prohibited acts.

9.32.06    Entertainment – Hours permitted.

9.32.08    Violations.

*Cross reference(s) – License required where dancing is permitted and alcoholic beverages are being served, § 5.02.070.

State law reference(s) – Authority to adopt police regulations not in conflict with state law, RCW 66.08.120.


9.32.04 Prohibited acts.

The following acts or conduct on premises licensed under the authority of the state liquor control board are prohibited from:

1. Employing or allowing any person to sell or serve alcoholic beverages in or upon the licensed premises while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the breast below the top of the areolae or of any portion of the pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals;

2. Employing or allowing the services of or allowing any hostess or other person including any entertainer to mingle with the patrons while such hostess or other person or entertainer is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as described in subsection (A) above;

3. Employing, contracting with or allowing any person to solicit a patron for any beverage and/or accept any beverage from a patron in or upon the licensed premises and receive therefor, either directly or indirectly, any commission, remuneration or compensation;

4. Employing or contracting with any person for the purpose of having such person dance with a patron or for the purpose of having such person spend time with a patron in or upon the licensed premises and for which the person is to receive, either directly or indirectly, any commission, remuneration or compensation;

5. Permitting any dancer-entertainer to perform on the premises except when removed at least six (6) feet from the nearest patron and except when on a permanent stage at least eighteen (18) inches high;

6. Encouraging or permitting any person on the licensed premises to touch, caress or fondle the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals of any other person;

7. Permitting any employee or person to wear or use any device or covering, exposed to view, which simulates the breast, genitals, anus, pubic hair or any portion thereof;

8. Permitting any person to perform acts of or acts which simulate:

a. Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law;

b. The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals;

c. The displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals;

9. Permitting entertainers or any other person whose breasts and/or buttocks are exposed to perform anywhere on the licensed premises;

10. Permitting any person to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the prohibited activities described above;

11. Permitting any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises who exposes to public view any portion of his genitals or anus;

12. Permitting the showing of film, still pictures, electronic reproduction, or other visual reproductions depicting:

a. Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law,

b. Any person being touched, caressed or fondled on the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals,

c. Scenes wherein a person displays the vulva or the anus or the genitals,

d. Scenes where artificial devices or inanimate objects are employed to depict, or drawings are employed to portray, any of the prohibited activities described above.

(Ord. No. 2312, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.32.04)


9.32.06 Entertainment – Hours permitted.

Pursuant to RCW 66.28.080 and WAC 314-16-055, no music, dancing or entertainment may be conducted between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any premises licensed under the authority of the state liquor control board which is open to the public and which operates for profit, directly or indirectly, or requires a monetary payment or contribution from the persons admitted. “Dancing” herein shall not include a public dance under Ch. 5.12 KCC which regulates certain public dances on premises not licensed under the authority of the state liquor control board. “Dancing” and “entertainment” herein shall not include adult entertainment under Ch. 5.10 KCC which regulates adult entertainment performed on premises not licensed under the authority of the state liquor control board. “Music” and “entertainment” herein shall not apply to radios or mechanical musical devices such as tape decks or similar equipment.

(Ord. No. 3163, § 1, 5-3-94)


9.32.08 Violations.

Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and punishable by imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days, and a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500) or both such fine and imprisonment.

(Ord. No. 2312, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 9.32.08)


Chapter 9.34 CORRECTIONS FACILITY

Sections:

9.34.010    Definitions.

9.34.020    Programs – Policies and procedures.

9.34.030    Corrections facility programs as privilege – No right to participate – Participation may be required.

9.34.040    Costs of programs.

9.34.050    Good time credit – Work credit day to jail day ratio.

9.34.060    Electronic home detention.

9.34.070    Work release.

9.34.080    Work programs in general – Types of work performed – Limitations.

9.34.110    Inmate responsible for portion of medical care costs.


9.34.010 Definitions.

The following words, terms, and phrases shall have the following meanings:

A. Confinement shall mean confinement within the corrections facility, or participation in a corrections facility program.

B. Corrections facility shall mean the city of Kent corrections facility.

C. Corrections staff shall mean employees of the corrections facility.

D. Day of work shall mean a work day pursuant to a work program. The length of a day of work shall be determined by corrections staff.

E. Inmate shall mean a defendant sentenced by the Kent municipal court or another court to serve a period of confinement in the corrections facility.

F. The terms jail, imprisonment, or commitment, as those terms are used in a sentencing order of the court, shall mean confinement.

G. Program shall mean electronic home detention or monitoring, work programs, work release or other corrections facility program as authorized by statute, ordinance or corrections facility policy. A program may be nonsupervised, partially supervised, or supervised.

H. Qualifying inmate shall mean an inmate who meets the conditions of participation in a corrections facility program as such conditions are set forth in the corrections facility policies and procedures applicable to such program.

(Ord. No. 3919, § 3, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 4004, § 1, 9-20-11)


9.34.020 Programs – Policies and procedures.

The corrections facility shall establish policies and procedures for the implementation of the various programs set forth in this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3919, § 3, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 4004, § 1, 9-20-11)


9.34.030 Corrections facility programs as privilege – No right to participate – Participation may be required.

A. Participation in programs shall be considered a privilege, participation shall be subject to the discretion of the corrections staff, and the inmate shall have no right to participate in such programs. There shall be no guarantee to any inmate that he or she will be permitted to participate in any program even after a date for participation is established. In the event an inmate is accepted in, or ordered to participate in, a program, and thereafter the program is not available, the inmate may be permitted to participate in another program for which he or she is eligible, subject to availability and at the sole discretion of corrections staff.

B. Participation shall be conditioned upon the inmate meeting the qualifications of the program, and complying with applicable policies and procedures for the program.

C. The corrections facility may, at its discretion, require an inmate to participate in a corrections facility program against his or her will.

(Ord. No. 3919, § 3, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 4004, § 1, 9-20-11)


9.34.040 Costs of programs.

The city may, pursuant to resolution or through a budget ordinance, set various fees which may be required as a condition of participating in a program; provided, the corrections facility may waive the fees or require the inmate to participate on a work program in lieu of payment in order to manage the correction facility’s population, or in order to make such programs available to the indigent.

(Ord. No. 3919, § 3, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 4004, § 1, 9-20-11)


9.34.050 Good time credit – Work credit day to jail day ratio.

A. Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, an inmate may receive good time credit for good behavior in an amount not to exceed one-third (1/3) of the confinement ordered by the court; provided, such good time credit may be taken away from the inmate pursuant to corrections facility policies and procedures.

B. Any inmate who performs work on a corrections facility work program shall receive credit for two (2) days of confinement ordered by the court for every three (3) days of work performed. Partial credit for periods of less than one (1) day may be given where the inability to complete the full day of work is not the fault of the inmate, and the inmate has otherwise complied with the program policies.

(Ord. No. 3919, § 3, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 4004, § 1, 9-20-11)


9.34.060 Electronic home detention.

A qualifying inmate sentenced to a period of confinement at the corrections facility may, at the discretion of corrections staff and subject to applicable policies and procedures, serve all or a portion of his or her ordered confinement in a qualifying residence, subject to an acceptable system of electronic surveillance.

(Ord. No. 3919, § 3, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 4004, § 1, 9-20-11)


9.34.070 Work release.

A qualifying inmate sentenced to a period of confinement at the corrections facility may, at the discretion of corrections staff and subject to applicable policies and procedures, serve all or a portion of his or her ordered confinement on a work release program. Inmates participating in the work release program may, pursuant to applicable policies or procedures, spend a portion of a twenty-four (24) hour period away from the corrections facility while performing work at the inmate’s qualifying place of employment. The inmate shall spend nonworking hours at the corrections facility; provided, the inmate may, at the discretion of the corrections staff, be allowed to attend approved school, treatment, AA/NA meetings, or appointments.

(Ord. No. 3919, § 3, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 4004, § 1, 9-20-11)


9.34.080 Work programs in general – Types of work performed – Limitations.

A. In general. A qualifying inmate sentenced to a period of confinement at the corrections facility may, at the discretion of corrections staff and subject to applicable policies and procedures, serve all or a portion of his or her ordered confinement on a work program. There shall be two (2) types of work programs as follows:

1. In-custody work program. An inmate who serves on an in-custody work program shall spend nonworking hours confined at the corrections facility. The work performed may be within or outside of the corrections facility and may be at a location other than the corrections facility. During the period of work, the inmate may be supervised, partially supervised, or not supervised. While confined at the corrections facility, the inmate may, at the discretion of the corrections staff, be allowed to attend local court dates or appointments.

2. Out-of-custody work program. An inmate who serves on an out-of-custody work program shall spend nonworking hours at a location other than the corrections facility, and as approved by corrections staff. The work performed may be within or outside of the corrections facility and may be at a location other than the corrections facility. During the period of work, the inmate may be supervised, partially supervised, or not supervised.

B. Types of work performed. A work crew program may be utilized to perform the following types of work:

1. Garbage, litter, debris, and junk removal from municipal, state, and federal property, including but not limited to roadways, roadway easements, sidewalks, trails, open space, wetlands, shorelines, waterways, steep slopes, parks, and public facilities.

2. Removal and maintenance of invasive and undesirable vegetation and leaves from municipal, state, and federal property, including but not limited to roadways, roadway easements, sidewalks, trails, open space, wetlands, shorelines, waterways, steep slopes, parks, and public facilities.

3. Removal of snow, sand, dirt, and debris from municipal, state, and federal property, including but not limited to roadways, roadway easements, sidewalks, trails, open space, wetlands, shorelines, waterways, steep slopes, parks, and public facilities.

4. Graffiti removal and repair on state, federal, and municipal property.

5. General maintenance and repair of municipal, state, and federal property.

6. Janitorial and landscape services at municipal, state, and federal property.

7. Any other work as approved by the corrections facility.

C. Performance of work for other public agencies. The work program may perform work at the request of other public agencies. The corrections facility may, at its discretion, require the public agency to pay a fee for the utilization of the work program.

D. Performance of work for private parties or nonprofit agencies. The work program may perform the types of work described in subsection (B) of this section for private parties or nonprofit agencies on the condition that the private party or nonprofit agency reimburse the city for the costs of providing the work program and the private party or nonprofit agency assumes all risk and liability exposure of having the work program perform the work; provided, that at the discretion of corrections staff, reimbursement may not be required when the work performed primarily benefits the poor and infirm.

E. Performance of bargaining unit work. The city of Kent will not utilize a work program to perform work that is within the body of work of a recognized city of Kent union, without the prior agreement of the city of Kent union that owns the body of work.

(Ord. No. 3919, § 3, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 4004, § 1, 9-20-11. Formerly 9.34.100)


9.34.110 Inmate responsible for portion of medical care costs.

A. Payment responsibility. Each inmate confined in the corrections facility shall be responsible for payment of a portion of the cost to provide medical care to him or her while subject to confinement in the corrections facility.

B. Medical care costs. Each inmate confined in the corrections facility shall be financially responsible for payment of fifteen dollars ($15) each time he or she is provided medical care; provided, that a portion of this fee may be waived in the event medical staff determines the inmate has a chronic condition that requires treatment at regular and frequent intervals, or an inmate was provided medical care more than one (1) time during any one (1) day for the same condition. In addition, each inmate shall pay ten dollars ($10) for each course of prescription medication that is prescribed to the inmate. In the event an inmate requires transport by ambulance to a medical care facility, he or she shall pay the actual costs billed to the city for such transport.

C. Notification. An inmate shall be notified that in the event he or she is provided medical care while confined in the corrections facility, he or she shall be responsible for payment of a portion of the cost of that care. The inmate shall also be notified that by receiving medical care, he or she agrees that the costs set forth in this section may be collected by the court, and that those costs will be added to any other amount owing to the court, or, in the alternative, that the costs may be collected by seizing the inmate’s currency that is being held by the corrections facility, by utilizing the services of a collections agency, or by any other legal means.

D. Proof of care. In the event the city chooses to utilize the Kent municipal court to collect medical care costs, the city shall submit to the court a document that identifies the inmate’s name, date of birth, the date medical care was provided, and the name of the provider to establish that medical care was provided and that the defendant owes a portion of the medical care costs to the city.

E. Forfeiture of inmate property. At the discretion of the corrections facility, and as an alternative to other collection methods, the corrections facility may seize a portion of the United States currency that has been identified and recorded as inmate property during an inmate property inventory. To this end, all United States currency in the possession of an inmate, which is recorded upon booking, shall be subject to forfeiture to cover the costs of medical care; provided, that prior to forfeiture, the corrections staff shall provide the inmate with an opportunity to a hearing to contest the forfeiture of the currency.

F. Appeal. An inmate may appeal the assessment of medical care costs; provided, the quality of medical care, the manner in which the medical provider administers medical care, and the timing of medical care shall not be subject to appeal. In the event the inmate wishes to appeal the assessment of medical care costs, he or she must provide written notice to the corrections facility within five (5) days of receiving such care. The written notice shall state the date the care was provided and must contain a detailed explanation of the reasons for appealing the assessment of costs. In the event the court has been utilized to recover such costs, the inmate’s written notice shall be delivered to the court, and the court shall set a hearing to permit the inmate to contest the assessed medical care costs. In the event the court was not utilized to collect medical care costs, the corrections facility shall, in accordance with its administrative appeal process, set an administrative appeal. At any appeal hearing, the inmate shall bear the burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, that he or she is not responsible for the costs.

G. No denial of medical care. Under no condition shall medical care be denied or delayed due to an inmate’s inability to pay the fees set forth in this section; provided, that nothing in this section shall prevent the city from taking steps to collect medical care costs after care is provided.

(Ord. No. 3919, § 3, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 4004, § 1, 9-20-11)


Chapter 9.36 TRAFFIC CODE*

Sections:

9.36.010    Adopting ordinance.

9.36.015    Driving regulations.

9.36.020    Inattentive driving.

9.36.030    Avoidance of intersection, penalty.

9.36.040    Breaking traction – Quick starts.

9.36.045    Motor vehicle public disturbance.

9.36.050    One-way streets and alleys – Penalty.

9.36.060    Compression brakes restrictions.

9.36.070    Vehicle weight restrictions.

9.36.075    Duty in the case of accident with pedestrian or vehicle propelled by human power.

9.36.080    Warrant checks.

9.36.090    –

9.36.110    Reserved.

9.36.120    Emergency response caused by person’s intoxication – Recovery of costs from convicted person.

9.36.130    Traffic safety school.

9.36.140    School speed zone traffic safety cameras.

9.36.150    Stoplight traffic safety cameras.

*Cross reference(s) – Police department, ch. 2.22; speed limits and vehicle regulations in parks and recreation areas, § 4.01.080; traffic regulations in parks and recreation areas, § 4.01.210; license required for taxicabs and other vehicles for hire, ch. 5.03; visibility requirements at intersections in residential districts, § 15.08.130; visibility at access points for automobiles, § 15.08.140.

State law reference(s) – Model traffic ordinance, RCW 46.90.005 et seq.


9.36.010 Adopting ordinance.

Pursuant to RCW 46.90.010, the Washington Model Traffic Ordinance (MTO) as set forth in Chapter 308-330 WAC, attached as Exhibit A to Ordinance No. 4196, is hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended or recodified from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. The MTO, in conjunction with the other provisions of this chapter, shall constitute the traffic ordinance of the city of Kent. As provided for in the MTO, the addition of any new section to, or amendment or repeal of any section in, the MTO shall be deemed to amend the traffic ordinance of the city of Kent, and it shall not be necessary for the Kent city council to take any action with respect to such addition, amendment, or repeal.

A copy of the MTO adopted by reference for application and enforcement within the city limits of Kent is available online for public viewing through the Washington State Legislature’s website at: http://app.leg.wa.gov/wac/. Physical copies of these statutes are also maintained by the city clerk and available for public inspection during the regular business hours of the city clerk’s office.

(Ord. No. 3017, § 3, 12-3-91; Ord. No. 3073, § 1, 10-20-92; Ord. No. 3170, § 1, 5-24-94; Ord. No. 3408, § 2, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 4196, § 1, 4-19-16)


9.36.015 Driving regulations.

All RCW sections that constitute traffic infractions or traffic offenses, and the RCW sections necessary for the investigation, citation, prosecution, enforcement, and adjudication of those traffic infractions or traffic offenses, or necessary to define or interpret terms used therein, that are enacted, amended, repealed, or recodified by the state Legislature, after the Department of Licensing’s last update of the MTO and prior to the Department of Licensing’s next update of the MTO, are hereby adopted by reference as they are enacted or as they are amended, repealed, or recodified from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full.

(Ord. No. 3408, § 3, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 3954, § 4, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4196, § 2, 4-19-16)


9.36.020 Inattentive driving.

A. It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in an inattentive manner upon any highway within the city or way open to the public within the city that is maintained primarily for public use and is adjacent to any highway.

B. For the purpose of this section, inattentive means the operation of a vehicle in a lax or slack manner.

C. For the purposes of this section, the term highway is defined as set forth in RCW 46.04.197 and the term way open to the public is defined as set forth in WAC 200-200-015(8).

D. The offense of operating a vehicle in an inattentive manner shall be considered to be a lesser offense than, but included in the offense of, negligent driving in the second degree.

E. A violation of this section shall be a traffic infraction punishable by a monetary penalty of one hundred fifty dollars ($150), plus all mandatory state costs, fees, and assessments.

(Ord. No. 2716; Ord. No. 3017, § 4, 12-3-91; Ord. No. 3288, § 1, 4-3-96; Ord. No. 3408, § 4, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 4073, § 1, 2-19-13. Formerly Code 1986, § 10.02.032)


9.36.030 Avoidance of intersection, penalty.

A. It is unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle on the highways of the city to turn such vehicle either to the right or to the left upon approaching or leaving intersections and to proceed across any private property for the purpose of avoiding the intersection or any traffic control device controlling the intersection, unless so directed by lawful authority.

B. A violation of this section shall be a traffic infraction punishable by a monetary penalty of one hundred dollars ($100).

(Ord. No. 2769, § 1; Ord. No. 3017, § 5, 12-3-91; Ord. No. 3408, § 5, 7-7-98. Formerly Code 1986, § 10.02.034)


9.36.040 Breaking traction – Quick starts.

A. No person shall drive any vehicle or motorcycle so as to cause, by excessive or unnecessary acceleration, the tires of any such vehicle or cycle to spin and emit loud noises or to unnecessarily throw stones or gravel.

B. A violation of this section shall be a traffic infraction punishable by a monetary penalty of one hundred fifty dollars ($150).

(Ord. No. 3350, § 7, 5-21-97; Ord. No. 3408, § 6, 7-7-98)

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3138, § 4, adopted Oct. 19, 1993, repealed former § 9.36.040, which pertained to street closures.


9.36.045 Motor vehicle public disturbance.

A. It is unlawful for any person in control of or operating a motor vehicle to permit sound from the motor vehicle sound system, such as but not limited to a radio, tape player, or compact disc player, whether or not affixed to the vehicle, to be operated at a volume so as to be audible at a distance greater than fifty (50) feet from the vehicle itself.

B. A violation of this section shall be a traffic infraction punishable by a monetary penalty of one hundred fifty dollars ($150).

(Ord. No. 3408, § 7, 7-7-98)


9.36.050 One-way streets and alleys – Penalty.

A. Upon those streets and parts of streets, and in those alleys described in the schedule on file in the city clerk’s office, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.

B. Any violation of this section shall be an infraction and punishable by a monetary penalty of not more than twenty dollars ($20).

(Ord. No. 1972, §§ 4, 5; Ord. No. 2085, § 2; Ord. No. 2313, § 1; Ord. No. 2427, § 4; Ord. No. 2731, § 4; Ord. No. 2940, § 1; Ord. No. 3062, § 2(10.06.160), 8-18-92; Ord. No. 3170, § 1, 5-24-94. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 10.06.160, 10.06.170)

State law reference(s) – Yield signs, RCW 46.61.425, 46.61.435; stop signs, RCW 46.61.435.

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3170, § 1, adopted May 24, 1994, renumbered former § 9.36.100 as 9.36.050.


9.36.060 Compression brakes restrictions.

A. Compression brakes prohibited. No person shall use motor vehicle brakes within the city limits that are in any way activated or operated by the compression of the engine of that motor vehicle or any unit or part thereof. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the compression brakes where applied in an emergency and were necessary for the protection of persons and/or property.

B. Violation; penalty. Any person violating these compression brake provisions shall have committed a traffic infraction and a penalty of one hundred dollars ($100) shall be imposed.

C. Signposting. The director of public works is authorized and directed to post appropriate signs consistent with these provisions.

(Ord. No. 3317, § 1, 10-1-96)


9.36.070 Vehicle weight restrictions.

A. Operational maximum gross vehicle weight restriction on Kent 5 Bridge at Rock Creek. In accordance with RCW 46.61.450, it is unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle or combination of vehicles over the Kent 5 Bridge at Rock Creek located on Kent-Kangley Road with an operational maximum gross vehicle weight over forty-four (44) tons or eighty-eight thousand (88,000) pounds. For purposes of this section, operational maximum gross vehicle weight means the maximum gross vehicle weight of all load-bearing axles on the bridge at any one (1) time. School buses, public transit buses, emergency vehicles, public utility or municipal and county vehicles, and solid waste disposal vehicles are exempt from this section.

B. Violations. A violation of this section is a traffic infraction under RCW 46.44.105(4), and punishable by the allowable monetary penalty, as may be amended from time to time. In addition to any penalty for violation of the provisions of this section, such violator may be liable in a civil action instituted in the name of the city for any damages to the bridge sustained as a result of such violation.

(Ord. No. 3816, § 1, 9-19-06)


9.36.075 Duty in the case of accident with pedestrian or vehicle propelled by human power.

The operator of any motor vehicle involved in an accident with a pedestrian, or with a device propelled by human power operated by any person, or upon which a person is seated, shall do the following:

1. Immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident, or as close thereto as possible, and return to and remain at the scene of such accident until he or she has given his or her name, address, insurance company, insurance policy number, and vehicle license number, and exhibit his or her operator’s license to the pedestrian or person operating the device propelled by human power, or, if they are unconscious or incompetent, provide the same information to another person who he or she reasonably believes is acting on their behalf; or, if the pedestrian or person operating the device propelled by human power is unconscious or incompetent, and there is no one to act on their behalf, shall immediately, or as soon as possible, call 9-1-1 to summon emergency services to the scene.

2. Under no circumstances shall the rendering of assistance or other compliance with the provisions of this section be evidence of liability of any motor vehicle operator of such accident.

For the purposes of this section, “pedestrian” means any person who is afoot or who is using a wheelchair, a power wheelchair, an electric personal assistive mobility device, or a means of conveyance propelled by human power. “Motor vehicle” shall be as defined in RCW 46.04.320.

Violation of this section is a gross misdemeanor the maximum penalty of which is three hundred sixty-four (364) days in jail and a five-thousand-dollar ($5,000) fine.

(Ord. No. 4033, § 1, 4-17-12)


9.36.080 Warrant checks.

Law enforcement officers are authorized to search for outstanding warrants upon making a stop, or upon making contact with a person, for a traffic infraction or non-traffic infraction. This provision shall be in addition to, and subject to, all current and future federal or state legislative enactments affecting the same.

(Ord. No. 3364, § 2, 9-16-97)


9.36.090 – 9.36.110 Reserved.

    Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3170, § 1, adopted May 24, 1994, repealed former §§ 9.36.050, 9.36.060, 9.36.070, 9.36.080, 9.36.090, 9.36.110, which contained provisions relating to the traffic code.


9.36.120 Emergency response caused by person’s intoxication – Recovery of costs from convicted person.

A person whose intoxication causes an incident resulting in an appropriate emergency response and who, in connection with the incident, has been found guilty of or has had his or her prosecution deferred for driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any drug pursuant to RCW 46.61.502 or use of a vessel while under the influence of alcohol or drugs pursuant to RCW 79A.60.040 is liable for the expense of the emergency response to the incident by a public agency. In no event shall a person’s liability under this section for the expense of an emergency response exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) for a particular incident.

The expense of an emergency response is a charge against the person liable for expenses under this section. The charge constitutes a debt of that person and is collectible by the public agency incurring those costs in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, expressed or implied. Following a conviction of an offense listed in this section, and prior to sentencing, the prosecution may present to the court information setting forth the expenses incurred by the public agency for its emergency response to the incident. Upon a finding by the court that the expenses are reasonable, the court shall order the defendant to reimburse the public agency. The cost reimbursement shall be included in the sentencing order as an additional monetary obligation of the defendant and may not be substituted for any other fine or cost required or allowed by statute. The court may establish a payment schedule for the payment of the cost reimbursement, separate from any payment schedule imposed for other fines and costs.

For the purposes of this section, the phrase expense of an emergency response means reasonable costs incurred by a public agency in reasonably making an appropriate emergency response to the incident, but shall only include those costs directly arising from the response to the particular incident. Reasonable costs shall include the costs of providing police, coroner, firefighting, rescue, emergency medical services, or utility response at the scene of the incident, as well as the salaries of the personnel responding to the incident.

(Ord. No. 4047, § 1, 9-18-12)


9.36.130 Traffic safety school.

A. Authorized. The traffic safety school is hereby authorized. The traffic safety school shall be administered and operated by the police department.

B. Purpose. The purpose of the traffic safety school is to create a foundation for safe driving habits by educating participants in the proper, lawful, and safe operation of motor vehicles upon the roadway, the rules of the road, the challenges of driving safely among bicyclists and pedestrians, and the consequences of unsafe driving practices.

C. Attendance. Attendance at the traffic school may be a condition of diversion of a traffic infraction or criminal traffic citation prior to the filing of the infraction or criminal traffic citation. Attendance at the traffic school may also be ordered by the Kent municipal court or agreed to by the prosecutor as a condition of a sentence, suspended sentence, deferral of sentence, or continuance in a criminal case or as condition of a deferred finding in a traffic infraction case.

D. Fee. The police department shall charge a fee to attend the traffic safety school. The amount of the fee shall be established or amended by the city council by resolution. Fees collected to attend the traffic safety school may be used to:

1. Reimburse the city for the costs of administering the traffic safety school;

2. Provide for safe driver education materials, programs, promotions, and advertising;

3. Pay the costs associated with the training of law enforcement officers and personnel or purchase law enforcement equipment; or

4. Pay the costs related to the investigation and enforcement of traffic related offenses and criminal laws.

E. Policies and procedures. The city shall establish policies and procedures that determine who shall be eligible for the traffic safety school; the dates, times, and location in which the traffic safety school shall be offered; the curriculum of the traffic safety school; and the effect of successful completion of the traffic safety school.

(Ord. No. 4079, § 1, 5-21-13)


9.36.140 School speed zone traffic safety cameras.

A. Authorized use of automated traffic safety cameras. Pursuant to the authority of RCW 46.63.170, the city is authorized to use automated traffic safety cameras and related automated systems in order to detect, record, and enforce and prosecute school speed zone violations.

B. Limitation on photos – Use of photos.

1. Limitation on photos. Automated traffic safety cameras may only take pictures of the vehicle and vehicle license plate and only while an infraction is occurring. The picture must not reveal the face of the driver or of passengers in the vehicle.

2. Use of photos. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all photographs, microphotographs, or electronic images prepared under this section are for the exclusive use of law enforcement in the discharge of duties under this section and are not open to the public and may not be used in a court in a pending action or proceeding unless the action or proceeding relates to a violation under this section. No photograph, microphotograph, or electronic image may be used for any purpose other than enforcement of violations under this section nor retained longer than necessary to enforce this section.

C. Infraction processing – Responsibilities – Presumption.

1. In general. Infractions detected through the use of automated traffic safety cameras are not part of the registered owner’s driving record under RCW 46.52.101 and 46.52.120. Additionally, infractions generated by the use of automated traffic safety cameras shall be processed in the same manner as parking infractions, including for the purposes of RCW 3.50.100, 35.20.220, 46.16A.120, and 46.20.270(3).

2. Notice of infraction. A notice of infraction must be mailed to the registered owner of the vehicle within 14 days of the violation, or to the renter of a vehicle within 14 days of establishing the renter’s name and address under subsection (C)(4) of this section. The law enforcement officer issuing the notice of infraction shall include with it a certificate or facsimile thereof, based upon inspection of photographs, microphotographs, or electronic images produced by an automated traffic safety camera, stating the facts supporting the notice of infraction. This certificate or facsimile is prima facie evidence of the facts contained in it and is admissible in a proceeding charging a violation under this section. Any citation or notice of infraction issued pursuant to this section may be initiated by electronic signature of the issuing police officer. The photographs, microphotographs, or electronic images evidencing the violation must be available for inspection and admission into evidence in a proceeding to adjudicate the liability for the infraction. A person receiving a notice of infraction based on evidence detected by an automated traffic safety camera may respond to the notice by mail.

3. Registered owner responsible – Rental car business. The registered owner of a vehicle is responsible for an infraction issued pursuant to this section unless the registered owner overcomes the presumption in subsection (C)(5) of this section, or, in the case of a rental car business, satisfies the conditions under subsection (C)(4) of this section. If appropriate under the circumstances, a renter identified under subsection (C)(4) of this section is responsible for an infraction.

4. Rental cars. If the registered owner of the vehicle is a rental car business, the law enforcement agency shall, before a notice of infraction is issued under this section, provide a written notice to the rental car business that a notice of infraction may be issued to the rental car business if the rental car business does not, within 18 days of receiving the written notice, provide to the issuing agency by return mail:

a. A statement under oath stating the name and known mailing address of the individual driving or renting the vehicle when the infraction occurred; or

b. A statement under oath that the business is unable to determine who was driving or renting the vehicle at the time the infraction occurred because the vehicle was stolen at the time of the infraction. A statement provided under this subsection must be accompanied by a copy of a filed police report regarding the vehicle theft; or

c. In lieu of identifying the vehicle operator, the rental car business may pay the applicable penalty.

Timely mailing of the statements described in subsections (C)(4)(a) and (b) of this section to the issuing law enforcement agency relieves a rental car business of any liability under this section for the notice of infraction.

5. Presumption. Pursuant to RCW 46.63.075, in a traffic infraction case involving an infraction detected through the use of an automated traffic safety camera under this section, proof that the particular vehicle described in the notice of traffic infraction was in violation of a law enforced through the use of the automated traffic safety camera, together with proof that the person named in the notice of traffic infraction was at the time of the violation the registered owner of the vehicle, constitutes in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person in control of the vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, the violation occurred. This presumption may be overcome only if the registered owner states, under oath, in a written statement to the court or in testimony before the court that the vehicle involved was, at the time, stolen or in the care, custody, or control of some person other than the registered owner.

D. Infraction – Penalty. It shall be an infraction to exceed the posted speed limit in a school speed zone enforced through the use of an automated traffic safety camera. The penalty for an infraction committed in a school speed zone which is detected through the use of an automated traffic safety camera shall be $136; provided, the penalty shall be $248 for a violation in which the vehicle was operated at a speed of 30 miles per hour or more. In addition to the fines provided herein, a violator may be assessed any costs and assessments as required or permitted by state law or court rule.

E. Signs – Payment to vendor – Alternative enforcement.

1. School zones must be signed. All locations where an automated traffic safety camera is used must be clearly marked at least 30 days prior to activation of the camera by placing signs in locations that clearly indicate to a driver that he or she is entering a zone where traffic laws are enforced by an automated traffic safety camera.

2. Payment made to vendor. The compensation paid by the city to the manufacturer or vendor of the automated traffic safety camera equipment must be based only upon the value of the equipment and services provided or rendered in support of the system, and may not be based upon a portion of the fine or civil penalty imposed or the revenue generated by the equipment.

3. Alternative enforcement. Nothing in this section prohibits a law enforcement officer from issuing a notice of traffic infraction to a person in control of a vehicle at the time a violation occurs pursuant to RCW 46.63.030(1)(a), (b), or (c).

F. Use of funds. Funds derived from the use of automated traffic safety cameras shall be used to pay the costs of administering the automated traffic safety camera program, including but not limited to personnel costs, vendor costs, and equipment costs. Funds in excess of these costs may be used to fund personnel, programs, services, and equipment related to the enforcement and processing of traffic and criminal laws within the city.

G. Definition. For the purposes of this section, automated traffic safety camera means a device that uses a vehicle sensor installed to work in conjunction with an intersection traffic control system, a railroad grade crossing control system, or a speed measuring device, and a camera synchronized to automatically record one or more sequenced photographs, microphotographs, or electronic images of the rear of a motor vehicle at the time the vehicle fails to stop when facing a steady red traffic control signal or an activated railroad grade crossing control signal, or exceeds a speed limit in a school speed zone as detected by a speed measuring device.

(Ord. No. 4080, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4298, § 1, 12-11-18)


9.36.150 Stoplight traffic safety cameras.

A. Authorized use of automated traffic safety cameras. Pursuant to the authority of RCW 46.63.170, the city is authorized to use automated traffic safety cameras and related automated systems in order to detect, record, and enforce and prosecute stoplight violations.

B. Limitation on photos – Use of photos.

1. Limitation on photos. Automated traffic safety cameras may only take pictures of the vehicle and vehicle license plate and only while an infraction is occurring. The picture must not reveal the face of the driver or of passengers in the vehicle.

2. Use of photos. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all photographs, microphotographs, or electronic images prepared under this section are for the exclusive use of law enforcement in the discharge of duties under this section and are not open to the public and may not be used in a court in a pending action or proceeding unless the action or proceeding relates to a violation under this section. No photograph, microphotograph, or electronic image may be used for any purpose other than enforcement of violations under this section nor retained longer than necessary to enforce this section.

C. Infraction processing – Responsibilities – Presumption.

1. In general. Infractions detected through the use of automated traffic safety cameras are not part of the registered owner’s driving record under RCW 46.52.101 and 46.52.120. Additionally, infractions generated by the use of automated traffic safety cameras shall be processed in the same manner as parking infractions, including for the purposes of RCW 3.50.100, 35.20.220, 46.16A.120, and 46.20.270(3).

2. Notice of infraction. A notice of infraction must be mailed to the registered owner of the vehicle within 14 days of the violation, or to the renter of a vehicle within 14 days of establishing the renter’s name and address under subsection (C)(4) of this section. The law enforcement officer issuing the notice of infraction shall include with it a certificate or facsimile thereof, based upon inspection of photographs, microphotographs, or electronic images produced by an automated traffic safety camera, stating the facts supporting the notice of infraction. This certificate or facsimile is prima facie evidence of the facts contained in it and is admissible in a proceeding charging a violation under this section. Any citation or notice of infraction issued pursuant to this section may be initiated by electronic signature of the issuing police officer. The photographs, microphotographs, or electronic images evidencing the violation must be available for inspection and admission into evidence in a proceeding to adjudicate the liability for the infraction. A person receiving a notice of infraction based on evidence detected by an automated traffic safety camera may respond to the notice by mail.

3. Registered owner responsible – Rental car business. The registered owner of a vehicle is responsible for an infraction issued pursuant to this section unless the registered owner overcomes the presumption in subsection (C)(5) of this section, or, in the case of a rental car business, satisfies the conditions under subsection (C)(4) of this section. If appropriate under the circumstances, a renter identified under subsection (C)(4) of this section is responsible for an infraction.

4. Rental cars. If the registered owner of the vehicle is a rental car business, the law enforcement agency shall, before a notice of infraction is issued under this section, provide a written notice to the rental car business that a notice of infraction may be issued to the rental car business if the rental car business does not, within 18 days of receiving the written notice, provide to the issuing agency by return mail:

a. A statement under oath stating the name and known mailing address of the individual driving or renting the vehicle when the infraction occurred; or

b. A statement under oath that the business is unable to determine who was driving or renting the vehicle at the time the infraction occurred because the vehicle was stolen at the time of the infraction. A statement provided under this subsection must be accompanied by a copy of a filed police report regarding the vehicle theft; or

c. In lieu of identifying the vehicle operator, the rental car business may pay the applicable penalty.

Timely mailing of the statements described in subsections (C)(4)(a) and (C)(4)(b) of this section to the issuing law enforcement agency relieves a rental car business of any liability under this section for the notice of infraction.

5. Presumption. Pursuant to RCW 46.63.075, in a traffic infraction case involving an infraction detected through the use of an automated traffic safety camera under this section, proof that the particular vehicle described in the notice of traffic infraction was in violation of a law enforced through the use of the automated traffic safety camera, together with proof that the person named in the notice of traffic infraction was at the time of the violation the registered owner of the vehicle, constitutes in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person in control of the vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, the violation occurred. This presumption may be overcome only if the registered owner states, under oath, in a written statement to the court or in testimony before the court that the vehicle involved was, at the time, stolen or in the care, custody, or control of some person other than the registered owner. 

D. Infraction – Penalty. A driver facing a steady red traffic control signal shall stop and shall remain stopped until an indication to proceed is shown. It shall be an infraction to proceed through a stoplight at the intersections of two arterials enforced through the use of an automated traffic safety camera. The penalty for a stoplight infraction detected through the use of an automated traffic safety camera shall be $136. In addition to the fine provided herein, a violator may be assessed any costs and assessments as required or permitted by state law or court rule. 

E. Signs – Payment to vendor – Alternative enforcement. 

1. Stoplight locations must be signed. All locations where an automated traffic safety camera is used must be clearly marked at least 30 days prior to activation of the camera by placing signs in locations that clearly indicate to a driver that he or she is entering a zone where traffic laws are enforced by an automated traffic safety camera.

2. Payment made to vendor. The compensation paid by the city to the manufacturer or vendor of the automated traffic safety camera equipment must be based only upon the value of the equipment and services provided or rendered in support of the system, and may not be based upon a portion of the fine or civil penalty imposed or the revenue generated by the equipment.

3. Alternative enforcement. Nothing in this section prohibits a law enforcement officer from issuing a notice of traffic infraction to a person in control of a vehicle at the time a violation occurs pursuant to RCW 46.63.030(1)(a), (b), or (c).

F. Use of funds. Funds derived from the use of automated traffic safety cameras shall be used to pay the costs of administering the automated traffic safety camera program, including, but not limited to personnel costs, vendor costs, and equipment costs. Funds in excess of these costs may be used to fund personnel, programs, services and equipment related to the enforcement and processing of traffic and criminal laws within the city. 

G. Definition. For the purposes of this section, automated traffic safety camera means a device that uses a vehicle sensor installed to work in conjunction with an intersection traffic control system, a railroad grade crossing control system, or a speed measuring device, and a camera synchronized to automatically record one or more sequenced photographs, microphotographs, or electronic images of the rear of a motor vehicle at the time the vehicle fails to stop when facing a steady red traffic control signal or an activated railroad grade crossing control signal, or exceeds a speed limit in a school speed zone as detected by a speed measuring device.

(Ord. No. 4297, § 1, 12-11-18)


Chapter 9.37 TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU

Sections:

9.37.010    Definitions.

9.37.020    Traffic violations bureau – Created.

9.37.030    Same – Acceptance of bail or monetary penalties.

9.37.040    Same – Duties.


9.37.010 Definitions.

The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Monetary penalties means those sums determined by rules promulgated by the courts of this state to be appropriate penalties to be assessed for traffic infractions.

Traffic infraction means any offense designated as a traffic infraction under RCW 46.63.020 and any additions or amendments thereto.

(Ord. No. 2258, § 1. Formerly Code 1986, § 10.04.010)

Cross reference(s) – Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.01.030.


9.37.020 Traffic violations bureau – Created.

The Kent Traffic Violations Bureau is established. The bureau shall operate under the auspices of the city finance department and in conjunction with the Aukeen District Court. The bureau shall be staffed by such persons and shall be open at such hours as are designated by the finance director.

(Ord. No. 2258, § 2. Formerly Code 1986, § 10.04.020)


9.37.030 Same – Acceptance of bail or monetary penalties.

The traffic violations bureau may accept bail or monetary penalties for those offenses or traffic infractions which by effect of statute, ordinance, or court rule may be disposed of other than by mandatory court appearance; provided, that this section shall not preclude a person charged with an offense or infraction from requesting a trial or hearing as authorized by law.

(Ord. No. 2258, § 3. Formerly Code 1986, § 10.04.030)


9.37.040 Same – Duties.

Duties of the traffic violations bureau shall include among others the following:

1. It shall accept designated bail or monetary penalties from and issue receipts to such violators permitted to and who desire to forfeit bail or who desire to accept the determination that a traffic infraction has been committed.

2. It shall keep a proper and complete record of all bail forfeitures or forfeitures of monetary penalties in cases wherein any person has been charged with violation of the traffic ordinances of the city, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses and infractions.

3. It shall keep a record of all serially numbered citation forms issued by the police department to individual police officers, the record to include any forms spoiled or upon which an entry has been made but the form not issued to an alleged violator.

4. It shall forward to the Aukeen District Court the names of those persons who fail to respond to a traffic citation or notice of traffic infraction as the same may be required by any statute, ordinance, or court rule.

(Ord. No. 2258, § 4. Formerly Code 1986, § 10.04.040)


Chapter 9.38 PARKING*

Sections:

9.38.010    Findings.

9.38.020    No parking zones.

9.38.025    Loading zones and passenger loading zones.

9.38.030    Parking in fire lanes – Penalty.

9.38.035    Electric vehicle parking space – Penalty.

9.38.040    Arterial and highway parking prohibited.

9.38.045    Parking prohibited from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.

9.38.050    Parking prohibited from 4:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.

9.38.055    Parking in City Hall parking lot and Centennial Center parking garage.

9.38.060    Two-hour parking zones.

9.38.065    Four-hour parking zones.

9.38.070    Holiday parking – Penalty.

9.38.080    Thirty (30) minute parking zones.

9.38.085    Seasonal no parking zone – Lake Meridian.

9.38.090    Repealed.

9.38.095    Re-parking in same block to avoid citation.

9.38.100    Compliance with state law.

9.38.110    Parking prohibited within ten (10) feet of mailboxes – Penalty.

9.38.120    Parking and storage of large vehicles on city streets – Finding.

9.38.130    Parking and storage of large vehicles on city streets – Penalty and exemptions.

9.38.140    Parking of certain trailers or semi-trailers – Penalty.

9.38.145    Parking of recreational vehicles, boats or vessels, and trailers.

9.38.150    Parking an unlicensed vehicle or a vehicle with switched license plates or tabs – Penalty.

9.38.160    Municipal parking facilities regulated – Penalty.

9.38.170    Parking permits and passes or exemptions.

9.38.175    Residential parking zone.

9.38.180    Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specified places.

9.38.185    Parking too far from the curb.

9.38.190    Penalty for violation of certain sections.

9.38.195    Failure to respond – Penalty.

9.38.200    Flood emergency hazardous materials parking zone.

*Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3189, § 1, adopted Oct. 4, 1994, repealed former §§ 9.38.070 and 9.38.090, which pertained to one (1) hour parking zones and fifteen (15) minute parking zones, and substantially revised ch. 9.38.

Cross reference(s) – Duties of the parking enforcement aide, § 2.22.060; off-street parking regulations, § 15.05.030 et seq.; parking and storage of vehicles, § 15.08.090.


9.38.010 Findings.

The Kent Traffic Code adopts by reference the Model Traffic Ordinance, set forth in Chapter 308-330 WAC. The Model Traffic Ordinance, pursuant to RCW 46.61.570, authorizes a municipality such as the city of Kent, by ordinance, to restrict parking and establish no parking zones on city streets and other rights-of-way. The city council finds that it is necessary and appropriate, for public safety reasons, to adopt an ordinance establishing restricted parking and no parking zones on city streets and other rights-of-way within the city of Kent.

(Ord. No. 2857, § 1, 7-5-89; Ord. No. 3189, § 1, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 3974, § 1, 9-21-10)


9.38.020 No parking zones.

A. At such time as the traffic engineer shall place the appropriate sign or signs, it shall be illegal to park any motor vehicle or other vehicle, as those terms are defined in Chapter 46.04 RCW, at any time upon and on either side of, unless otherwise indicated, the following roadways or portions thereof:

1. 1st Avenue North: from the intersection of West James Street to the north end of 1st Avenue North, east side only.

2. 1st Avenue North: from West James Street to West Smith Street, east side only.

3. 2nd Avenue North: from West Smith Street to West Harrison Street.

4. 2nd Avenue North: from South 228th Street to south end of street.

5. 4th Avenue North and South: from SR 516/West Willis Street to South 228th Street.

6. 5th Avenue North: from West James Street to north end of 5th Avenue North.

7. 6th Avenue North: from South 228th Street to south end of street.

8. 6th Avenue South: from West Meeker Street to West Gowe Street.

9. 26th Avenue South: both sides from South 272nd Street to 500 feet north of South 272nd Street and on 26th Avenue South from South 272nd Street to end of 26th Avenue South, east side only.

10. 27th Avenue South: from South 240th Street to end of 27th Avenue South.

11. 27th Place South: from South 259th Place north to South 256th Street.

12. 28th Avenue South: from South 240th Street to end of 28th Avenue South.

13. 30th Avenue South: from South 240th Street to Kent-Des Moines Road (SR 516).

14. 36th Place South: from South 272nd Street to 35th Lane South.

15. 42nd Avenue South: from Reith Road to South 260th Street.

16. 43rd Avenue South: the cul-de-sac north of 42nd Place S. and the attached spur road to the north.

17. 54th Avenue South: from South 228th Street to South 226th Street.

18. 58th Place South: from Russell Road to South 194th Street.

19. 58th Place South: from South 226th Street to south end of 58th Place South.

20. 62nd Avenue South: from South 190th Street to South 196th Street.

21. 64th Avenue South: from south end of road to South 212th Street.

22. 66th Avenue South: from South 196th Street to South 190th Street.

23. 72nd/70th Avenue South: from South 228th Street to South 180th Street (43rd Avenue South).

24. 72nd Avenue South: from South 262nd Street to South 277th Street.

25. 74th Avenue South: from South 259th Street to West Willis Street (SR 516).

26. 76th Avenue South: from South 228th Street to South 212th Street.

27. 77th Avenue South: from South 212th Street to north end of road.

28. 80th Avenue South: from South 180th Street (43rd Avenue South) to South 196th Street, and 80th Avenue South from South 200th Street to South 208th Street.

29. 80th Place South: from 80th Avenue South to 84th Avenue South.

30. 81st Avenue South: from South 200th Street to South 196th Street.

31. 83rd Avenue South: from South 228th Street to South 224th Street.

32. 84th Avenue South/East Valley Highway/Central Avenue North/Central Avenue South: from South 180th Street (43rd Avenue South) to the Green River Bridge.

33. 88th Avenue South: from East James Street to South 218th Street.

34. 94th Avenue South: from Canyon Drive to South 240th Street.

35. 97th Place South: from Canyon Drive to 100th Avenue Southeast.

36. 100th Avenue Southeast: from Southeast 248th Street to Southeast 218th Street.

37. 101st Avenue Southeast: from Southeast 256th Street (SR 516) to Southeast 260th Street.

38. 102nd Avenue Southeast: from Southeast 240th Street to the north end of 102nd Avenue Southeast.

39. 104th Avenue Southeast (SR 515): from Southeast 272nd Street to north city limits.

40. 108th Avenue Southeast: from Southeast 281st Street to Kent-Kangley Road (SR 516).

41. 108th Avenue Southeast: from Southeast 244th Street to Southeast 236th Place.

42. 109th Avenue Southeast: from Southeast 256th Street to Southeast 248th Street.

43. 112th Avenue Southeast: from south end of 112th Avenue Southeast to Southeast 232nd Street.

44. 114th Avenue Southeast: from Kent-Kangley Road to south end of street.

45. 116th Avenue Southeast: from Southeast 227th Place to Southeast 274th Way.

46. 116th Avenue Southeast: from Southeast 248th Street to Southeast 256th Street, west side only.

47. 117th Avenue Southeast: from Southeast 244th Street to end of street.

48. 118th Court Southeast: from Southeast 244th Street to end of street.

49. 119th Court Southeast: from Southeast 244th Street to end of street.

50. 119th Way/120th Place Southeast: from Southeast 244th Street to Southeast 244th Street.

51. 120th Avenue Southeast: from the gate on Southeast 268th Street to Southeast 270th Street, north and east sides only.

52. 124th Avenue Southeast: from Southeast 248th Street to Southeast 282nd Street.

53. 128th Avenue Southeast: from Southeast 226th Place to Southeast 227th Street, west side only.

54. 128th Avenue Southeast/Southeast 227th Street: on the curve from 128th Avenue Southeast to Southeast 227th Street, northeast side only.

55. 128th Place Southeast: from Southeast 226th Place to Southeast 227th Street, east side only.

56. 129th Place Southeast: from 70 feet north of Southeast 225th Court to Southeast 225th Court, west side only.

57. 129th Place Southeast: from 120 feet south of Southeast 225th Court to Southeast 226th Place, east side only.

58. 129th Place Southeast: from Southeast 226th Place to 185 feet north of end of road, west side only.

59. 132nd Avenue Southeast: from Southeast 236th Street to Southeast 288th Street.

60. 132nd Place Southeast: from Southeast 227th Street to Southeast 227th Place, east side only.

61. 133rd Place Southeast: from Southeast 226th Street to Southeast 227th Street, west side only.

62. 134th Place Southeast: from Southeast 224th Place to Southeast 225th Place, east side only.

63. 134th Place Southeast: from Southeast 227th Street to Southeast 227th Place, east side only.

64. 135th Avenue Southeast: from Southeast 252nd Street to Southeast 253rd Place, west side only.

65. 140th Avenue Southeast: from Southeast 256th Street to Southeast 260th Street.

66. 144th Avenue Southeast: from Kent-Kangley Road (SR 516) to Southeast 288th Street.

67. 148th Avenue Southeast: from Southeast 256th Street to Southeast 240th Street.

68. 148th Avenue Southeast/152nd Way Southeast: from north city boat ramp to Kent-Kangley Road (SR 516).

69. 152nd Avenue Southeast/152nd Way Southeast: from Kent-Kangley Road (SR 516) to SR 18.

70. Alder Lane/South 262nd Street: from Central Avenue South to 500 feet east of Central Avenue South.

71. Cambridge Way: 200 feet south of South 262nd Street, west side only.

72. East Canyon Drive: from Hazel Avenue North to 101st Avenue Southeast.

73. East Gowe Street/West Gowe Street: from Railroad Avenue South to 1st Avenue South.

74. East Gowe Street: from Railroad Avenue South to Central Avenue South, south side only, and from Central Avenue South to Kennebeck Avenue South.

75. East Harrison Street: from 140 feet west of 4th Avenue North to 4th Avenue North, south side only.

76. East Meeker Street/West Meeker Street: from Railroad Avenue South to 1st Avenue South.

77. East Pioneer Street: from 170 feet east of Central Avenue to State Avenue, south side only, and from Central Avenue South to 200 feet east of Central Avenue, north side only.

78. East Pioneer Street: from Railroad Avenue North to Central Avenue North.

79. East Titus Street: from 3rd Avenue South to 4th Avenue South, north side only; police vehicle parking only.

80. East Titus Street: from West Gowe Street to Reiten Road South, southeast side only.

81. East Titus Street/West Titus Street: from Railroad Avenue South to 1st Avenue South.

82. East Titus Street: from East Smith Street to Reiten Road South.

83. Frager Road South: from West Meeker Street to South 204th Street.

84. Interurban Trail Street: from Meeker Street to Smith Street.

85. Kennebeck Avenue South: from East Smith Street to East Ward Street.

86. Lake Fenwick Road: from South Reith Road to South 272nd Street.

87. Lakeside Boulevard East: from South 240th Street to South 228th Street.

88. Lakeside Boulevard West: from Lakeside Boulevard East to South 228th Street.

89. Landing Way: from 64th Avenue South to West Valley Highway.

90. Lincoln Avenue North: from West Meeker Street to West James Street.

91. Maple Street South: from Woodland Way South to Garfield Avenue South, south side only.

92. Military Road South/36th Avenue South/Military Road South: from South 228th Street to South 272nd Street.

93. Novak Lane: from Central Avenue to west end of street.

94. Ramsay Way: from 4th Avenue North to 230 feet east of 4th Avenue North.

95. Ramsay Way: from 350 feet east of 4th Avenue North to 440 feet east of 4th Avenue North, south side only.

96. Ramsay Way: from 350 feet east of 4th Avenue North to 480 feet east of 4th Avenue North, north side only.

97. Ramsay Way: from 520 feet east of 4th Avenue North to 150 feet north of West Temperance Street.

98. Ramsay Way: from West Temperance Street to West Smith Street.

99. Riverview Boulevard: from South 216th Street to South 232nd Street.

100. Russell Road South: from end of street at Green River Trail to West James Street.

101. Russell Road South: from South 228th Street to South 212th Street.

102. South 188th Street: from West Valley Highway (SR 181) to 72nd Avenue South, and South 188th Street from a point 960 feet west of 80th Avenue South westerly to the end of the street at the BNSF Railway Company tracks.

103. South 190th Street: from West Valley Highway to 72nd Avenue South.

104. South 192nd Street: from the west end of the road to 84th Avenue South.

105. South 194th Street: from 58th Place South to 66th Avenue South.

106. South 194th Street: from 84th Avenue South to west end of street at BNSF Railway Company tracks.

107. South 196th Street/Russell Road/South 200th Street: from 84th Avenue South to the Green River.

108. South 200th Street: from 80th Avenue South to 84th Avenue South.

109. South 202nd Street: from 80th Avenue South to west end of street at BNSF Railway Company tracks.

110. South 204th Street: from West Valley Highway (SR 181) to 72nd Avenue South.

111. South 206th Street: from 72nd Avenue South to 77th Avenue South.

112. South 208th Street: from 80th Avenue South to west end of street at BNSF Railway Company tracks.

113. South 208th Street: from 84th Avenue South to 96th Avenue South.

114. South 212th Street: from west city limits to east city limits.

115. South 216th Street: from 64th Avenue South to 72nd Avenue South.

116. South 216th Street: from 84th Avenue South to the west end at BNSF Railway Company tracks.

117. South 218th Street: from 84th Avenue South to SR 167.

118. South 220th Street: from West Valley Highway (SR 181) to 72nd Avenue South.

119. South 222nd Street: from west end at BNSF Railway Company tracks to SR 167.

120. South 224th Street: from 83rd Avenue South to east end of road.

121. South 226th Street: from 54th Avenue South to 64th Avenue South.

122. South 228th Street: from Russell Road South to 83rd Avenue South.

123. South 231st Way: from Military Road South to Russell Road South.

124. South 234th Street: from West Valley Highway to east end of street.

125. South 236th Street: from Lakeside Boulevard East to 64th Avenue South.

126. South 240th Street: from 27th Avenue South to I-5.

127. South 252nd Street: from Canyon Drive (SR 516) to east end of road.

128. South 256th Street: from 27th Place South east to the traffic control gate.

129. South 259th Street: from 74th Avenue South to east city limits.

130. South 260th Street/South 259th Place South/Reith Road South: from SR 99 (Pacific Highway South) to Kent-Des Moines Road (SR 516).

131. South 268th Street: from Military Road South to Princeton Avenue South.

132. South 272nd Street: from Lake Fenwick Road South to 42nd Avenue South, north side only.

133. South 277th Street and Southeast 274th Way: from 700 feet east of L Street NE to 116th Avenue Southeast.

134. South Central Place: from South 266th Street to the end of South Central Place.

135. Southeast 211th Street: from 160 feet east of 127th Place Southeast to end of street, north side only.

136. Southeast 224th Place: from 133rd Avenue Southeast to 134th Place Southeast, south side only.

137. Southeast 225th Court: from 60 feet south of end of road to 129th Place Southeast, southwest side only.

138. Southeast 225th Place: from 132nd Place Southeast to 133rd Avenue Southeast, north side only.

139. Southeast 226th Place: from 130 feet east of 127th Avenue Southeast to 128th Avenue Southeast, south side only.

140. Southeast 226th Place: from 128th Avenue Southeast to 129th Place Southeast, north side only.

141. Southeast 227th Street: from 128th Avenue Southeast to 128th Place Southeast, south side only.

142. Southeast 227th Street/128th Place Southeast: on the curve from Southeast 227th Street to 128th Place Southeast, northwest side only.

143. Southeast 227th Street: from 132nd Place Southeast to 134th Place Southeast, south side only.

144. Southeast 236th Street: from 104th Avenue Southeast (SR 515) to 108th Avenue Southeast, south side only.

145. Southeast 239th Street: from 102nd Avenue Southeast to 104th Avenue Southeast.

146. Southeast 244th Street: from 120th Avenue Southeast to 116th Avenue Southeast.

147. Southeast 248th Street: from 104th Avenue Southeast to 116th Avenue Southeast, south side only.

148. Southeast 248th Street: in front of George Daniels Elementary School.

149. Southeast 252nd Street: from 200 feet west of 133rd Place Southeast to 135th Avenue Southeast, north side only.

150. Southeast 253rd Place: from 90 feet west of 135th Avenue Southeast to 136th Avenue East, south side only.

151. Southeast 256th Street: from 101st Avenue Southeast to 148th Avenue Southeast.

152. Southeast 260th Street: from 100th Avenue Southeast/97th Place South to 108th Avenue Southeast.

153. Southeast 264th Street: from 124th Avenue Southeast to 127th Avenue Southeast, north side only.

154. Southeast 267th Street: from 102nd Avenue Southeast to 104th Avenue Southeast, north side only.

155. Southeast 282nd Street: from 132nd Avenue Southeast to 144th Avenue Southeast.

156. SR 99 (Pacific Highway South): from Kent-Des Moines Road (SR 516) to South 272nd Street.

157. West Cloudy Street: from 4th Avenue North to 5th Avenue North.

158. West Gowe Street: from 6th Avenue South to 300 feet east of 6th Avenue South.

159. West James Street/East James Street/South 240th Street/Southeast 240th Street: from Russell Road to 148th Avenue Southeast.

160. West Meeker Street: from Kent-Des Moines Road (SR 516) to 6th Avenue South.

161. West Saar Street: from west end of street to 4th Avenue South, south side only.

162. West Sam Street: from West Valley Highway (SR 181/Washington Avenue) to end of street.

163. West Smith Street/East Smith Street: from 64th Avenue South to Jason Avenue South.

164. West Temperance Street: from Ramsay Way to 1st Avenue North.

165. West Valley Highway South/Washington Avenue South/Washington Avenue North/68th Avenue South: from south city limits to north city limits.

166. West Willis Street/East Willis Street: from 4th Avenue South to Central Avenue South.

167. Woodland Way South: from East Maple Street to South 262nd Street.

B. Penalty. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be an infraction punishable by a monetary penalty of $50.00. Vehicles parked in violation of this section are subject to impoundment as provided by law.

(Ord. No. 3790, § 2, 3-7-06; Ord. No. 3846, § 1, 7‑17-07; Ord. No. 3859, § 1, 9-18-07; Ord. No. 3862, § 1, 11-20-07; Ord. No. 3881, § 1, 5-6-08; Ord. No. 3918, § 1, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 3974, § 1, 9-21-10; Ord. No. 3993, § 1, 3-15-11; Ord. No. 4008, § 1, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 4078, § 1, 4-16-13; Ord. No. 4223, § 1, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 4283, § 1, 7-17-18)


9.38.025 Loading zones and passenger loading zones.

A. As authorized pursuant to WAC 308-330-265, 308-330-439, and 308-330-442, the traffic engineer shall have the authority to establish loading zones and passenger loading zones at such locations and during said times as posted by the traffic engineer. Except to load and unload vehicles, it shall be illegal to park any motor vehicle or other vehicle at any time upon that portion of the road right-of-way established as a loading zone or passenger loading zone as posted by the traffic engineer, unless otherwise indicated.

B. Penalty. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be an infraction punishable by a monetary penalty of fifty dollars ($50). Vehicles parked in violation of this section are subject to impoundment as provided by law.

(Ord. No. 3363, § 1, 9-16-97; Ord. No. 3974, § 1, 9-21-10)


9.38.030 Parking in fire lanes – Penalty.

A. Parking prohibited. Except when necessary to temporarily avoid conflict with other moving traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer, fire official, traffic control sign, signal, or device, no person shall:

1. Stop, stand, or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, within any fire lane except:

a. Momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers; or



b. Temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property.

2. Allow continued violations of this section on private property which they own or manage.

B. Penalty. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be an infraction punishable by a monetary penalty of fifty dollars ($50). Vehicles parked in violation of this section are subject to impoundment as provided by law.

(Ord. No. 2296, § 2; Ord. No. 2434; Ord. No. 2615, § 1; Ord. No. 2663, § 1; Ord. No. 2920, § 1(13.02.030), 4-17-90; Ord. No. 3189, § 1, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 3963, § 1, 6-15-10; Ord. No. 3974, § 1, 9-21-10. Formerly Code 1986, § 13.02.030)

Note – Formerly § 9.38.025.


9.38.035 Electric vehicle parking space – Penalty.

A. No person shall park any nonelectric vehicle in a parking space designated as an electric vehicle parking space.

B. No person shall park an electric vehicle in an electric vehicle parking space if the vehicle is not connected to charging equipment.

C. No person shall park an electric vehicle in an electric vehicle parking space for longer than the posted time.

D. It is a violation of this chapter for any person to stop, stand, or park an electric vehicle in an electric vehicle parking space which requires a fee for charging without paying the posted fee.

E. Penalty. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be an infraction punishable by a monetary penalty of $50. Vehicles parked in violation of this section are subject to impoundment as provided by law.

(Ord. No. 4223, § 2, 12-13-16)


9.38.040 Arterial and highway parking prohibited.

A. Parking is prohibited on four (4) lane highways or arterials unless otherwise designated by sign or posting.

B. Penalty. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be an infraction punishable by a monetary penalty of fifty dollars ($50). Vehicles parked in violation of this section are subject to impoundment as provided by law.

(Ord. No. 2660, § 3; Ord. No. 3189, § 1, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 3974, § 1, 9-21-10. Formerly Code 1986, § 10.07.010)

Note – Formerly § 9.38.030.


9.38.045 Parking prohibited from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.

A. At such time as the traffic engineer shall place the appropriate sign, it shall be illegal to park any motor or other vehicle between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless otherwise indicated, at the following locations:

1. The north side of SE 276th Place between the east and west boundaries of Springwood Park.

2. On both sides of SE 274th Street between 128th Place SE and the end of the street, adjacent to Springwood Park.

3. On both sides of South 203rd Street, from 100th Avenue SE westerly, approximately six hundred (600) feet, to the westerly boundary of Chestnut Ridge Park.

B. Penalty. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be an infraction punishable by a monetary penalty of fifty dollars ($50). Vehicles parked in violation of this section are subject to impoundment as provided by law.

(Ord. No. 3328, § 1, 12-10-96; Ord. No. 3352, § 1, 6-17-97; Ord. No. 3934, § 1, 11-3-09; Ord. No. 3974, § 1, 9-21-10)


9.38.050 Parking prohibited from 4:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.

A. At such time as the traffic engineer shall place the appropriate sign, it shall be illegal to park any motor or other vehicle between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., except Sundays and holidays, on either side of, unless otherwise indicated, the following locations:

1. Meeker Street: from Fourth Avenue to State Avenue.

2. Gowe Street: from Meeker Street to State Avenue.

3. Titus Street: from Fourth Avenue to Central Avenue.

4. First Avenue: from Smith Street to Titus Street.

5. Second Avenue: from Harrison Street to Saar Street.

6. Railroad Avenue: from James Street to Titus Street.

7. State Avenue: from Smith Street to Gowe Street.

8. First Avenue: from James Street to Smith Street.

B. Penalty. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be an infraction punishable by a monetary penalty of $50. Vehicles parked in violation of this section are subject to impoundment as provided by law.

(Ord. No. 1972, § 3; Ord. No. 2017, § 3; Ord. No. 2731, § 3; Ord. No. 3189, § 1, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 3974, § 1, 9-21-10. Formerly Code 1986, § 10.06.150; Ord. No. 4223, § 3, 12-13-16)

Note – Formerly § 9.38.040.


9.38.055 Parking in City Hall parking lot and Centennial Center parking garage.

Except as provided for under KCC 9.38.070 and 9.38.170, it is illegal to park a vehicle in the parking lot between City Hall and the Centennial Center, or within the Centennial Center parking garage, in violation of this section.

A. No general public parking during business hours. Monday through Friday, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., the parking lot between City Hall and the Centennial Center, and the first floor of the Centennial Center parking garage, are reserved for use by individuals who visit the City Hall campus to attend a city-sponsored event at City Hall, the Centennial Center, or the Kent police department; to conduct business at City Hall, the Centennial Center, or the Kent police department; or to otherwise make use of the amenities or services offered at City Hall, the Centennial Center, or the Kent police department. Such visitors may park within the City Hall parking lot, or within those spaces on the first floor of the Centennial Center parking garage that are marked or otherwise designated as available for use by visitors, and as limited in time or otherwise restricted by this chapter and official signs or markings. During such business hours, these parking facilities are not otherwise open for use by the general public. Visitors may not park vehicles in any parking space that is marked or otherwise designated for use by city employees or reserved for city vehicles.

B. Reserved parking. The second and third floors of the Centennial Center parking garage, including the ramps leading to and from each floor, are reserved exclusively for use by authorized city employees or to park city vehicles as determined appropriate by the mayor or designee. These parking facilities are not otherwise open for use by the general public or visitors to the City Hall campus.

C. Penalty. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be an infraction punishable by a monetary penalty of $50. Vehicles parked in violation of this section may be towed and impounded as provided by law.

(Ord. No. 4239, § 1, 3-21-17)


9.38.060 Two-hour parking zones.

A. Two-hour parking limit. Except as provided for under KCC 9.38.070 and 9.38.170, at such times as the director of public works or designee shall place the appropriate sign, or the facilities superintendent for municipal parking facilities, it shall be illegal to park any motor or other vehicle for an uninterrupted period in excess of two hours between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on either side of, unless otherwise indicated, the following streets, parking lots, parking garages, or portions thereof:

1. Centennial Parking Garage: that portion of the first floor as posted or otherwise marked. A vehicle that displays a valid disabled parking placard or disabled license plate is exempt from the two-hour limitation.

2. City Hall parking lot between City Hall and the Centennial Building: all parking stalls unless otherwise posted or marked. A vehicle that displays a valid disabled parking placard or disabled license plate is exempt from the two-hour limitation.

3. Clark Avenue North: from East Smith Street to East Temperance Street, west side only.

4. East Pioneer Street: from Central Avenue North easterly approximately 150 feet to the alley east of Central Avenue North, south side only.

5. First Avenue North and First Avenue South: from a point 200 feet north of West Meeker Street to West Titus Street.

6. Railroad Avenue North and Railroad Avenue South: from East James Street to East Smith Street, east side only; and from East Smith Street to East Gowe Street.

7. Ramsay Way: from 230 feet east of 4th Avenue North to 350 feet east of 4th Avenue North.

8. Ramsay Way: from 440 feet east of 4th Avenue North to 520 feet east of 4th Avenue North, south side only.

9. Ramsay Way: from 480 feet east of 4th Avenue North to 520 feet east of 4th Avenue North, north side only.

10. Ramsay Way: from 30 feet north of West Temperance Street to 150 feet north of West Temperance Street.

11. Second Avenue North and Second Avenue South: from West Harrison Street to West Titus Street.

12. State Avenue North and State Avenue South: from East Smith Street to East Gowe Street.

13. West Gowe Street and East Gowe Street: from Fourth Avenue South to Central Avenue South.

14. West Meeker Street and East Meeker Street: from Fourth Avenue to State Avenue.

15. West Harrison Street: from Fourth Avenue North to Second Avenue North.

16. West Titus Street: from Second Avenue South to First Avenue South, north side only.

Provided, that this section shall not apply on Sundays or holidays.

B. Penalty. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be an infraction punishable by a monetary penalty of $30. Vehicles parked in violation of this section may be towed and impounded as provided by law.

(Ord. No. 3790, § 4, 3-7-06; Ord. No. 3974, § 1, 9-21-10; Ord. No. 4114, § 1, 6-3-14; Ord. No. 4239, § 2, 3-21-17; Ord. No. 4322, § 1, 5-7-19)


9.38.065 Four-hour parking zones.

A. Four-hour parking limit – During business hours. Except as provided for under KCC 9.38.070 and 9.38.170, at such times as the director of public works or designee shall place the appropriate sign, it shall be illegal to park any motor or other vehicle for an uninterrupted period in excess of four hours between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on either side of, unless otherwise indicated, the following streets, public parking lots, public parking garages, or portions thereof:

1. East George Street: from Central Avenue North to State Avenue North.

2. State Avenue North: from 175 feet south of East George street to north end of road, west side only.

3. Railroad Avenue North and Railroad Avenue South: from East Smith Street to East Gowe Street.

Provided, that this section shall not apply on Sundays or holidays.

B. Four-hour parking limit – At all times. Except as provided for under KCC 9.38.070 and 9.38.170, at such times as the director of public works or designee shall place the appropriate sign, it shall be illegal to park any motor or other vehicle for an uninterrupted period in excess of four hours at any time on either side of, unless otherwise indicated, the following streets, public parking lots, public parking garages, or portions thereof:

1. West Smith Street: from 64th Avenue South to Washington Avenue.

C. Penalty. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be an infraction punishable by a monetary penalty of $30. Vehicles parked in violation of this section may be towed or impounded as provided by law.

(Ord. No. 4114, § 1, 6-3-14; Ord. No. 4239, § 3, 3-21-17; Ord. No. 4322, § 2, 5-7-19)


9.38.070 Holiday parking – Penalty.

A. From the day after Thanksgiving until January 2nd of the following year, all two (2) hour parking zones shall be considered three (3) hour parking zones, and it shall be illegal to park any motor or other vehicle for an uninterrupted period in excess of three (3) hours between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on the roadways designated in KCC 9.38.060 as two (2) hour parking zones. There shall be no enforcement of limited duration parking restrictions, in those zones designated for two (2) hour parking, on Saturdays during the period from the day after Thanksgiving until January 2nd of the following year.

B. A violation of this section shall be an infraction and punishable by a monetary penalty of fifty dollars ($50). Vehicles parked in violation of this section are subject to impoundment as provided by law.

(Ord. No. 2444, § 1; Ord. No. 3062, § 4 (10.06.130), 8-18-92; Ord. No. 3189, § 1, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 3963, § 2, 6-15-10; Ord. No. 3974, § 1, 9-21-10; Ord. No. 4114, § 1, 6-3-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 10.06.130)

Note – Formerly § 9.38.060.


9.38.080 Thirty (30) minute parking zones.

A. At such times as the traffic engineer shall place the appropriate sign, it shall be illegal to park any motor or other vehicle for an uninterrupted period in excess of thirty (30) minutes, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., unless otherwise indicated, at the following locations:

1. First Avenue: The first stall north of Meeker Street on the west side of First Avenue.

2. First Avenue: The first stall south of Meeker Street on the west side of First Avenue.

3. Second Avenue: The first stall south of Meeker Street on the east side of Second Avenue.

4. Second Avenue: The first stall south of Meeker Street on the west side of Second Avenue.

5. Gowe Street: The first stall east of Railroad Avenue on Gowe Street, north side.

6. Fourth Avenue: The stalls north of Titus Street on the east side of Fourth Avenue.

7. Centennial Building: The first four (4) stalls on the east side of the building as posted.

B. Penalty. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be an infraction punishable by a monetary penalty of fifty dollars ($50). Vehicles parked in violation of this section are subject to impoundment as provided by law.

(Ord. No. 2731, § 1; Ord. No. 2760, § 1; Ord. No. 2959, § 1, 1-3-91; Ord. No. 3189, § 1, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 3324, § 2, 11-27-96; Ord. No. 3834, § 1, 4-17-07; Ord. No. 3974, § 1, 9-21-10. Formerly Code 1986, § 10.06.230)


9.38.085 Seasonal no parking zone – Lake Meridian.

A. At such times as the traffic engineer shall place the appropriate sign, it shall be illegal to park any motor vehicle, or other vehicle or trailer, for the period of May 15th through September 15th of each year, between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m., at the following locations:

1. 150th Place S.E.: from S.E. 272nd Street to the end of the road.

2. 270th Place: from 150th Place S.E. to the end of the road.

3. 271st Place: from 150th Place S.E. to the end of the road.

B. A violation of this section shall be an infraction and shall be punishable by a monetary penalty of fifty dollars ($50). Vehicles parked in violation of this section are subject to impoundment as provided by law.

(Ord. No. 3463, § 1, 6-15-99; Ord. No. 3974, § 1, 9-21-10)


9.38.090 Parking reserved for physically disabled, penalty.

Repealed by Ord. 3924.

(Ord. No. 2304, §§ 1, 3; Ord. No. 2313, § 2; Ord. No. 2406, § 1; Ord. No. 2613, § 1; Ord. No. 3062, § 3, 8-18-92; Ord. No. 3189, § 1, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 3335, § 1, 2-5-97. Formerly Code 1986, § 10.06.190)

Note – Formerly § 9.38.100.


9.38.095 Re-parking in same block to avoid citation.

A. It shall be an infraction for any person to move and re-park a vehicle from one (1) parking space within a parking time limit area to another parking space within a parking time limit area that is within one (1) block of the original parking space.

B. It shall be an infraction for any person to move and re-park a vehicle parked in a parking lot with a parking time limit to another space within the same parking lot with a parking time limit.

C. For the purposes of this section, a “block” is a city street, roadway, highway, or alley section located between consecutive intersections.

D. Penalty. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be an infraction punishable by a monetary penalty of fifty dollars ($50).

(Ord. No. 3974, § 1, 9-21-10)


9.38.100 Compliance with state law.

The traffic engineer is directed to obtain from the State Department of Transportation approval and ratification of any no-parking zone where required by RCW 47.24.020.

(Ord. No. 2303, § 2; Ord. No. 3189, § 1, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 3974, § 1, 9-21-10. Formerly Code 1986, § 10.06.200)

Note – Formerly § 9.38.110.


9.38.110 Parking prohibited within ten (10) feet of mailboxes – Penalty.

A. No motor vehicle shall be parked within ten (10) feet of a clearly visible, residential mailbox which is located directly adjacent to curbside or on a public right-of-way between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays.



B. Any violation of this section shall be an infraction and punishable by a monetary penalty of fifty dollars ($50). Vehicles parked in violation of this section are subject to impoundment as provided by law.

(Ord. No. 2658; Ord. No. 3189, § 1, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 3963, § 3, 6-15-10; Ord. No. 3974, § 1, 9-21-10. Formerly Code 1986, § 10.06.07)

Note – Formerly § 9.38.120.


9.38.120 Parking and storage of large vehicles on city streets – Finding.

A. The city council finds that the parking and storage of trucks, vans, tractor trailers, semi-trailers, and other vehicles, with a maximum gross vehicle weight rating that exceeds 14,001 pounds, present unacceptable risks and hazards to public health, safety, and welfare when such vehicles are parked or stored on city streets at times when such vehicles are not engaged in activity.

B. The city council also recognizes that under some circumstances, it may benefit the public health, safety, and welfare to park the above described vehicles on certain city streets, and that there should be a mechanism to permit the chief of police to suspend the enforcement of parking restrictions relating to those vehicles to allow those vehicles to park on city streets temporarily and during certain time frames.

(Ord. No. 2916, § 1, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 3189, § 1, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 3974, § 1, 9-21-10; Ord. No. 4115, § 1, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 4192, § 1, 4-19-16)

Note – Formerly § 9.38.130.


9.38.130 Parking and storage of large vehicles on city streets – Penalty and exemptions.

A. Parking prohibited. No vehicle, including a truck, van, trailer, or semi-trailer, whether licensed or unlicensed, with a maximum gross vehicle weight rating that exceeds 14,001 pounds may be stored or parked upon any city street.

B. Exemptions. The parking limitation provided in this section shall not apply to the following:

1. A vehicle that is being actively loaded or unloaded.

2. A vehicle that is being used for the exclusive purpose of providing active construction or other hired services to a property at that location, including construction, carpentry, plumbing, landscaping, and moving services.

3. Recreational vehicles whose parking is regulated under KCC 9.38.145.

4. City of Kent or other government vehicles, public utility vehicles, or emergency vehicles.

C. Penalty and impoundment. Any violation of this section shall be an infraction and punishable by a monetary penalty of $250. Vehicles parked in violation of this section are subject to impoundment as provided by law.

D. Authority to suspend enforcement. The chief of police shall have the authority to suspend the enforcement of this section in the event he or she, in his or her discretion, determines that suspension of enforcement will benefit the public health, safety, and welfare. Any suspension of enforcement of this section shall be in writing delivered to the office of the mayor and shall specify the times and dates in which the suspension shall be effective. The suspension of enforcement shall also suspend the enforcement of KCC 9.38.180(A)(15), (B)(6), and (C)(2), as well as applicable sections of KCC 9.38.020. Any truck, vehicle, van, trailer, or semi-trailer parked in accordance with the terms of the suspension of enforcement shall be parked in compliance with applicable requirements of the Revised Code of Washington and the Washington Administrative Code.

(Ord. No. 2916, § 2, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 3062, § 5, 8-18-92; Ord. No. 3189, § 1, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 3850, § 1, 8-7-07; Ord. No. 3974, § 1, 9-21-10; Ord. No. 4115, § 1, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 4192, § 2, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 4214, § 1, 9-20-16)

Note – Formerly § 9.38.140.


9.38.140 Parking of certain trailers or semi-trailers – Penalty.

A. Except as provided in KCC 9.38.130, no trailer or semi-trailer shall be parked upon any city street unless the trailer or semi-trailer is attached to a vehicle by which it may be propelled or drawn. In case of accident, such trailer or semi-trailer may be moved to the side of the street, and if a good and sufficient red signal is displayed at both ends of the trailer or semi-trailer during the hours of darkness, such trailer or semi-trailer may be permitted or allowed to remain for a period not exceeding twenty-four (24) hours pending removal except that such trailer or semi-trailer shall not remain upon any portion of a city street where standing or parking is limited or prohibited for a period longer than is necessary to effect its removal.

B. Any violation of this section shall be an infraction and punishable by a monetary penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250). Vehicles parked in violation of this section are subject to impoundment as provided by law.

C. The chief of police shall have the authority to suspend the enforcement of this section in the event he or she, in his or her discretion, determines that suspension of enforcement will benefit the public health, safety, and welfare. Any suspension of enforcement of this section shall be in writing delivered to the office of the mayor and shall specify the times and dates in which the suspension shall be effective. The suspension of enforcement shall also suspend the enforcement of KCC 9.38.180(A)(15), (B)(6), and (C)(2), as well as applicable sections of KCC 9.38.020. Any trailer or semi-trailer parked in accordance with the terms of the suspension of enforcement shall be parked in compliance with applicable requirements of the Revised Code of Washington and the Washington Administrative Code. 

(Ord. No. 2508, § 2; Ord. No. 2582, § 1; Ord. No. 2916, § 3, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 3062, § 1, 8-18-92; Ord. No. 3189, § 1, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 3850, § 2, 8-7-07; Ord. No. 3974, § 1, 9-21-10; Ord. No. 4115, § 1, 6-17-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 10.06.100)

Note – Formerly § 9.38.150.


9.38.145 Parking of recreational vehicles, boats or vessels, and trailers.

A. No person shall park any recreational vehicle, boat or vessel, or trailer on any street, highway, roadway, alley, or public right-of-way in any residential neighborhood in the city for more than twenty-four (24) hours. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following prescribed meanings: 

1. Recreational vehicle shall be as defined in KCC 8.09.030(G).

2. Boat or vessel shall mean every description of watercraft used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on the water.

3. Trailer shall mean every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a hitch or other connector, and ordinarily used for transporting items upon public streets and highways.

B. Any violation of this section shall be an infraction and punishable by a monetary penalty of fifty dollars ($50). Vehicles parked in violation of this section are subject to impoundment as provided by law.

(Ord. No. 3974, § 1, 9-21-10)


9.38.150 Parking an unlicensed vehicle or a vehicle with switched license plates or tabs – Penalty.

A. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, on a street, highway, roadway, alley, or public property unless the vehicle possesses a license plate and license tab registration that is proper and current for that vehicle. Such license plate and tab registration shall be properly mounted on the vehicle in accordance with the State Department of Licensing rules and regulations.

B. Any violation of this section shall be an infraction and punishable by a monetary penalty of fifty dollars ($50). Vehicles parked in violation of this section are subject to impoundment as provided by law.

(Ord. No. 2614, § 1; Ord. No. 3189, § 1, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 3963, § 4, 6-15-10; Ord. No. 3974, § 1, 9-21-10. Formerly Code 1986, § 10.06.110)

Note – Formerly § 9.38.160.


9.38.160 Municipal parking facilities regulated – Penalty.

A. Municipal parking facilities – Definition. Municipal parking facilities means the adjacent parking lot or parking garage that serves the following municipal facilities: Kent City Hall, the Centennial Center, Kent Municipal Court, Kent Corrections Facility, Kent Commons, Riverbend Golf Complex, Kent Senior Center, the parks department’s maintenance shop facility, the public works department’s operations shop facility, and all parks or recreation facilities owned or operated by the city.

B. Municipal parking facilities – Reserved exclusively for users of municipal facility. Except as otherwise provided by KCC 9.38.055, those parking lots or parking garages that are connected or adjacent to a municipal facility are reserved exclusively for use by individuals who are visiting the municipal facility during its regular hours of operation to attend a city-sponsored event, to conduct business with the city, or to otherwise make use of the amenities or services offered by the municipal facility. Such visitors may park within those spaces that are marked or otherwise designated as available for use by visitors, and as limited in time or otherwise restricted by the mayor or designee through official signs or markings. During a municipal facility’s regular hours of operation, its parking lot is not otherwise open for use by the general public. Visitors may not park vehicles in any parking space within the municipal parking facility that is marked or otherwise designated for use by city employees, for city vehicles, or for other reserved uses or vehicles. It is illegal for a vehicle to be parked in violation of this section.

C. Public parking facilities. A public parking lot is available for general use by the public in downtown Kent, which is located adjacent to Titus Street and between Second Avenue and First Avenue, as limited in time or otherwise restricted by official signs or markings.

D. Penalty. Any violation of this section shall be an infraction and punishable by a monetary penalty of $50. Vehicles parked in violation of this section may be towed and impounded as provided by law.

(Ord. No. 2407, § 1; Ord. No. 2842, § 2 (10.06.220), 4-4-89; Ord. No. 2857, § 2, 7-5-89; Ord. No. 3189, § 1, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 3324, § 3, 11-27-96; Ord. No. 3963, § 5, 6-15-10; Ord. No. 3974, § 1, 9-21-10; Ord. No. 4239, § 4, 3-21-17. Formerly Code 1986, § 10.06.220)

Note – Formerly § 9.38.170.


9.38.170 Parking permits and passes or exemptions.

A. Authority to create and issue – Mayor or designee. The mayor or designee may designate, assign, restrict, and authorize parking within all municipal parking facilities. This authority specifically includes the ability to regulate parking through the issuance of parking permits or parking passes that either authorize the bearer to park in a particular place or area, or exempt the bearer from some or all of the parking limitations imposed by this chapter, including the time limitations imposed under KCC 9.38.060 and 9.38.065.

B. Form of permits and passes. Permits or passes may be in any form the mayor or designee determines to be appropriate and conspicuous. Such permits or passes should contain a rendition of the city’s corporate seal or official logo, the signature of the issuer, or some other means of authentication to identify the bearer as a person who is authorized to park in the applicable location, or as a person who is exempt from one or more of the parking restrictions established under this chapter, excluding disabled parking stalls. For any permit or pass to be valid, it must be displayed at all times while the vehicle is parked within the applicable location. If the permit or pass is not displayed, any permission or exemption the permit or pass conveys is ineffective and no infraction shall be dismissed on such basis.

B. Exception to permit or pass requirement – Police or government vehicles. Marked police vehicles and other police or government vehicles displaying exempt license plates are exempt from the parking and time restrictions imposed by KCC 9.38.060, 9.38.065, and 9.38.160, without the necessity of a permit or pass.

C. Residential parking zone manager. The residential parking zone manager, appointed pursuant to KCC 9.38.175(C), is authorized to issue temporary parking permits for the personal and business vehicles of city contractors, subcontractors, and their employees for use only while engaged in city contract work that requires such persons to be present in residential parking zones.

D. Human resources department – Commute trip reduction program. The city’s director of human resources or designee may recommend the mayor or designee issue carpool parking permits under the city’s commute trip reduction program, which entitle the bearer to park a vehicle within designated carpool spaces on the first floor of the Centennial Center parking garage, which spaces are exempt from any time limitation otherwise imposed.

(Ord. No. 2842, § 3, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 2857, § 3, 7-5-89; Ord. No. 3189, § 1, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 3324, § 4, 11-27-96; Ord. No. 3908, § 1, 2-3-09; Ord. No. 3974, § 1, 9-21-10; Ord. No. 4239, § 5, 3-21-17)

Note – Formerly § 9.38.180.


9.38.175 Residential parking zone.

A. Purpose of residential parking zone. The city establishes this residential parking zone (RPZ) program in response to parking concerns expressed by residents of the neighborhood surrounding destinations that are expected to generate significant demand for offsite parking in those neighborhoods, and as required to mitigate parking impacts of those destinations. This RPZ program will reserve parking on the surface streets in the RPZs established herein for neighborhood owners, residents, and their visitors, who might otherwise be displaced by visitors to these destinations.

B. Residential parking zones established.

1. The following described area, also known as the North Park Neighborhood, is established as Kent RPZ No. 1: That area bounded on the west by Fifth Avenue North, to the south by West James Street, to the north by State Route 167, and to the east by the Burlington Northern main line (First Avenue North). Residential parking zone permits are required at all times to park in Kent RPZ No. 1.

2. The following roadways or portions thereof, within the area known as the Mill Creek Neighborhood, are established as Kent RPZ No. 2:

a. Cedar Street: from Clark Avenue North to Jason Avenue North.

b. Clark Avenue North: from 150 feet north of East Smith Street to East Temperance Street, east side only.

c. Clark Avenue North: from East Temperance Street to East James Street.

d. East George Street: from State Avenue North to Woodford Avenue North.

e. East Temperance Street: from Kennebeck Avenue North to Jason Avenue North.

f. Jason Avenue North: from East Smith Street to East James Street.

g. Kennebeck Avenue North: from East Temperance Street to north end of road.

h. State Avenue North: from East James Street to 175 feet south of East George Street.

i. State Avenue North: 175 feet south of East George Street to north end of road, east side only.

j. Woodford Avenue North: from East James Street to north end of road.

Residential parking zone permits are required to park between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on weekdays in Kent RPZ No. 2. 

3. The following roadways or portions thereof, within portions of Glencarin Division 1, Shadow Run, and Jason Lane are established as Kent RPZ No. 3:

a. 124th Avenue Southeast: from Southeast 208th Street to Southeast 211th Street.

b. 125th Avenue Southeast: from Southeast 209th Street to north end of road.

c. 125th Avenue Southeast: from Southeast 209th Street to Southeast 211th Street.

d. 126th Avenue Southeast: from Southeast 208th Street to Southeast 211th Street.

e. 127th Place Southeast: from Southeast 208th Street to Southeast 211th Street.

f. Southeast 208th Place: from 126th Avenue Southeast to end of road.

g. Southeast 209th Street: from 170 feet west of 124th Avenue Southeast to 125th Avenue Southeast.

h. Southeast 209th Court: from 126th Avenue Southeast to end of road.

i. Southeast 210th Court: from 126th Avenue Southeast to end of road.

j. Southeast 210th Court: from 127th Place Southeast to end of road.

k. Southeast 210th Place: from 124th Avenue Southeast to end of road.

l. Southeast 210th Street: from 124th Avenue Southeast to end of road.

m. Southeast 211th Street: from 125 feet west of 124th Avenue Southeast to 124th Avenue Southeast.

n. Southeast 211th Street: from 125th Avenue Southeast to 160 feet east of 127th Place Southeast.

Residential parking zone permits are required between 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. on weekdays during the months of September through June, excluding holidays, to park in Kent RPZ No. 3.

C. RPZ manager. The mayor will appoint from city staff the RPZ manager who shall administer the RPZ program as set forth in this section. The duties of the RPZ manager may be carried out by more than one person and may be delegated to the customer services division of the city’s finance department as appropriate.

D. Residential parking zone permit. When properly issued and displayed, an RPZ permit or a visitor parking permit will authorize a vehicle to park within the RPZ for which the permit was issued. A property is included within the RPZ only if its address includes, and/or sole access to the property is via, a street that is within the RPZ. The permit shall not guarantee a parking space, nor shall it exempt the vehicle or operator from observing zones where parking is otherwise prohibited, including but not limited to permanent or temporary no parking zones, loading zones, fire zones, and all zones where parking is regulated or prohibited by other applicable laws or regulations of this code.

E. Permit eligibility.

1. Zone owners and residents. Permits may be issued only to persons who own property or reside in the RPZ established by subsection (B) of this section. At this time, all permits will be issued to RPZ owners and residents free of charge.

2. Resident visitors. The RPZ manager may issue additional permits to each residence within the RPZ for temporary use by residents’ visitors. Visitor permits may not be sold or redistributed for any purpose.

3. Government vehicles. Government vehicles will not be required to obtain permits for the purpose of conducting official business in the North Park Neighborhood. Government vehicles associated with the conduct of business at the Kent Events Center may not park in the RPZ.

F. Use and validity of permits.

1. The RPZ permit is valid only if displayed on the rear left window of the vehicle and only for so long as the permit holder owns or controls the vehicle and resides at the address for which the permit was issued.

2. A visitor parking permit shall be valid only if the hang tag is hung from the vehicle’s rearview mirror.

G. Issuance of permits. The RPZ manager will send four RPZ window decals to the owner of record and to the occupant of each dwelling unit or residence within the RPZ. In addition, the RPZ manager will send 15 hang tag visitor permits to each owner of record and the occupant of each dwelling unit or residence for temporary use. Each permit issued shall contain the number of the RPZ for which it was issued and a serial number for the permit, together with such other information as determined by the RPZ manager. The RPZ manager is authorized to issue additional RPZ and/or visitor permits, if a demonstrated need exists. Any RPZ resident may make application for additional necessary permits by returning to the RPZ manager a completed application supplied by the city identifying the additional permits required and the reason for the request. Additional permits will be issued at the discretion of the RPZ manager and at no cost at this time.

H. Proof of ownership or residence. The following will be sufficient proof of ownership or residence within the RPZ:

1. Appearance as owner of record on the King County recorder’s office website; or

2. A valid driver’s license showing residence at a current address located within the RPZ; or

3. A deed, lease, rental agreement, or other document which, at the discretion of the RPZ manager, establishes residency, and which shows residency within the RPZ.

I. Revocation or denial of permits – Cause. Any of the following shall be cause for the revocation or suspension of RPZ permits and/or visitor permits by the RPZ manager:

1. The making of any false or misleading statement in application for a permit.

2. The transfer to an unauthorized person or address.

3. The alteration of a permit in any respect in order to gain privileges not authorized by the permit.

4. The display on a vehicle of a permit that has been suspended or revoked.

5. The sale of a permit and the receipt of anything of value in exchange for a permit. 

J. Revocation or denial of permits – Process. If the RPZ manager finds that a RPZ permit or a visitor permit should be revoked or denied for any of the reasons set forth in subsection (I) of this section, the RPZ manager will send a written notice of revocation or denial to the permit holder, which notice shall contain the following information: 

1. That the permit is denied or will be revoked not sooner than 10 calendar days from the date of the letter.

2. The reasons for permit revocation or denial.

3. That unless a written notice of appeal is filed with the community development director not later than 10 calendar days from the date of the notice of revocation or denial, the permit will be deemed finally revoked or denied.

4. That the basis for the appeal must be contained in the written notice of appeal.

K. Revocation or denial – Appeal. An applicant aggrieved by the RPZ manager’s revocation or denial of an RPZ or visitor permit may file a notice of appeal with the community development director who upon consideration of the written documentation submitted in the notice of revocation or denial and the notice of appeal will affirm, reverse, or modify the revocation or denial decision, or order suspension for a specified period.

L. Violation – Penalty. It shall be a parking infraction to park within an RPZ unless the parked vehicle properly displays a valid RPZ permit or a visitor parking permit. Any violation of this section shall be an infraction punishable by a monetary penalty of $50. Vehicles parked in violation of this section may be towed or impounded as provided by law.

(Ord. No. 3894, § 1, 11-18-08; Ord. No. 3974, § 1, 9-21-10; Ord. 4322, § 3, 5-7-19)


9.38.180 Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specified places.

Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, no person shall:

A. Stop, stand, or park a vehicle:

1. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street.

2. On a sidewalk or street planting strip.

3. Within an intersection.

4. On a crosswalk.

5. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless official signs or markings indicate a different no parking area opposite the ends of a safety zone.

6. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.

7. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel.

8. On any railroad tracks.

9. In the area between roadways of a divided highway including crossovers.

10. Outside of the limits of an individual parking stall or parking space designated for vehicular on-street parking. An individual parking stall or parking space is that portion of the paved section of the roadway, of sufficient length and depth from the sidewalk curb to accommodate a vehicle to be parked, as shall be specified and marked by the city.

11. Within a marked bicycle lane, which is that portion of the paved section of the roadway specified and marked by the city for the movement of bicycles on the roadway.

12. Upon any portion of the street, roadway, or public way for the purpose of doing any work on, maintaining, or repairing any vehicle, except for those repairs necessitated by an emergency.

13. Upon any portion of the street, roadway, or public way for the principal purpose of displaying the vehicle for sale or for advertising services for vehicles.

14. Alongside or adjacent to any traffic island, which is the curbed area in a roadway from which traffic is excluded.

15. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.

B. Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:

1. In front of a public or private driveway or within five (5) feet of the end of the curb radius leading thereto;

2. Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant;

3. Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk;

4. Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;

5. Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of said entrance when properly signposted; or

6. At any place where official signs prohibit standing.

C. Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers:

1. Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; or

2. At any place where official signs prohibit parking.

D. Parking or standing shall be permitted in the manner provided by law at all other places, unless otherwise prohibited by this chapter.

E. No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is unlawful.

F. It shall be unlawful for any person to reserve or attempt to reserve any portion of a highway for the purpose of stopping, standing, or parking to the exclusion of any other like person, nor shall any person be granted such right.

G. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be an infraction and punishable by a monetary penalty of fifty dollars ($50). Vehicles parked in violation of this section are subject to impoundment as provided by law.

(Ord. No. 3974, § 1, 9-21-10)




9.38.185 Parking too far from the curb.

A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a two (2) way roadway shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels parallel to and within twelve (12) inches of the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder.

B. Except when otherwise provided by local ordinance, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one (1) way roadway shall be so stopped or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction of authorized traffic movement, with its right-hand wheels within twelve (12) inches of the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder, or with its left-hand wheels within twelve (12) inches of the left-hand curb or as close as practicable to the left edge of the left-hand shoulder.

C. Angle parking shall only be allowed as provided for in this chapter or elsewhere in the Kent City Code.

D. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be a traffic infraction and punishable by a monetary penalty of fifty dollars ($50). Vehicles parked in violation of this section are subject to impoundment as provided by law.

(Ord. No. 3974, § 1, 9-21-10)


9.38.190 Penalty for violation of certain sections.

Any violation of any section of this chapter for which no penalty is specifically provided shall be an infraction and punishable by a monetary penalty of $50. Vehicles parked in violation of this section are subject to impoundment as provided by law.

(Ord. No. 1972, § 5; Ord. No. 2303, § 3; Ord. No. 2313, § 1; Ord. No. 2731, § 4; Ord. No. 2928, § 1, 6-19-90; Ord. No. 3062, §§ 2 (10.06.190), 4 (10.06.190), 8-18-92; Ord. No. 3189, § 1, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 3963, § 6, 6-15-10; Ord. No. 3974, § 1, 9-21-10; Ord. No. 4239, § 6, 3-21-17. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 10.06.170, 10.06.210)

Note – Formerly § 9.38.180.


9.38.195 Failure to respond – Penalty.

Any person who fails to respond to a notice of infraction relating to parking shall, in addition to all other penalties and assessments, be assessed a penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25) for failing to respond. For the purposes of this section, a person shall be deemed to have failed to respond if he or she fails to timely pay any required penalty as stated on the notice of infraction or as required by the court, or fails to appear at the properly scheduled hearing to contest or mitigate the parking infraction.

(Ord. No. 4065, § 1, 12-11-12)


9.38.200 Flood emergency hazardous materials parking zone.

A. Purpose of the flood emergency hazardous materials parking zone. The city establishes this flood emergency hazardous materials parking zone (FEHMPZ) program for the purpose of providing upland parking for commercial motor vehicles carrying hazardous materials, as hereinafter defined, from city businesses when such materials must be relocated to avoid potential hazardous materials release. This program will allow for hazardous material truck parking on certain upland public right-of-way to the extent of available capacity. This program does not excuse any person or entity responsible for hazardous materials from proper protection, handling, and storage of such hazardous materials.

B. Definitions.

1. Flood emergency means an emergency declared by the mayor, the county executive, the governor, or federal officials by reason of floods or potential floods in the vicinity of the city.

2. Hazardous material means a substance or material which has been determined by the Secretary of Transportation to be capable of posing a risk to health, safety, and property when transported in commerce, and which has been so designated.

3. Commercial motor vehicle means any self-propelled or towed motor vehicle used on a highway in interstate commerce to transport passengers or property when the vehicle: 

a. Has a gross vehicle weight rating or gross combination weight rating, or gross vehicle weight or gross combination weight, of four thousand five hundred thirty-six (4,536) kilograms (ten thousand one (10,001) pounds) or more, whichever is greater; or

b. Is designed or used to transport more than eight (8) passengers (including the driver) for compensation; or

c. Is designed or used to transport more than fifteen (15) passengers, including the driver, and is not used to transport passengers for compensation; or

d. Is used in transporting material found by the Secretary of Transportation to be hazardous under 49 USC 5103 and transported in a quantity requiring placarding under regulations prescribed by the Secretary under Title 49 CFR, Subtitle B, Chapter I, Subchapter C.

C. Flood emergency hazardous materials parking zone established. Up to three (3) lanes of South 231st Street west of the Green River bridge to the intersection of Military Road South.

D. FEHMPZ manager. The city emergency manager shall administer the FEHMPZ program as set forth in this section. The duties of the FEHMPZ manager may be carried out by more than one (1) person and may be delegated to the fire prevention staff as appropriate. The FEHMPZ manager will adopt such rules and procedures as are necessary for notice of availability of the FEHMPZ for parking and for its management.

E. FEHMPZ permits. When properly issued and displayed, a FEHMPZ permit, in the form of a hang tag, will authorize a vehicle to park within the FEHMPZ during a flood emergency. The permit will not guarantee a parking place nor shall it allow the permitted vehicle to block private access to abutting properties or fire zones. The FEHMPZ manager will determine the capacity of the FEHMPZ zone and issue, on a first-come, first-served basis, only so many permits as the FEHMPZ will accommodate vehicles. 

F. Permit eligibility.

1. Kent businesses. Permits will be issued only to owners of licensed city businesses which business shall require the use and/or storage of hazardous materials. 

2. Vehicles. Each permit will be issued for a specific commercial motor vehicle. Vehicles with trailers will be required to remain attached during the duration of their use of the FEHMPZ. Vehicles and trailers will be required to have their wheels chocked.

3. Government vehicles. Government vehicles will be permitted to park in the FEHMPZ without permits.

G. Use and validity of permits – Fee.

1. The FEHMPZ permit shall be valid only if the hang tag is hung from the vehicle’s rearview mirror and only so long as the permit holder owns or controls the vehicle and maintains the business for which the permit was issued.

2. Each permit, unless terminated under subsection (G)(1) of this section or revoked by the FEHMPZ manager, shall expire on June 30th of each calendar year. 

3. A one-hundred-dollar ($100) administrative fee shall be charged for each permit issued to help defray the cost of administering the FEHMPZ program.

H. Issuance of permits.

1. Each permit applicant shall submit an application to the FEHMPZ manager along with a copy of the business license and vehicle registration(s). The application shall be upon a city form with such information as the FEHMPZ manager shall require. Such information shall include, but not be limited to, proof of insurance as required by the city risk manager. Upon request, the applicant will appear in person to show the original business license and vehicle registration(s). Each applicant shall agree, in writing, that submission of an application is not a guarantee of a parking place and does not excuse any compliance with any state, local, or federal regulations respecting hazardous materials or otherwise.

2. The FEHMPZ manager shall issue up to two (2) permits suitable for display for each approved application to Kent businesses that are members of the local emergency planning committee. Other Kent businesses will then be issued permits on a first-come, first-served basis until capacity within the FEHMPZ is exhausted.

3. Each permit shall show the date of expiration together with a license plate number and such other information as the FEHMPZ manager shall require.

I. Revocation or denial of permits – Cause. Any of the following shall be cause for the denial or revocation of the FEHMPZ permit:

1. The unavailability of capacity in the FEHMPZ.

2. A false or misleading statement in the application for permit.

3. The transfer of a permit to an unauthorized business or vehicle by sale or otherwise.

4. The alteration of a permit in any respect.

J. Revocation or denial of permit – Process. If the FEHMPZ manager finds that a FEHMPZ permit should be revoked or denied for any of the reasons set forth in subsection (I) of this section, the FEHMPZ manager will send a written notice of revocation or denial to the permit holder at the business address, which notice shall contain the following information:

1. That the permit is denied or will be revoked not sooner than ten (10) calendar days from the date of the letter.

2. The reasons for the permit revocation or denial.

3. That unless a written notice of appeal is filed with the FEHMPZ manager not later than ten (10) calendar days from the date of the notice of revocation or denial, the permit will be deemed finally revoked or denied.

4. That the basis for the appeal must be contained in the written notice of appeal.

K. Revocation or denial – Appeal. An applicant aggrieved by the FEHMPZ manager’s revocation or denial of a permit may file a notice of appeal with the FEHMPZ manager, who shall submit the same to the city hearing examiner. The hearing examiner, upon consideration of the written documentation submitted in the notice of revocation or denial and the notice of appeal, will affirm, reverse, or remand the revocation or denial.

L. Violation – Penalty. Any violation of this section shall be an infraction punishable by a monetary penalty of fifty dollars ($50). Vehicles parked in violation of this section during an emergency flood event are subject to impoundment as provided by law; provided, however, that all other rules and regulations regarding traffic, transportation, and the public right-of-way will be in effect during such times as an emergency flood event is not in effect.

(Ord. No. 3991 § 1, 2-15-11)


Chapter 9.39 TOWING*

Sections:

9.39.010    Title and purpose.

9.39.020    Removal by police officer.

9.39.030    Impoundment of vehicles when driver arrested for violation of driving while license suspended or revoked or operation of motor vehicle under other license while suspended.

9.39.040    Authorization to impound.

*Cross reference(s) – Duties of the parking enforcement aide, § 2.22.060.


9.39.010 Title and purpose.

This chapter shall be known and cited as the towing ordinance and shall supplement Chapter 46.55 RCW which is currently adopted in KCC 9.36.010 (Model Traffic Ordinance). In the event that a conflict exists between the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 46.55 RCW, this chapter shall prevail.

(Ord. No. 3464, § 2, 7-6-99; Ord. No. 4030, § 1, 2-21-12)


9.39.020 Removal by police officer.

In addition to the provisions of RCW 46.55.113, a police officer may take custody of a vehicle and provide for its prompt removal to a place of safety whenever a police officer finds a vehicle standing or parked in violation of RCW 46.61.570.

(Ord. No. 3464, § 2, 7-6-99; Ord. No. 4030, § 1, 2-21-12)


9.39.030 Impoundment of vehicles when driver arrested for violation of driving while license suspended or revoked or operation of motor vehicle under other license while suspended.

A. Impoundment of vehicles authorized. 

1. Whenever the driver of a vehicle is arrested for a violation of driving while license suspended or revoked (RCW 46.20.342) or operation of motor vehicle under other license or permit prohibited while license is suspended or revoked (RCW 46.20.345), as these provisions are currently enacted or hereafter amended, the vehicle is subject to impoundment at the direction of a law enforcement officer.

2. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or other person lawfully charged with possession of a vehicle to ensure that any person driving such vehicle has a valid license. It shall not be a defense to impoundment or to the payment of any of the costs of impound that the owner or other person lawfully charged with the vehicle was not aware that the driver’s license was suspended, revoked, or otherwise invalid.

B. Impoundment periods.

1. If a vehicle is impounded because the driver is arrested for a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(c) (driving while license suspended or revoked in the third degree) or 46.20.345, the vehicle shall be redeemable immediately pursuant to subsection (B)(6) of this section.

2. If a vehicle is impounded because the driver is arrested for a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) (driving while license suspended or revoked in the first degree) or 46.20.342(1)(b) (driving while license suspended or revoked in the second degree) and the Washington Department of Licensing’s records show that the driver has not been convicted of a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or (b) or equivalent local ordinance within the past five (5) years, the vehicle shall be impounded for thirty (30) days.

3. If a vehicle is impounded because the driver is arrested for a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or (b) and the Washington Department of Licensing’s records show that the driver has been convicted one (1) time of a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or (b) or equivalent local ordinance within the past five (5) years, the vehicle shall be impounded for sixty (60) days.

4. If a vehicle is impounded because the driver is arrested for a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or (b) and the Washington Department of Licensing’s records show that the driver has been convicted of a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or (b) or equivalent local ordinance two (2) or more times within the past five (5) years, the vehicle shall be impounded for ninety (90) days.

5. At the conclusion of the applicable period of impoundment, if any, the registered owner, a person authorized by the registered owner, or one who has purchased the vehicle from the registered owner, who produces proof of ownership or authorization and signs a receipt therefor, may redeem an impounded vehicle. A towing contractor may use any reasonable means necessary to confirm that the person redeeming the vehicle is authorized to redeem the vehicle, and neither the city nor the tow company shall be responsible for any loss resulting from a delay during the time in which the towing contractor is confirming authorization.

6. Prior to redeeming the impounded vehicle, any person redeeming a vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall pay the towing contractor for the costs of impoundment, including removal, towing, and storage fees accrued as a result of the impoundment. The towing contractor shall accept payment as provided in RCW 46.55.120 and other applicable statutes as currently enacted or hereafter amended. If the vehicle was impounded pursuant to this section and was being operated by the registered owner when it was impounded, it may not be released to any person until all traffic-related penalties, fines, and forfeitures owed by the registered owner have been satisfied.

7. A vehicle impounded pursuant to this section may be inventoried incident to the impound of the vehicle pursuant to the laws of the state of Washington and the United States. With the exception of personal property seized by a police officer, personal property contained within an impounded vehicle shall continue to be the responsibility of its owner, or the person driving the vehicle, and shall be dealt with pursuant to the requirements of RCW 46.55.090 and other applicable statutes as now enacted or hereafter amended. Property which is attached to the vehicle with electronic wiring, or by bolts, screws, glue, or other adhesive material, shall be considered a component of, or a part of, the vehicle for purposes of impoundment.

C. Impound hearing.

1. When a vehicle is impounded pursuant to this section, the tow truck operator shall send notice to the legal and registered owners as required by RCW 46.55.110 and other applicable statutes as now enacted or hereafter amended.

2. Any person seeking to redeem a vehicle impounded pursuant to this section has a right to a hearing in the Kent municipal court without a jury. The purpose of this hearing is solely to contest the validity of the impoundment or the amount of removal, towing, and storage fees. A person may waive the right to a hearing and, subject to the requirements of subsection (B) of this section, redeem the vehicle at the end of the applicable period. Failure to request a hearing pursuant to this subsection (C) shall constitute a waiver of the hearing. 

3. A request for a hearing must: (a) be in writing in a form approved by the administrator of the Kent municipal court, (b) be signed by the person contesting the impound, and (c) be received by the Kent municipal court within ten (10) days of the date the notice of impoundment was mailed or given to such person pursuant to RCW 46.55.110 or 46.55.120(2)(a), whichever is later. At the time of the filing of the request for hearing, the petitioner must pay to the court a filing fee in the amount of thirty-nine dollars ($39).

4. The hearing shall be provided as follows: 

a. The court, within five (5) days after a proper request for a hearing has been received, shall set the hearing date and send notice of the date, time, and location of the hearing to the registered and legal owners of the vehicle or other item of personal property registered or titled with the Department of Licensing, the person requesting the hearing if not the owner, the tow truck operator, and the person or agency authorizing the impound.

b. If the vehicle is still impounded at the time the written request is received, the court shall set the hearing within seven (7) days of receipt of the written request. If the vehicle has been released from impound at the time the written request is received, the court shall set the hearing within forty-five (45) days.

c. Any person seeking a hearing who has failed to request such hearing within the time requirements set forth in subsection (C)(3) of this section may petition the court for an extension to file a request for hearing. Such extension shall be granted only upon the demonstration of good cause as to the reason(s) the request for hearing was not timely filed and only in the event that notice of the auction of the vehicle has not been published by the tow truck operator pursuant to the requirements of RCW 46.55.110, 46.55.130, and other applicable statutes as now enacted or hereafter amended. For the purposes of this section, “good cause” shall be defined as circumstances beyond the control of the person seeking the hearing that prevented such person from filing a timely request for hearing. In the event such extension is granted, the date of granting the extension shall be treated as the date the hearing request was received. In the event that an extension is granted, additional fees resulting from the storage of the vehicle caused by the delay in the hearing shall be paid by the person requesting the extension, regardless of whether the impound is determined to be lawful or unlawful.

d. If a person fails to file a request for hearing within the time periods required, and no extension to file a request has been granted, the right to a hearing is waived, the impoundment and the associated costs of impoundment are deemed to be proper, and the city shall not be liable for any charges arising from the impound.

e. For the purposes of this section, any computation of time shall be in accordance with Civil Rule 6(a) of the Washington Court Rules.

f. Delivery of notices required by this section shall be deemed proper three (3) calendar days after the date such notice is sent by regular first class mail, or in any other manner reasonably calculated to reach the intended recipient. For the purposes of delivering notices required by this section, the address of the intended recipient which is either listed on a citation issued by a police officer, or which appears on any record maintained by or for the Department of Licensing, or which appears on any document or correspondence filed with the court by the intended recipient, shall be an appropriate and accurate address of the intended recipient.

5. Hearings shall, at the discretion of the court, be held by a judge, commissioner, judge pro tempore, or magistrate of the Kent municipal court, who shall determine whether the impoundment was proper and/or whether the associated removal, towing, storage, and any administrative fees were proper. The court may not adjust fees or charges that are in compliance with the posted or contracted rates.

6. The court may consider the criminal citation, the notice of traffic infraction, the authorization to impound created pursuant to KCC 9.39.040, and any other written report made under penalty of perjury submitted by the city of Kent or other impounding agency in lieu of the officer’s personal appearance at the hearing. The court may also consider an abstract of driving record and electronically printed registration information, without further evidentiary foundation. Such records shall constitute prima facie evidence of the status of the driver’s or contestant’s license to drive a motor vehicle, the proper period of impoundment, or the ownership of the impounded motor vehicle. The person named in the notice may subpoena witnesses, including the officer, and has the right to present evidence and examine witnesses present in court.

7. The burden of proof is upon the city to establish that the impound was proper by a preponderance of the evidence.

8. If the impoundment is found to be proper, the court shall enter an order so stating. The court’s order shall provide that the impounded vehicle shall be released only after the applicable impound period has expired and the redemption requirements of subsections (B)(5) and (6) of this section have been satisfied. The court shall grant time payments only in the cases of extreme financial need, and only after a finding of such extreme financial need, and only where there is an assured and effective guarantee of payment. 

9. If the impoundment is found to be improper, the court shall enter an order so stating and order the immediate release of the vehicle. If the costs of impoundment have already been paid, the court shall order the refund by the city of the costs of impoundment. If the impoundment is determined to be improper, and a filing fee was paid, the filing fee shall be returned to the payor.

10. In the event the court finds that the impoundment was proper, but the removal, towing, storage, or administrative fees charged for impoundment were not in compliance with the posted or contracted rates, the court shall determine the correct fees to be charged. If the costs of impoundment have been overpaid, the court shall order a refund by the towing company of the costs of impoundment for the amount of the overpayment. If the costs of impoundment have been overpaid, and a filing fee was paid, the filing fee shall be returned to the payor.

11. No determination of facts made at a hearing under this section shall have any collateral estoppel effect on a subsequent criminal prosecution and such determination shall not preclude litigation of those same facts in a subsequent criminal prosecution.

12. The hearing procedures set forth in this subsection shall apply only to hearings set pursuant to this section.

13. The court, in its discretion, may waive the filing fee required by subsection (C)(3) of this section upon proof by competent evidence that the person who is requesting the hearing is indigent as that term is defined in RCW 10.101.010(1). 

D. Economic or personal hardship – Rental cars – Vehicle dealer or lender with perfected security interest – Commercial or farm transport vehicles – Exceptions.

1. The court is authorized to release a vehicle impounded pursuant to this section prior to the expiration of any period of impoundment upon petition of the owner of the motor vehicle who was not the driver, provided he or she states under penalty of perjury that he or she was unaware the driver was suspended or revoked at the time of impoundment, or of a family member or dependent person of the driver based upon economic or personal hardship to such family member or dependent person resulting from the unavailability of the vehicle, and after consideration of the threat to public safety that may result from the release of the vehicle, including, but not limited to, the driver’s criminal history, driving record, license status, and access to the vehicle. If such release is authorized, the person redeeming the vehicle must satisfy the redemption requirements of subsections (B)(5) and (6) of this section. The decision to release the vehicle pursuant to this subsection shall not create any duty to protect any individual, nor shall it impart any costs, fees, or other financial obligations associated with the removal, towing, and/or storage of the vehicle to the city, provided the removal, towing, and/or storage were lawful under the Kent Municipal Code or the Revised Code of Washington. Further, neither the decision to release the vehicle, nor any determination of facts at a hearing under this section, shall provide a defense in any subsequent criminal prosecution, or have any collateral estoppel effect or preclude litigation of those same facts in a subsequent criminal prosecution. The release of a vehicle pursuant to this subsection shall be available to an owner or relative or dependent person of the driver one (1) time only.

2. Pursuant to RCW 46.55.120, as now enacted or hereafter amended, a rental car business may immediately redeem a rental vehicle it owns upon payment of the costs of removal, towing, and storage.

3. Pursuant to RCW 46.55.120, as now enacted or hereafter amended, a motor vehicle dealer or lender with a perfected security interest in the vehicle may immediately redeem or repossess a vehicle it owns upon payment of the costs of removal, towing, and storage.

4. Pursuant to RCW 46.55.113(3), as now enacted or hereafter amended, before the summary impoundment of a commercial vehicle or farm transport vehicle when the driver is not the owner of the vehicle, the police officer shall attempt in a reasonable and timely manner to contact the owner of the vehicle and may release the vehicle to the owner, or designee of the owner, if either is reasonably available, as long as the owner or designee states under penalty of perjury that he or she was unaware the driver was suspended or revoked. This remedy shall not be available when the owner has received a prior release under this subsection or RCW 46.55.120(1)(a)(ii). In the event that the owner or designee cannot be contacted in a reasonable and timely manner, or is not reasonably available, then he or she may immediately redeem the vehicle he or she owns upon payment of towing, removal, and storage costs.

5. Nothing in this section may derogate from the powers of police officers under the common law.

6. For the purposes of this section, “farm transport vehicle” means a motor vehicle owned by a farmer and that is being actively used in the transportation of the farmer’s or another farmer’s farm, orchard, aquatic farm, or dairy products, including livestock and plant or animal wastes, from point of production to market or disposal, or supplies or commodities to be used on the farm, orchard, aquatic farm, or dairy, and that has a gross vehicle weight rating of seven thousand two hundred fifty-eight (7,258) kilograms (sixteen thousand one (16,001) pounds) or more.

E. Sale of vehicle. Any vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall be subject to the sale provisions of RCW 46.55.130 and other applicable statutes, as now enacted or hereafter amended.

F. Authority to enforce. The chief of police, or his or her designee, and the court are hereby authorized to implement such administrative procedures as may be necessary to carry out the directives of this section.

(Ord. No. 3464, § 2, 7-6-99; Ord. No. 3569, § 1, 8-7-01; Ord. No. 4030, § 1, 2-21-12)


9.39.040 Authorization to impound.

When an officer authorizes the impound of a motor vehicle pursuant to this chapter, such authorization shall state the basis for the impound; the ordinance or statute which authorizes the impound; the date, time, and place of the impound; and the officer who authorized the impound. Such authorization shall be delivered to the towing contractor within twenty-four (24) hours of the impoundment. The towing contractor shall deliver the authorization to impound to the registered and legal owners of the vehicle with the other required information and within the time period required by RCW 46.55.110.

(Ord. No. 3464, § 2, 7-6-99; Ord. No. 4030, § 1, 2-21-12)


Chapter 9.40 SPEED LIMITS

Sections:

9.40.010    Findings.

9.40.020    State speed law applicable.

9.40.030    Streets and speed limits.

9.40.040    Approval of State Highway Commission.

9.40.050    Regulation of speed by traffic signals.

9.40.060    Violations.


9.40.010 Findings.

The Kent Traffic Code adopts by reference the Model Traffic Ordinance, set forth in Chapter 308-330 WAC. The Model Traffic Ordinance, pursuant to WAC 308-330-270, and RCW 46.61.415, set forth the procedure for a municipality such as the city of Kent to determine and declare the maximum speed limits on city arterials, streets, and other rights-of-way, and allows such to be done by resolution after an engineering and traffic investigation by the traffic engineer. The city council finds that it is necessary and appropriate to adopt an ordinance relating to the establishment of vehicular speed limits on certain designated streets in the city as authorized by state law.

(Ord. No. 3188, § 1, 10-4-94)


9.40.020 State speed law applicable.

The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles, RCW 46.61.400 through 46.61.475, shall be applicable upon all streets within this city, except as this chapter, as authorized by state law, declares and determines upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigation that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas, in which event, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared in this chapter when signs are in place giving notice thereof.

(Ord. No. 3188, § 1, 10-4-94)


9.40.030 Streets and speed limits.

Pursuant to RCW 46.61.400(2)(a), all city streets within the city limits shall have a speed limit of twenty-five (25) miles per hour to be in effect at all times except those streets and/or parts of streets which shall have speed limits to be in effect at all times, as established by city council resolution, pursuant to the Model Traffic Ordinance set forth in KCC 9.36.010, more specifically, WAC 308-330-270 and RCW 46.61.415, which resolution shall be on file in the city clerk’s office.

(Ord. No. 3188, § 1, 10-4-94)


9.40.040 Approval of State Highway Commission.

The city traffic engineer is directed to obtain from the Washington State Department of Transportation any approval which may be required by RCW 47.24.020, and to see that proper signs are posted along any highway or portion thereof for which such approval is required, notifying the public of the legal speed limit thereon.

(Ord. No. 3188, § 1, 10-4-94)


9.40.050 Regulation of speed by traffic signals.

The traffic engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner.

(Ord. No. 3188, § 1, 10-4-94)


9.40.060 Violations.

Violation of any of the speed limits established pursuant to this chapter, and any city council resolution established hereunder, shall be considered to be a traffic infraction and shall be punishable by a monetary amount that may be determined by statute, ordinance or court rule.

(Ord. No. 3188, § 1, 10-4-94)


Chapter 9.41 BICYCLE HELMETS

Sections:

9.41.010    Purpose and policy declared.

9.41.020    Definitions.

9.41.030    Bicycle helmet required.

9.41.040    Bicycle races and events – Bicycle helmet required.

9.41.050    Bicycle on lease or loan – Bicycle helmet to be provided.

9.41.060    Helmet sales – Safety standards.

9.41.070    Enforcement.


9.41.010 Purpose and policy declared.

A. It is the express purpose of this chapter to provide for and to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the general public and not to create, establish, or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this chapter.

B. It is the specific intent of this chapter to place the obligation of complying with its terms upon any person falling within its scope. No provision of this chapter is intended to impose any duty upon the city of Kent or any of its officers, employees, or agents for any damage or injury resulting from the failure of a person to comply with this chapter. Implementation and enforcement of this chapter by the city of Kent and its officers or employees shall be discretionary and not mandatory. This chapter is not intended to form the basis for liability of the city of Kent, or any of its officers, employees, or agents, in the event that a person is injured or property is damaged as a result of the failure of any person to comply with its terms.

(Ord. No. 3465, § 1, 7-6-99)


9.41.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

A. Bicycle means every device propelled solely by human power upon which a person or persons may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels, either of which is eight (8) inches or more in diameter, or three (3) wheels, any one of which is more than twenty (20) inches in diameter. The term “bicycle” shall include any child-seat, trailer, side-car, or other device attached to a bicycle. A device meeting the definition of a bicycle shall be considered a bicycle notwithstanding the fact that training wheels are affixed to the device.

B. Guardian means a person legally responsible for the care and management of a person under the age of sixteen (16). “Guardian” shall include the parent, a person with legal custody, a person with temporary custody, or a person who is temporarily caring for the child.

C. Child means a person under the age of sixteen (16).

D. Approved bicycle helmet means a head covering designed to protect the head that meets or exceeds safety standards adopted by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), or the Snell Foundation.

E. Public area means the public roadways, sidewalks, bicycle paths, parks, public property, public rights-of-way, and publicly owned facilities within the city limits of the city of Kent.

(Ord. No. 3465, § 1, 7-6-99)


9.41.030 Bicycle helmet required.

A. Any person riding a bicycle, including a passenger on a bicycle or a person in tow of a bicycle, upon any public area, shall wear an approved bicycle helmet and shall have either the neck or chin strap of the helmet fastened securely while the bicycle is in motion.

B. No person shall transport another person on a bicycle or in tow of a bicycle upon any public area, unless the passenger is wearing an approved bicycle helmet. Each person transported in violation of this subsection shall be considered a separate offense chargeable to the person in control of the bicycle.

C. The guardian of a child is responsible for requiring that the child under his or her care wears an approved bicycle helmet while bicycling, or riding as a passenger on a bicycle or in tow of a bicycle, in any public area, and that the child has the neck or chin strap of the helmet fastened securely. Each child not wearing an approved bicycle helmet in violation of this section shall be considered a separate offense chargeable to the parent or guardian.

D. It is a defense to this section for a person wearing an unapproved bicycle helmet that the helmet was furnished in conjunction with his or her lease of the bicycle by a person engaged in the business of leasing bicycles and that the helmet was fastened securely while bicycling.

(Ord. No. 3465, § 1, 7-6-99)


9.41.040 Bicycle races and events – Bicycle helmet required.

The person managing, organizing, or promoting a bicycle race, tour, or event shall include notice of the bicycle helmet requirement on all promotional brochures and on all registration materials.

(Ord. No. 3465, § 1, 7-6-99)


9.41.050 Bicycle on lease or loan – Bicycle helmet to be provided.

A. Any person regularly engaged in the business of renting or loaning (e.g., “a test drive”) a bicycle for use in any public area shall have an approved bicycle helmet available, shall offer such helmet to the person renting or borrowing the bicycle, and shall retain proof that such person was offered the use of an approved bicycle helmet. 

B. Each rental or lease in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense.

(Ord. No. 3465, § 1, 7-6-99)


9.41.060 Helmet sales – Safety standards.

No person who is regularly engaged in the selling of bicycle helmets shall sell or offer for sale a bicycle helmet that does not meet or exceed the safety standards approved in KCC 9.41.020(D). Each sale in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 

(Ord. No. 3465, § 1, 7-6-99)


9.41.070 Enforcement.

A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall have committed a traffic infraction punishable by a monetary penalty in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25).

B. In the event that a person is charged with a violation of KCC 9.41.030, the court may, upon proof that the person has not been cited with a previous violation of this chapter or a similar ordinance, and upon proof that the person has obtained an approved bicycle helmet and upon presentation of a receipt therefor, may dismiss the charge.

(Ord. No. 3465, § 1, 7-6-99)


Chapter 9.42 UNLAWFUL RACE ATTENDANCE

Sections:

9.42.010    Definitions.

9.42.020    Unlawful race attendance – Prohibited.


9.42.010 Definitions.

Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section shall apply throughout this chapter.

A. Public place means an area, whether publicly or privately owned, generally open to the public and includes, without limitation, the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them, streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, and parking lots.

B. Unlawful race event means an event wherein persons willfully compare or contest relative speeds by operation of one (1) or more motor vehicles.

(Ord. No. 3557, § 1, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 3738, § 1, 4-5-05)


9.42.020 Unlawful race attendance – Prohibited. 

A. Any person (1) who has actual or constructive knowledge that he or she is in attendance of an unlawful race event and (2) who has actual or constructive knowledge that an unlawful race event is occurring, has occurred, or is about to occur, and (3) was there with the intent to observe or support or encourage the unlawful race event is guilty of a misdemeanor.

B. The circumstances which may be considered in determining whether a violation of subsection (A) of this section has occurred shall include, but not be limited to:

1. The unlawful race event occurred in a designated “No Racing Zone” as defined in KCC 9.43.030; 

2. The person is associating with persons racing in an unlawful race event;

3. The person, by admission, is in attendance of an unlawful race event with the intent to observe or support or encourage the unlawful race event;

4. Statements of other persons who are shown to be in attendance of an unlawful race event which provide evidence that the person intends to observe or support or encourage an unlawful race event;

5. The person either operates or is a passenger in a vehicle that shares the attributes of other vehicles that are in attendance of the unlawful race event or which are engaging in, about to engage in, or which have engaged in an unlawful race;

6. The person either operates or is a passenger in a vehicle which is driven in such a manner as to show evidence of an attempt to flee or escape detection when a police officer arrives on the scene of an unlawful race event; or

7. The person has no reasonable alternative purpose for being in the area in which the unlawful race event is occurring, is about to occur, or which occurred.

(Ord. No. 3557, § 1, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 3598, § 1, 4-16-02; Ord. No. 3738, § 1, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 3921, § 1, 6-16-09)


Chapter 9.43 STAY OUT OF AREAS OF RACING – SOAR

Sections:

9.43.005    Findings.

9.43.010    Stay Out of Areas of Racing – Abbreviation.

9.43.015    SOAR orders.

9.43.020    SOAR orders – Issuance.

9.43.030    SOAR orders – Designated “No Racing Zones.”

9.43.040    SOAR orders – Violation.


9.43.005 Findings.

The zones listed in KCC 9.43.030 are frequented by illegal racers and those who attend illegal races. These zones attract illegal street racers and their spectators as the roads are straight, wide, and long, and traffic during the dark hours is not heavy. It is in these zones that street racers and their spectators cause damage to pavement, curbing, and street striping. Due to the volume of people that attend illegal street races in these zones, which can number in the hundreds, adjacent private property owners suffer economic loss due to the trash, human waste, and graffiti that is left behind. Street racers also cause damage to this private property by destroying planters and vegetation and parking lot black top. In addition, due to the high volume of people who attend illegal street races, there is a severe risk of danger to the street racers and their spectators. Spectators crowd the streets as vehicles race close by at excessive speeds. This uncontrolled racing environment has been known to cause serious injuries and death around the country. The zones listed in KCC 9.43.030 suffer a much higher incidence of illegal street racing and race attendance than other zones or areas of the city. (Ord. No. 3738, § 2, 4-5-05)


9.43.010 Stay Out of Areas of Racing – Abbreviation.

As used in this title, the acronym “SOAR” represents “Stay Out of Areas of Racing.”

(Ord. No. 3557, § 2, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 3738, § 2, 4-5-05)


9.43.015 SOAR orders.

A SOAR order prohibits persons from engaging in racing or unlawful race attendance within a “No Racing Zone,” as set forth in KCC 9.43.030.

(Ord. No. 3557, § 2, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 3598, § 2, 4-16-02; Ord. No. 3738, § 2, 4-5-05)


9.43.020 SOAR orders – Issuance.

A. The municipal court may issue a SOAR order to any person charged with racing, unlawful race attendance, reckless driving associated with race activity, or trespass associated with race activity as a condition of pre-trial release, sentence, or deferred sentence.

B. A person is deemed to have notice of the SOAR order when:

1. The signature of either the person named in the order or that of his or her attorney is affixed to the bottom of the order, which signature shall signify the person named in the order has read the order and has knowledge of the contents of the order; or

2. The order recites that the person named in the order, or his or her attorney, has appeared in person before the court at the time of issuance of the order.

C. The written SOAR order shall contain the court’s directives and shall bear the statement: “Violation of this order is a criminal offense under KCC 9.43.030 and will subject the violator to arrest.”

(Ord. No. 3557, § 2, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 3738, § 2, 4-5-05)


9.43.030 SOAR orders – Designated “No Racing Zones.”

A. Designated zones. The SOAR order may apply to any of the following “No Racing Zones”:

1. 54th Avenue South from South 228th Street to the end of the road at the 22500 block.

2. 58th Place South from Russell Road to South 194th Way.

3. 59th Place South from South 212th Street to South 199th Place.

4. 62nd Avenue South from South 199th Place to South 190th Street.

5. 64th Avenue South from James Street to South 212th Street.

6. 72nd Avenue South from 220th Street to South 180th Street.

7. 76th Avenue South (signage reads 76th Avenue) from South 228th Street (signage reads 228th St.) to South 212th Street.

8. 80th Avenue South from 196th Street to South 180th Street.

9. 85th Avenue South from South 202nd Street to South 198th Street.

10. 87th Avenue South from South 208th Street to South 198th Street.

11. 89th Avenue South (signage reads 89th) from the 20400 block to South 198th Street.

12. South 180th Street from 68th Avenue South (West Valley Highway) to 84th Avenue South (East Valley Highway).

13. South 190th Street from 62nd Avenue South to 68th Avenue South.

14. South 194th Street and 58th Place South from 66th Avenue South to Russell Road.

15. South 199th Place from 59th Place South to 68th Avenue South (West Valley Highway).

16. South 202nd Street from 84th Avenue South (East Valley Highway) to 89th Avenue South.

17. South 226th Street from 54th Avenue South to 64th Avenue South.

B. Adjoining areas included. These “No Racing Zones” include any highway, as that term is defined in RCW 46.04.197, together with adjoining property areas (such as sidewalks, entryways, landscaped areas, and parking areas) if those adjoining areas are being used for racing or unlawful race attendance.

C. Posting of signs. These “No Racing Zones” shall be designated by the placement of clear and conspicuous signs at all highway entrances to the No Racing Zone. At a minimum, these signs must include the following statements: “No Racing Zone; Race Attendance Prohibited; KCC 9.42.020.”

(Ord. No. 3557, § 2, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 3598, § 3, 4-16-02; Ord. No. 3738, § 2, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 3921, § 2, 6-16-09)


9.43.040 SOAR orders – Violation. 

A. In the event a police officer has probable cause to believe that a person has been issued a SOAR order as a condition of pre-trial release or a sentence imposed by the court and, in the officer’s presence, the person is seen violating or failing to comply with any requirement or restriction set forth in the SOAR order, the officer may arrest the violator without warrant for violation of the SOAR order and shall bring that person before the court that issued the order.

B. When a SOAR order is issued pursuant to this chapter and the person so named in the order has notice of the order, a violation of any of the provisions of the SOAR order is a gross misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000) or imprisonment not to exceed more than one (1) year, or both.

(Ord. No. 3557, § 2, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 3738, § 2, 4-5-05)




Chapter 9.44 MOTORIZED WHEELED TRANSPORTATION DEVICES

Sections:

9.44.010    Definition.

9.44.020    Prohibited areas.

9.44.030    Times of operation.

9.44.040    Age of operator.

9.44.050    Helmet required.

9.44.060    Brakes required.

9.44.070    Noise.

9.44.080    No more than one (1) person permitted – Towing or pulling prohibited.

9.44.090    Operator to abide by rules applicable to bicycles.

9.44.100    Negligent operation – Prohibited.

9.44.110    Parental responsibility.

9.44.120    Recreation or entertainment business that uses motorized wheeled transportation device.

9.44.130    Violation – Penalty.


9.44.010 Definition.

For the purposes of this section, a motorized wheeled transportation device shall mean any device which has no more than two (2) wheels, is propelled by an electric or liquid fuel motor, and is intended to transport a person on or across land. A motorized wheeled transportation device shall include, but shall not be limited to, a “motorized foot scooter” as that term is defined in RCW 46.04.336, and any electric or gas powered scooter, power board, motor powered skateboard, miniature motorcycle, pocket bike, or miniature chopper, regardless of the manner in which the device is designed; provided, that a motorized wheeled transportation device shall not include any of the following as defined in the referenced RCW: 

RCW

46.04.169    Electric-assisted bicycle.

46.04.1695    Electric personal assistive mobility device. 

46.04.304    Moped. 

46.04.330    Motorcycle. 

46.04.332    Motor-driven cycle. 

46.04.415    Power wheelchair. 

46.04.710    Wheelchair conveyance. 

(Ord. No. 3707, § 1, 9-7-04)


9.44.020 Prohibited areas. 

A. The operation or use of motorized wheeled transportation devices shall not be permitted in or upon the following areas:

1. Improved or natural surface recreational trails.

2. Parks.

3. Publicly owned or operated parking lots.

4. Streets with a maximum speed limit in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour.

B. Motorized wheeled transportation devices shall not be permitted on sidewalks; provided, that motorized wheeled transportation devices may be operated upon sidewalks that are adjacent to streets that have a speed limit in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour; provided further, that when the operation of a motorized wheeled transportation device on a sidewalk is lawful, the device shall not be operated on the sidewalk at a speed in excess of five (5) miles per hour, and the operator must, at all times, yield to pedestrian or bicycle traffic.

(Ord. No. 3707, § 1, 9-7-04)


9.44.030 Times of operation. 

A. A motorized wheeled transportation device shall not be operated between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

B. A motorized wheeled transportation device operated during the “hours of darkness,” as that phrase is defined in RCW 46.04.200, shall display a white light to the front of the device that is visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet from the front of the device, and a red light on the rear of the device that is visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet from the rear of the device.

(Ord. No. 3707, § 1, 9-7-04)


9.44.040 Age of operator.

No person under the age of thirteen (13) shall operate a motorized wheeled transportation device.

(Ord. No. 3707, § 1, 9-7-04)


9.44.050 Helmet required.

Any person operating or riding upon any motorized wheeled transportation device shall, at all times, wear a “motorcycle helmet” as that term is defined in RCW 46.37.530, or an approved bicycle helmet certified by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), or the Snell foundation, and shall have the chin strap fastened securely while the motorized wheeled transportation device is in motion.

(Ord. No. 3707, § 1, 9-7-04)


9.44.060 Brakes required.

Motorized wheeled transportation devices shall be equipped with brakes that will enable the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement.

(Ord. No. 3707, § 1, 9-7-04)


9.44.070 Noise. 

A. The operation of a motorized wheeled transportation device shall be subject to the provisions of KCC 9.02.200, Public disturbance.

B. No motorized wheeled transportation device powered by a liquid fuel motor shall be operated unless such device is equipped with a properly working muffler that is designed to reduce the noise produced by the device.

(Ord. No. 3707, § 1, 9-7-04)


9.44.080 No more than one (1) person permitted – Towing or pulling prohibited.

A. No more than one person shall operate or ride upon a single motorized wheeled transportation device at the same time. In the event that more than one person operates or rides upon a single device at the same time, each person operating or riding the device shall be in violation of this section.

B. No person operating a motorized wheeled transportation device shall tow or pull another person behind such device. In the event that a person is towed or pulled behind a motorized wheeled transportation device, the person operating the motorized wheeled transportation device and the person being towed or pulled shall be in violation of this section.

(Ord. No. 3707, § 1, 9-7-04)


9.44.090 Operator to abide by rules applicable to bicycles. 

Except as provided in this chapter, every person operating a motorized wheeled transportation device upon a roadway shall have the same rights and duties as operators of bicycles.

(Ord. No. 3707, § 1, 9-7-04)


9.44.100 Negligent operation – Prohibited. 

The negligent operation of a motorized wheeled transportation device shall be prohibited. For the purposes of this section, the term negligent shall mean the failure to exercise ordinary care, and is the doing of some act that a reasonably careful person would not do under the same or similar circumstances or the failure to do something that a reasonably careful person would do under the same or similar circumstances. It is an affirmative defense to negligent operation of motorized wheeled transportation device that must be proved by the defendant by a preponderance of the evidence that the operator was operating the motorized wheeled transportation device on private property with the consent of the owner in a manner consistent with the owner’s consent.

(Ord. No. 3707, § 1, 9-7-04)


9.44.110 Parental responsibility. 

A parent or guardian who has custody of any child or ward under the age of eighteen (18) shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this section.

(Ord. No. 3707, § 1, 9-7-04)


9.44.120 Recreation or entertainment business that uses motorized wheeled transportation device.

This chapter shall not apply to any properly zoned, located, and licensed business in which motorized wheeled transportation devices are utilized for recreation or entertainment on the property of the business.

(Ord. No. 3707, § 1, 9-7-04)


9.44.130 Violation – Penalty.

A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by the imposition of a monetary penalty in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150). The court may also order a person found to have committed a civil infraction to make restitution.

A. Kent municipal court – jurisdiction. The Kent municipal court shall have jurisdiction to adjudicate, in accordance with applicable laws, any violation of this chapter; provided, that in the event jurisdiction over a juvenile lies with another court, that other court shall have jurisdiction to adjudicate the offense. 

B. Penalty – immediately payable. Whenever a monetary penalty is imposed by a court under this section, it is immediately payable. If the person is unable to pay at that time, the court may grant an extension of the time period within which the penalty may be paid. If the penalty is not paid on or before the time established for payment, the court may proceed to collect the penalty in the same manner as other civil judgments and may notify the prosecuting authority of the failure to pay.

(Ord. No. 3707, § 1, 9-7-04)

 


Title 10 HOUSING AND COMMUNITY AFFAIRS

Chapters:

10.01    Unfair Housing Practices

10.02    Rental Housing Registration and Inspection Program


Chapter 10.01 UNFAIR HOUSING PRACTICES

Sections:

10.01.010    Source of income discrimination prohibited.

10.01.020    Definitions.

10.01.030    Applicability.

10.01.040    Exceptions.

10.01.050    Penalties.

10.01.060    Appeals.


10.01.010 Source of income discrimination prohibited.

Property owners, property managers, landlords, and their agents who rent or lease dwelling units may not refuse to rent or lease a dwelling unit to any tenant or prospective tenant or otherwise discriminate or retaliate against that person solely on the basis that the person proposes to pay a portion of the rent from a “source of income” as defined in this chapter.

(Ord. No. 4233, § 1, 1-17-17)


10.01.020 Definitions.

A. “Source of income” includes income derived from social security, supplemental security income, other retirement programs, and any federal, state, local, or nonprofit-administered benefit or subsidy programs, including housing assistance, public assistance, and general assistance programs. “Source of income” does not include income derived in an illegal manner.

B. Other terms used in this chapter shall be defined as set forth in the Residential Landlord Tenant Act, Chapter 59.18 RCW.

(Ord. No. 4233, § 1, 1-17-17)


10.01.030 Applicability.

Nothing in this chapter will apply if the dwelling unit does not qualify for participation in the tenant’s “source of income” program. However, any property owner or manager that refuses to rent a dwelling unit to a person based upon the proposed use of funds from a “source of income” must notify that person in writing of the reasons why the dwelling unit is ineligible for participation in the particular “source of income” program. Refusal to allow a health and safety inspection of the property by a public housing authority will not be considered a legitimate basis for refusing to rent due to program ineligibility.

(Ord. No. 4233, § 1, 1-17-17)


10.01.040 Exceptions.

This chapter shall not:

A. Apply to the renting, leasing, or subleasing of a portion of a single-family dwelling, where the owner or person entitled to possession maintains a permanent residence, home or abode in the same dwelling, or an accessory dwelling unit; or

B. Deny any person from making a choice among prospective tenants on the basis of factors other than the source of income.

(Ord. No. 4233, § 1, 1-17-17)


10.01.050 Penalties.

A. Civil Violation.

1. The violation of any provision of this chapter is a civil violation as provided for in Chapter 1.04 KCC, for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required.

2. Any penalty due and unpaid and delinquent under this chapter will constitute a debt of the city. The city may, pursuant to Chapter 19.16 RCW, use a collection agency to collect unpaid license fees, or it may seek collection by court proceedings, which remedies shall be in addition to all other remedies.

(Ord. No. 4233, § 1, 1-17-17)


10.01.060 Appeals.

A. Any person ordered to pay a civil penalty pursuant to KCC 10.01.050 may appeal the penalty by filing with the city clerk a written appeal. Appeals shall be in writing and contain the following information:

1. Appellant’s name, address, phone number, and email address;

2. Appellant’s statement describing his or her standing to appeal;

3. Identification of the summary of decision which is the subject of the appeal;

4. Appellant’s statement of grounds for appeal and the facts upon which the appeal is based;

5. The relief sought, including the specific nature and extent; and

6. A statement affirming that the appellant has read the appeal and believes the contents to be true, followed by the appellant’s signature.

B. To be valid, the appeal must be received and date stamped by the city clerk’s office no later than 14 calendar days after the penalty was issued. The city clerk will forward all timely appeals to the economic and community development director or designee.

C. The director, or designee, will review the appeal and either affirm or repeal the order imposing the civil penalty based upon written findings of fact and conclusions of law. The director, or designee, may reduce the amount of the civil penalty upon a finding that the violation did not occur in bad faith and any known victims of the violation have been fully compensated for damages suffered as a result of the violation. The director, or designee, may request additional information necessary to make the decision and/or choose to hold an informal hearing to solicit evidence.

D. If the penalty is not repealed, the person who has been ordered to pay the civil penalty may appeal the director’s decision to the hearing examiner pursuant to the process set forth in Chapter 1.04 KCC. Appeals must be accompanied by an appeal fee as set by the city council. The city shall have the burden of proof to establish the violation by a preponderance of the evidence.

(Ord. No. 4233, § 1, 1-17-17)


Chapter 10.02 RENTAL HOUSING REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION PROGAM

Sections:

10.02.010    Purpose.

10.02.020    Applicability – Conflicts.

10.02.030    Definitions.

10.02.040    Scope.

10.02.050    Business license period – Application and relicensing – Fee.

10.02.060    Denial or revocation of business license – Appeal.

10.02.070    Certificates of inspection.

10.02.080    Notice that rental is unlawful when certificate not provided.

10.02.090    Other inspections.

10.02.100    Director is authorized to make rules.

10.02.110    Correction notice prior to enforcement.

10.02.120    Immediate health and safety threats.

10.02.130    Immunity, no warranty by city, and no private right of action.

10.02.140    Notice – Additional penalties.

10.02.150    Consistency with Chapter 59.18 RCW.


10.02.010 Purpose.

The city of Kent finds that the establishment of a rental housing registration and safety inspection program and the continuation of its rental housing business license requirements will protect the public health, safety, and welfare of tenants by encouraging the proper maintenance of rental housing by identifying and requiring correction of substandard housing conditions. By establishing this program, the city intends to prevent conditions of deterioration and blight that would adversely impact the quality of life in Kent.

(Ord. No. 4272, § 1, 3-20-18)


10.02.020 Applicability – Conflicts.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply in addition to the provisions of any other code provision or ordinance. Where there is a conflict, the more restrictive provision shall apply.

(Ord. No. 4272, § 1, 3-20-18)


10.02.030 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following words or phrases have the meaning prescribed below:

A. Accessory dwelling unit or ADU means a second, subordinate housing unit that is accessory to a single-family residence, and meets the definition and requirements of KCC 15.02.003 and 15.08.160 for accessory dwellings.

B. Building means a structure having a roof supported by columns or walls used for supporting or sheltering a use of any kind.

C. Building code means all code provisions adopted in and throughout Chapter 14.01 KCC.

D. Business license means a business license as required by Chapter 5.01 KCC.

E. Certificate of inspection means the document signed and dated by a qualified rental housing inspector and submitted to the city as the result of an inspection conducted by a qualified rental housing inspector that certifies that the residential housing units that were inspected comply with the requirements and standards of this chapter.

F. Declaration of compliance means a statement submitted to the city by the owner or the landlord that certifies that, to the best of his or her knowledge, after an onsite review of the conditions of the rental unit, each residential housing unit complies with the requirements and standards of this chapter.

G. Department means the city of Kent economic and community development department.

H. Director means the director of the economic and community development department or the director’s designee.

I. Fire code means all code provisions adopted in and throughout Chapter 13.01 KCC.

J. Landlord means the owner, lessor, or sublessor of the rental unit or the rental property of which it is a part and, in addition, means any person designated as representative of the owner, lessor, or sublessor including, but not limited to, an agent, a resident manager, or a designated property manager.

K. Mobile home means a mobile home or a manufactured home as defined in Chapter 59.20 RCW.

L. Owner has the meaning as defined in RCW 59.18.030.

M. Qualified rental housing inspector and RHI mean a private inspector who possesses at least one of the following credentials and who has been approved by the director as an RHI based on a process developed by the director consistent with the intent of this chapter:

1. American Association of Code Enforcement Property Maintenance and Housing Inspector certification;

2. International Code Council Property Maintenance and Housing Inspector certification;

3. International Code Council Residential Building Code Inspector;

4. Washington State licensed home inspector; or

5. Other acceptable credential the director establishes by rule.

N. Rental property means all residential dwelling units rented or leased on a single parcel of land managed by the same landlord.

O. Rental property complex means all residential dwelling units rented or leased on a contiguous parcel or parcels of land managed by the same landlord as a single rental complex.

P. Rental unit means a residential housing unit occupied or rented by a tenant or available for rent by a tenant.

Q. Residential housing unit means any building or part of a building in the city of Kent that is used or may be used as a home, residence, or sleeping place by one or more persons, including but not limited to single-family residences, accessory dwelling units, duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, townhouses, multifamily dwellings, apartment buildings, condominiums, and similar living accommodations.

R. Residential rental housing registration means registration required under this chapter.

S. Shelter means a facility with overnight sleeping accommodations, owned, operated, or managed by a nonprofit agency or governmental entity, the primary purpose of which is to provide temporary shelter for the homeless in general or for specific populations of the homeless.

T. Single-family residence means a single detached building containing only one residential housing unit that is completely separated by open space on all sides from any other structure, except its own garage or shed.

U. Tenant means a person entitled to occupy a residential housing unit pursuant to a rental agreement or who pays rent for occupancy or possession.

V. Transitional housing means residential housing units owned, operated, or managed by a nonprofit agency or governmental entity in which supportive services are provided to individuals or families that were formerly homeless, with the intent to stabilize them and move them to permanent housing within a period of not more than 24 months.

W. Unit unavailable for rent means a residential housing unit that is not offered or available for rent as a rental unit, and that prior to offering or making the unit available as a rental unit, the owner is required to obtain a residential rental registration for the rental property in which the unit is located and comply with applicable regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter.

(Ord. No. 4272, § 1, 3-20-18)


10.02.040 Scope.

A. Exempt residential housing units. This chapter does not apply to the following residential housing units:

1. Owner-occupied single-family residences;

2. Units unavailable for rent;

3. Housing accommodations in a hotel, motel, or other similar transient lodging;

4. Housing accommodations at an institution, whether public or private, where residence is merely incidental to detention or the provision of medical, religious, educational, recreational, or similar services, including but not limited to correctional facilities, licensed nursing homes, monasteries and convents, and hospitals;

5. Owner-occupied mobile homes or manufactured homes, both as defined in Chapter 59.20 RCW;

6. Shelters and transitional housing; and

7. Rental units that a government unit, agency, or authority owns, operates, or manages, or that are specifically exempted from such a registration requirement by state or federal law or administrative regulation. This exemption does not apply once the governmental ownership, operation, or management is discontinued.

B. Registration required.

1. No person shall make available for rent, or rent, lease, or let to the public, any residential housing unit that is not exempt under subsection (A) of this section without first registering the rental unit with the department.

2. A residential rental housing registration expires on December 31st of the calendar year following registration or renewal.

3. The residential rental housing registration is transferable to any person who has acquired ownership of a registered rental property for the unexpired portion of the one-year term for which it was issued.

4. Application. Application for a residential rental registration shall be made to the city on a form and through a process established by the director. The application shall include a declaration of compliance and such other information as required by the director in order to carry out the intent of this chapter.

5. Renewal. A residential rental registration may be renewed for the ensuing year on or before the date of the expiration of the current registration, by submitting a renewal application on a form and through a process established by the director updating the information contained in the original application.

6. Penalty. Any person who fails to properly register any residential housing unit or fails to submit the required documentation for renewal on or prior to the expiration date of the registration shall be subject to a $50 penalty.

C. License required. As a condition of operation, each and every owner or landlord renting or leasing a residential housing unit within the city limits shall, in accordance with Chapter 5.01 KCC, obtain and maintain a business license. The issuance of such a license shall be considered a privilege and not an absolute right of the landlord, and the possession of such license shall not entitle the landlord to a new business license for subsequent years.

1. Exemptions. Landlords are exempt from the requirement to obtain a business license for the following rental units:

a. Single-family residences;

b. Mobile homes or manufactured homes, both as defined in Chapter 59.20 RCW;

c. Condominiums and townhomes; and

d. All residential housing units exempt from the residential rental housing registration requirements under subsection (A) of this section.

2. Penalty for not obtaining license. In addition to the penalties set forth in Chapter 5.01 KCC, there shall be assessed a penalty of $100 per day for each day that a residential housing unit operates without a valid and current business license for the first 10 days of noncompliance with this chapter, and up to $400 per day for each day in excess of 10 days of noncompliance with this chapter.

3. Display of program information. Information regarding the rental housing and safety inspection program shall be posted on the inside of each residential housing unit or in a common area; provided, that the director may by rule establish one or more alternative or additional methods for conveying the information to tenants.

4. Declaration of compliance. As a condition to the issuance and/or renewal of a business license, an applicant shall provide a valid declaration of compliance addressing each rental unit in the rental property prior to the issuance of a license. A declaration of compliance submitted under this chapter must state that each unit complies with the requirements of this chapter and that there are no conditions presented in the units that endanger or impair the health or safety of a tenant.

(Ord. No. 4272, § 1, 3-20-18)


10.02.050 Business license period – Application and relicensing – Fee.

The business licensing period shall run from January 1st through December 31st of each year. Any application for a license required by this chapter shall be accompanied by a certificate of inspection and a fee as established in Chapter 5.01 KCC and any resolution established in accordance with that chapter. Residential rental housing business licensing applications shall comply with the requirements of KCC 5.01.090 and 5.01.110.

(Ord. No. 4272, § 1, 3-20-18)


10.02.060 Denial or revocation of business license – Appeal.

A. Denial or revocation of license. A residential rental housing business license may be denied or revoked for the following reasons:

1. Failure to obtain a certificate of inspection as required by this chapter;

2. The certificate of inspection or business license was procured by fraud or false representation of fact;

3. The applicant or registration holder has failed to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter;

4. The applicant or registration holder is in default in any fee due to the city under this chapter;

5. Any reason set forth in KCC 5.01.130;

6. The property is subject to a notice of violation for a code violation which has been deemed committed or found to have been committed pursuant to Chapter 1.04 KCC or violation of the Revised Code of Washington.

B. Process – Appeal. The denial or revocation of a residential rental housing business license shall comply with the business license revocation procedures set forth in Chapter 5.01 KCC. The denial or revocation of a business license required by this chapter may be appealed in conformance with the requirements of Chapter 5.01 KCC.

C. If a residential rental housing business license is revoked, or an application for a license is denied, the landlord will be granted a business license only after:

1. Any and all deficiencies on which the revocation or denial was based have been corrected;

2. In the event an inspection has been required, the applicant has provided to the city a valid certificate of inspection that meets the requirements of this chapter; and

3. The applicant pays a license fee as determined by ordinance.

D. Tenant relocation assistance shall be provided as required by RCW 59.18.085, and pursuant to the process set forth therein.

(Ord. No. 4272, § 1, 3-20-18)


10.02.070 Certificates of inspection.

A. All residential rental properties subject to the business license requirements of this chapter must be inspected once every three years by a qualified rental housing inspector and will require a certificate of inspection within a time period established by the director. The property selection process shall be based on a methodology determined by the director that will further the purpose of this chapter.

B. The director is authorized to create and publish a checklist to be used for declarations of compliance and inspections submitted or conducted under this chapter, and is authorized to include additional standards including, but not limited to, those within the building code, fire code, or RCW 59.18.060.

C. All certificates of inspection submitted under this chapter must state that all units subject to inspection have been inspected, and that all units inspected comply with the requirements of the checklist.

D. A certificate of inspection shall be based upon a physical inspection by the qualified rental housing inspector of the residential housing units conducted not more than 90 days prior to the date of the certificate of inspection.

E. The certificate of inspection shall list and show compliance with the minimum standards for each residential housing unit that was inspected using the checklist provided by the city and shall contain such other information as determined by the director to carry out the intent of this chapter.

F. Limitations and conditions on inspection of units for certificate of inspection.

1. The unit selection process shall be based on a methodology determined by the director that will further the purpose of this chapter.

2. The city may only require a certificate of inspection on a rental property no more frequently than once every three years in accordance with RCW 59.18.125.

3. A rental property that has received a certificate of occupancy within the last four years and has had no code violations reported on the property during that period is exempt from inspection.

4. For properties that require an inspection, the owner or landlord must send written notice of the inspection to all units at the rental property. The notice must advise tenants that some of the units at the property will be inspected and that the tenants whose units need repairs or maintenance should send written notification to the landlord as provided in RCW 59.18.070. The notice must also advise tenants that if the landlord fails to adequately respond to the request for repairs or maintenance, the tenants may contact city of Kent officials. A copy of the notice must be provided to the inspector upon request on the day of inspection.

5. If a rental property has 20 or fewer rental units, no more than four rental units at the rental property may be selected by the city to provide a certificate of inspection as long as the initial inspection reveals that no conditions exist that endanger or impair the health or safety of a tenant.

6. If a rental property has 21 or more rental units, no more than 20 percent of the units, rounded up to the next whole number, on the rental property, and up to a maximum of 50 units at any one property, may be selected by the city to provide a certificate of inspection as long as the initial inspection reveals that no conditions exist that endanger or impair the health or safety of a tenant.

7. If an owner or landlord is asked to provide a certificate of inspection for a sample of units on the rental property and a selected unit fails the initial inspection, the city may require up to 100 percent of the units on the rental property to provide a certificate of inspection.

8. If a rental property has had conditions that endanger or impair the health or safety of a tenant reported since the last required inspection, the city may require 100 percent of the units on the rental property to provide a certificate of inspection.

9. An inspector conducting an inspection under this chapter may only investigate a rental property as needed to provide a certificate of inspection.

G. Notice to tenants.

1. The landlord shall provide written notification of his or her intent to allow an inspector to enter an individual unit for the purposes of providing the city with a declaration of compliance or certificate of inspection in accordance with RCW 59.18.150(6). The written notice must indicate the date and approximate time of the inspection and the company or person performing the inspection, and that the tenant has the right to see the inspector’s identification before the inspector enters the individual unit. A copy of this notice must be provided to the inspector upon request on or before the day of inspection.

2. A tenant who continues to deny access to his or her unit is subject to the penalties in RCW 59.18.150(8).

(Ord. No. 4272, § 1, 3-20-18)


10.02.080 Notice that rental is unlawful when certificate not provided.

When a certificate of inspection or a declaration of compliance is required for a specified residential housing unit under this chapter and a valid certificate of inspection or declaration of compliance has not been provided to the city, the director is authorized to notify the owner or landlord that until a valid certificate of inspection or declaration of compliance is provided to the city, it is unlawful to rent or to allow a tenant to continue to occupy the residential housing unit. It shall be unlawful to rent or allow a tenant to occupy or continue to occupy such unit.

(Ord. No. 4272, § 1, 3-20-18)


10.02.090 Other inspections.

Nothing in this chapter precludes additional inspections conducted under RCW 59.18.150, Chapter 1.04 KCC, or at the request or consent of a tenant, pursuant to a warrant, or pursuant to the tenant remedy provided by RCW 59.18.115 of the Residential Landlord-Tenant Act.

(Ord. No. 4272, § 1, 3-20-18)


10.02.100 Director is authorized to make rules.

The director is authorized to adopt, publish, and enforce rules and regulations, consistent with this chapter and the standards in this chapter, for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter and it is unlawful to violate or fail to comply with any such rule or regulation.

(Ord. No. 4272, § 1, 3-20-18)


10.02.110 Correction notice prior to enforcement.

Before the city suspends or revokes a registration or imposes the penalties set forth in this chapter, an attempt shall be made to give the owner or landlord a written notice by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, stating the existence of a violation, that enforcement action is contemplated, and that such person shall have a specified period of time in which to correct the violation.

(Ord. No. 4272, § 1, 3-20-18)


10.02.120 Immediate health and safety threats.

Nothing in this chapter shall limit the city’s ability to inspect properties and issue citations for property-related conditions that may constitute an immediate health or safety threat.

(Ord. No. 4272, § 1, 3-20-18)


10.02.130 Immunity, no warranty by city, and no private right of action.

The purpose of this chapter is to promote the safety and welfare of the general public and not to create or designate any particular class of persons who will or should be specially protected by its terms. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended nor shall be construed to create any liability on the part of the city or its employees for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of an owner, landlord, inspector, or other individual to comply with the provisions of this chapter, or by reason or in consequence of any act or omission in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this chapter on the part of the city or its employees. By enacting and undertaking to enforce this chapter, neither the city, its agents or employees, nor the city council warrant or guarantee the safety, fitness, or suitability of any dwelling in the city or any unit inspected under this program. Owners, landlords, and occupants shall take whatever steps they deem appropriate to protect their interest, health, safety, and welfare. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to create a private right of action.

(Ord. No. 4272, § 1, 3-20-18)


10.02.140 Notice – Additional penalties.

A. Prior to imposing any penalties set forth in this chapter, the city shall provide notice and an opportunity to correct pursuant to Chapter 1.04 KCC.

B. Any person who knowingly submits or assists in the submission of a falsified certificate of inspection, or knowingly submits falsified information upon which a certificate of inspection is issued, is guilty of a gross misdemeanor and must be punished by a fine of not more than $5,000 as provided in RCW 59.18.125.

C. The penalties imposed in this chapter are not exclusive when the acts or omissions constitute a violation of another chapter of the Kent City Code. In addition to all other penalties, remedies, or other enforcement measures established within this chapter, or as otherwise provided by law, the acts or omissions that constitute violations of this chapter may be subject to penalties and enforcement provisions as provided by other chapters of the Kent City Code, and such penalties and enforcement provisions may be imposed as set forth therein. All remedies under this chapter are cumulative unless otherwise expressly stated. The exercise of one remedy shall not foreclose use of another. Remedies may be used singly or in combination; in addition, the city of Kent may exercise any rights it has at law or equity.

(Ord. No. 4272, § 1, 3-20-18)


10.02.150 Consistency with Chapter 59.18 RCW.

The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted in a manner that is consistent with the provisions of Chapter 59.18 RCW.

(Ord. No. 4272, § 1, 3-20-18)


Title 11 ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT Amended Ord. 4361

Chapters:

11.02    Environmental Review and Community Impact Mitigation

11.03    Environmental Policy Amended Ord. 4361

11.04    Shoreline Master Program

11.05    Repealed

11.06    Critical Areas 


Chapter 11.02 ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW AND COMMUNITY IMPACT MITIGATION*

Sections:

11.02.010    Purpose. 

11.02.020    Definitions. 

11.02.030    Application of chapter. 

11.02.040    Permit required. 

11.02.050    Application. 

11.02.060    Incorporation of other permit requirements. 

11.02.070    Fees designated. 

11.02.080    Violation – Penalties. 

*Cross reference(s) – Environmental mitigation fund, § 3.40.300 et seq.

State law reference(s) – Environmental policy act, RCW 43.21C.010 et seq.; siting of certain facilities, RCW 70.105.010 et seq.


11.02.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish a single permit process and annual system of fees for the siting of solid waste disposal sites and solid waste energy resource recovery or incineration facilities, and required or government ordered cleanup of solid waste or hazardous waste sites in the city.

(Ord. No. 2718, § 10. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.19.010)


11.02.020 Definitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Applicant shall mean the owner of real property upon which a remedial cleanup is to occur or property upon which a solid waste energy resource and recovery or incineration facility is sought to be located.

Application means a written request submitted under KCC 11.02.050 by the owner of real property upon which a remedial cleanup is to occur or property upon which a solid waste energy resource and recovery or incineration facility is sought to be located.

Cleanup or remedial cleanup includes all onsite and offsite remedial actions at solid waste or hazardous waste sites undertaken by any person to protect the health, safety, and welfare of citizens of the city. This term excludes routine servicing, shutdown or maintenance of solid waste or hazardous waste sites, and any solid waste energy resource and recovery or incineration facility.

Garbage means all accumulations of refuse, swill and other waste matter discarded as of no further value to the owner as defined in KCC 7.03.010.

1. Refuse means waste matter discarded as of no further value, including ashes, cinders, clinkers, lawn cuttings, grass and leaves, broken household furnishings and equipment, discarded hot water tanks, bottles, barrels, cartons, shrubs, small trees, small tree limbs, paper and scraps of wooden crates and boxes; but shall exclude large trees, earth, sand, gravel, rock, broken concrete, plaster, brick and other building materials, automobile bodies, large auto parts, building waste, fire refuse and waste.

2. Swill means all accumulations of animal, fruit, or vegetable matter, liquid or otherwise, that attends the preparation, use, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit and vegetables.

3. The term garbage excludes manure, sewage and sewage sludge, dead animals over fifteen (15) pounds and cleaning from public and private catchbasins, wash racks or sumps.

Hazardous waste means and includes all dangerous and extremely hazardous wastes as defined by RCW 70.105.010 and 70.105A.020 and as implemented in the Washington Administrative Code.

Moderate risk waste is defined to mean any waste which exhibits any of the properties of hazardous waste but is exempt from regulation under Chapters 70.105 and 70.105A RCW solely because it is generated in quantities below the threshold for regulation by the state.

Site or disposal site or facility means a landfill or disposal facility or part of a facility at which solid waste is placed in or on land and which may or may not be a land treatment facility. This term includes the location of a solid waste energy resource and recovery or incineration facility where treatment, utilization, processing or disposal of solid wastes or hazardous wastes occurs.

Solid waste shall be defined by RCW 70.95.030 and shall include “garbage” and “moderate risk waste” as defined above.

Solid waste disposal means the management, storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing and final disposal of solid wastes including the recovering and recycling of materials from solid wastes, the recovery of energy resources from such wastes or the conversion of the energy in such wastes through incineration or other methods to more useful forms or combinations thereof.

Solid waste energy resource recovery or incineration facility means reducing the volume of wastes by use of an enclosed device using controlled flame combustion for solid waste disposal.

(Ord. No. 2718, § 10. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.19.020)

Cross reference(s) – Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.01.030.


11.02.030 Application of chapter.

The city council finds that the requirements of this chapter apply only to the extent that cleanup activities at hazardous waste or solid waste sites otherwise require permits or authorizations from the city.

(Ord. No. 2908, § 1, 3-7-90)

Cross reference(s) – Solid waste, ch. 7.03.


11.02.040 Permit required.

No person shall undertake any remedial cleanup of a solid waste or hazardous waste site or undertake siting or construction of a solid waste energy resource and recovery or incineration facility without first being issued a permit from the department of public works under this chapter. Such permit incorporates for purposes of this chapter all other permit and fee requirements, except compliance with the State Environmental Policy Act, RCW 43.21C.010 et seq., the city environmental policy requirements as contained in Ch. 11.03 KCC and KCC 6.02.030 through 6.02.100 relating to public improvements. The requirements of this chapter apply only to the extent that city permits or authorizations are required by law. If no permit or authorization from the city is sought or required by law, the provisions of this section and chapter do not apply. If no additional permits or clearances are required by law from the city beyond a first issuing year, the requirements of this section and chapter shall terminate. If an application thereafter is made from the city as required by law for covered activities at such sites, computation of an annual permit fee shall be determined upon the provisions of KCC 11.02.070(2).

(Ord. No. 2718, § 10; Ord. No. 2908, § 2, 3-7-90. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.19.030)


11.02.050 Application.

To obtain a permit under this chapter, an applicant shall file an application on a form furnished by the department of public works. The application shall contain and identify the following:

1. General description of the nature and scope of work.

2. The property by a full, accurate and complete legal description and address for which the environmental cleanup and community impact mitigation permit is being sought.

3. All known or anticipated transportation routes to be utilized to and from the property.

4. The applicant’s name.

5. The contractor and subcontractors responsible for the remedial cleanup or siting or construction of the site or facility.

6. A state contractor’s number, including related state subcontractors’ numbers.

7. The city business license numbers of such contractor and subcontractors.

8. A certified copy of any final court order, administrative order or other governmental directive, whether adjudicatory, legislative or executive order, requiring the cleanup or the community impact mitigation of the specific site.

9. Any and all contract documents, including award of contract, performance bond and estimated or actual costs of cleanup or construction, including a description of any reserve or contingency fund.

10. An environmental checklist as provided in KCC 11.03.230 or WAC 197-11-960.

11. Evidence of an insurance binder with policy coverage including the city as a co-insured for purposes of public liability, bodily injury and property damage for no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence.

12. Signature of the applicant and persons who will actually be responsible for the environmental cleanup and community impact mitigation actions on and off the designated site.

(Ord. No. 2718, § 10. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.19.040)


11.02.060 Incorporation of other permit requirements.

A. An application for a permit issued under this chapter shall constitute an application for all required permits and licenses otherwise required by the city. Every permit issued by the department of public works and the planning department under the provisions of this chapter shall not excuse compliance with other substantive and procedural requirements of the code.

B. An application made under this chapter by the applicant shall be routed to the planning department, code enforcement and other appropriate departments for consolidated permit review by a permit committee co-chaired by the directors of public works and planning or designees for review and comment.

C. Upon such review, the planning director is authorized to waive, in part or in whole, substantive and procedural requirements of KCC Title 15 relating to zoning and land use upon an evaluation of the following criteria:

1. Adverse impact of substantive and procedural land use requirements upon overall cleanup project feasibility, including project costs, ability of federal, state and local enforcement agencies or owner, including project contractor, to meet cleanup deadlines and schedules and ability of owner or project contractor to meet required performance standards for cleanup.

2. Duration of cleanup activities at the cleanup site.

3. The nature of cleanup activities undertaken at the cleanup site, including the existence of an imminent or threatened release of hazardous waste into the environment and immediate need to prevent or minimize the release of hazardous waste which may cause a substantial danger to the public health or environment.

4. The degree to which such land use and zoning requirements present unusual hardships and practical difficulties inconsistent with the purposes sought in a government required cleanup of a solid waste or hazardous waste site from the strict application of such land use and zoning requirements.

5. Actual conflict of any local substantive or procedural land use requirements with federal or state requirements.

D. The planning director may grant waivers of the above-described provisions in whole or in part for the period of the permit, but, in any event, not to exceed one (1) year. Waiver renewals may thereafter be requested by an applicant in any successive permit applications submitted to the city under this chapter.

(Ord. No. 2718, § 10; Ord. No. 2745, § 3. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.19.050)


11.02.070 Fees designated.

The department of public works shall be responsible for application review, assessment of community impacts and anticipated municipal services, including but not limited to, streets, rights-of-way, water and sewage systems, stormwater drainage systems, transportation systems, emergency response plans and comprehensive land use plans. A permit fee shall be imposed annually based upon a percentage of estimated total construction or cleanup costs submitted by the applicant as follows:

1. The fee for the first or initial annual permit shall not exceed two (2) percent of the first one million dollars ($1,000,000) of the total estimated cost of cleanup or facility construction plus an additional one and one-half (1 1/2) percent of the total estimated actual costs of cleanup or facility construction over one million dollars ($1,000,000). The fee shall not, under any circumstances, exceed two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000) for the initial or first year in which the application is received.

2. Following the submission of any subsequent annual application for a permit under this chapter, the city shall establish annual permit fees based upon anticipated administrative costs and expenses which estimate the cost of continued environmental review and assessment of community impacts. Such expenses shall include but are not limited to departmental services, intergovernmental coordination, consultant fees, legal fees, equipment, supplies and recovery of administrative costs. The fee shall not exceed the estimated costs. All fees shall be paid in full prior to issuance of any permit required under this chapter. The director of public works may accept public improvements in lieu of fees pursuant to procedures provided for under procedures set forth in Ch. 6.02 KCC. Other than provisions for public improvements in lieu of fees, annual fee requirements of this chapter may be waived only by action of the city council. Except for public improvements received in lieu of fees, monies derived from both fees and charges shall be deposited in a designated environmental review and community impact mitigation fund.

(Ord. No. 2718, § 10. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.19.060)


11.02.080 Violation – Penalties.

It shall be unlawful for any person to undertake any cleanup of a solid waste or hazardous waste site or undertake the siting or construction of a solid waste energy resource and recovery or incineration facility without first having secured a permit under this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by five thousand dollars ($5,000) and imprisonment not to exceed one (1) year or both a fine and imprisonment. Each and every day during which any violation of this chapter is continued or permitted shall constitute a separate offense.

(Ord. No. 2718, § 10. Formerly Code 1986, § 4.19.070)


Chapter 11.03 ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY* Amended Ord. 4361

Sections:

Part 1. General Requirements 

11.03.010    Purpose and authority. 

11.03.020    Purpose of this part and adoption by reference. 

11.03.030    Designation of responsible official. 

11.03.040    Lead agency determination and responsibilities. 

11.03.050    Threshold determinations. 

11.03.060    Same – Submission of determination of nonsignificance, draft environmental impact statement, final environmental impact statement. 

Part 2. Categorical Exemptions and Threshold Determinations 

11.03.200    Purpose of this part and adoption by reference. 

11.03.210    Thresholds for categorical exemptions. 

11.03.215    Categorical exemptions for residential mixed use and residential infill development.

11.03.220    Use of exemptions. 

11.03.230    Environmental checklist. 

11.03.240    Mitigated determination of nonsignificance. 

Part 3. Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) 

11.03.300    Purpose of this part and adoption by reference. 

11.03.310    Preparation of environmental impact statements – Additional considerations. 

11.03.320    Using existing environmental documents. 

Part 4. Commenting 

11.03.400    Adoption by reference. 

11.03.410    Public notice. 

11.03.420    Designation of official to perform consulted agency responsibilities for the city. 

Part 5. State Environmental Policy Act and Agency Decisions 

11.03.500    Purpose of this part and adoption by reference. 

11.03.510    Substantive authority. 

11.03.520    Appeals. 

11.03.530    Record on appeal. 

11.03.540    Notice of action. 

Part 6. Definitions 

11.03.600    Purpose of this part and adoption by reference. 

11.03.610    Additional definitions. 

Part 7. Agency Compliance 

11.03.700    Purpose of this part and adoption by reference. 

11.03.710    Responsibility of agencies – State Environmental Policy Act public information. 

11.03.720    Critical areas.  Amended Ord. 4361

11.03.730    Fees. 

*Cross reference(s) – Improvement plan approval and inspection, ch. 6.03; street and curb cuts, ch. 6.06; water, ch. 7.02; solid waste, ch. 7.03; sanitary sewers, ch. 7.04; storm water and surface water utility, ch. 7.05; surface water and drainage code, ch. 7.07; waste water facilities plan, ch. 7.09; underground installation of electrical or communication facilities, ch. 7.10; cable television communications, ch. 7.12; street utility, ch. 7.14; public nuisances, ch. 8.01; litter control, ch. 8.03; noise control, ch. 8.05; rodent control, ch. 8.06; requirements and standards for subdivisions, § 12.04.430; subdivisions, ch. 12.04; mobile home parks, ch. 12.05; recreational vehicle parks, ch. 12.06; flood hazard regulations, ch. 14.09; water quality in hazard area developments, § 15.08.220; water quality in hazard area development classifications and restrictions, § 15.08.224.

State law reference(s) – Environmental policy act, RCW 43.21C.010 et seq.

PART 1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS


11.03.010 Purpose and authority.

The city adopts this chapter under the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA), RCW 43.21C.120(3) and the SEPA rules, WAC 197-11-904, as the same may be amended.

(Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.010)


11.03.020 Purpose of this part and adoption by reference.

This part contains the basic requirements that apply to the SEPA process. The city adopts the following sections and subsections of Chapter 197-11 WAC by reference:

197-11-040    Definitions.

197-11-050    Lead agency.

197-11-055    Timing of the SEPA process.

197-11-060    Content of environmental review.

197-11-070    Limitations on actions during SEPA process.

197-11-080    Incomplete or unavailable information.

197-11-090    Supporting documents.

197-11-100    Information required of applicants.

197-11-158    SEPA/GMA project review – Reliance on existing plans, laws, and regulations.

197-11-164    Planned actions – Definition and criteria.

197-11-168    Ordinances or resolutions designating planned actions – Procedures for adoption.

197-11-172    Planned actions – Project review.

197-11-210    SEPA/GMA integration.

197-11-220    SEPA/GMA definitions.

197-11-228    Overall SEPA/GMA integration procedures.

197-11-230    Timing of an integrated GMA/SEPA process.

197-11-232    SEPA/GMA integration procedures for preliminary planning, environmental analysis, and expanded scoping.

197-11-235    SEPA/GMA integration documents.

197-11-238    SEPA/GMA integration monitoring.

(Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 3424, § 7, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.100)


11.03.030 Designation of responsible official.

A. For those proposals for which the city is the lead agency, the responsible official shall be the planning director or the director’s designee.

B. The city shall retain all documents required by the SEPA rules, Chapter 197-11 WAC, and make them available in accordance with Chapter 42.56 RCW.

(Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.110)


11.03.040 Lead agency determination and responsibilities.

A. The department within the city receiving an application for or initiating a proposal that involves a nonexempt action shall determine the lead agency for that proposal under WAC 197-11-050 and WAC 197-11-922 through 197-11-944, unless the lead agency has been previously determined or the department is aware that another department or agency is in the process of determining the lead agency.

B. When the city is the lead agency for a proposal, the planning director shall determine the responsible official who shall supervise compliance with the threshold determination requirements and, if an environmental impact statement is necessary, shall supervise preparation of the environmental impact statement.

C. When the city is not the lead agency for a proposal, all departments of the city shall use and consider, as appropriate, either the determination of nonsignificance or the final environmental impact statement of the lead agency in making decisions on the proposal. No city department shall prepare or require preparation of a determination of nonsignificance or environmental impact statement in addition to that prepared by the lead agency, unless required under WAC 197-11-600. The city may conduct supplemental environmental review under WAC 197-11-600.

D. If the city or any of its departments receive a lead agency determination made by another agency that appears inconsistent with the criteria of WAC 197-11-922 through 197-11-940, it may object to the determination. Any objection must be made to the agency originally making the determination and resolved within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the determination, or the city must petition the State Department of Ecology for a lead agency determination under WAC 197-11-946 within the fifteen (15) day time period. Any such petition on behalf of the city may be initiated by the planning director.

E. Departments of the city are authorized to make agreements as to lead agency status or shared lead agency duties for a proposal under WAC 197-11-942 and 197-11-944. The responsible official and any department that will incur responsibilities as the result of such agreement must approve the agreement.

F. Any department making a lead agency determination for a private project shall require sufficient information from the applicant to identify which other agencies have jurisdiction over the proposal (that is, which agencies require nonexempt licenses).

(Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.120)


11.03.050 Threshold determinations.

A. If the city has made a determination of significance (DS) under Chapter 43.21C RCW concurrently with the notice of application, the notice of application shall be combined with the DS and scoping notice. Nothing in this section prevents a DS and scoping notice from being issued prior to a notice of application.

B. The responsible official shall, by administrative rule, adopt and make available to the public written standards for determining when an application and supporting documentation are complete. The standards adopted by the responsible official shall be consistent with any rules adopted by the State Department of Ecology pertaining to the issuance of a threshold determination.

C. Except for a DS, and except as expressly allowed by RCW 36.70B.110, Laws of 1997 Ch. 429, the city shall not issue its threshold determination until the expiration of the public comment period on a notice of application subject to the requirements of Chapter 12.01 KCC. 

(Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 3070, § 1, 10-6-92; Ord. No. 3424, § 8, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.130)


11.03.060 Same – Submission of determination of nonsignificance, draft environmental impact statement, final environmental impact statement.

A. For nonexempt proposals, the determination of nonsignificance or final environmental impact statement for the proposal shall normally accompany the city’s staff recommendations to the land use and planning board or hearing examiner. The draft environmental impact statement for a proposal may accompany the city’s staff recommendations when a hearing pursuant to WAC 197-11-535 is held.

B. For any nonexempt proposal, the applicant must submit a completed environmental checklist. A checklist shall be submitted in conjunction with a permit application and detailed plans and specifications. 

(Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 3424, § 9, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.140)

PART 2. CATEGORICAL EXEMPTIONS AND THRESHOLD DETERMINATIONS


11.03.200 Purpose of this part and adoption by reference.

This part contains the rules for deciding whether a proposal has a “probable significant, adverse environmental impact” requiring an environmental impact statement to be prepared. This part also contains rules for evaluating the impacts of proposals not requiring an environmental impact statement and rules applicable to categorical exemptions. The city adopts the following sections of the Washington Administrative Code by reference, as supplemented in this chapter:

197-11-300    Purpose of this part.

197-11-305    Categorical exemptions.

197-11-310    Threshold determination required.

197-11-315    Environmental checklist.

197-11-330    Threshold determination process.

197-11-335    Additional information.

197-11-340    Determination of nonsignificance (DNS).

197-11-350    Mitigated DNS.

197-11-355    Optional DNS process.

197-11-360    Determination of significance (DS)/initiation of scoping.

197-11-390    Effect of threshold determination.

197-11-800    Categorical exemptions.

197-11-880    Emergencies.

197-11-890    Petitioning DOE to change exemptions.

The city adopts the following section of the Revised Code of Washington by reference, as supplemented in this chapter:

43.21C.410    Battery charging and exchange station installation.

(Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 3424, § 10, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3976, § 4, 10-19-10; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.200)


11.03.210 Thresholds for categorical exemptions.

A. The city establishes the following exempt levels for minor new construction under WAC 197-11-800(1)(c) based on local conditions, for development located outside of the residential mixed use and residential infill development boundaries depicted in KCC 11.03.215(A) and the Downtown Planned Action Area adopted by Ordinance No. 4096:

1. For single-family residential dwelling units in WAC 197-11-800(1)(c): thirty (30) dwelling units or less.

2. For multifamily residential dwelling units in WAC 197-11-800(1)(c): sixty (60) dwelling units or less.

3. For agricultural structures in WAC 197-11-800(1)(c): forty thousand (40,000) square feet or less.

4. For office, school, commercial, recreational, service or storage buildings in WAC 197-11-800(1)(c): buildings of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet or less and ninety (90) or fewer parking spaces.

5. For fill or excavations in WAC 197-11-800(1)(c): one thousand (1,000) cubic yards or less.

B. Whenever the city establishes new exempt levels under this section, it shall provide the documentation and notification under WAC 197-11-800(1)(c).

C. For exempt projects, the city shall follow the cultural resource protection procedures of KCC 11.03.215(F) whether or not the proposal is considered an infill exemption.

(Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 2871, § 1, 9-19-89; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.210)


11.03.215 Categorical exemptions for residential mixed use and residential infill development.

A. Mixed use and infill development categorical exemption area designated. The city designates a categorical exemption for construction of residential developments, non-retail commercial developments less than sixty-five thousand (65,000) square feet in size, and mixed use developments under RCW 43.21C.229 in the following boundary.
[IMAGE]


B. Exempt levels of construction and trips. In order to accommodate residential mixed use and residential infill development in the mixed use and infill development categorical exemption area designated in subsection (A) of this section, the city establishes the following exempt levels for construction of residential developments and mixed use developments under RCW 43.21C.229, considered the mixed use and infill development and trip bank. 

1. Exempt levels of infill residential and mixed use development through the year 2031 are shown in the table below. No individual stand-alone non-retail commercial development shall exceed sixty-five thousand (65,000) square feet in size. 

 

	Growth Type	Base Year (2006) DSAP Study Area	Alternative 2 Moderate Growth Total (2031)	Alternative 2 – Net Growth (2031)

	Households	4,505	7,978	3,473

	Jobs1	3,184	5,507	2,323

	Total Activity Units (Jobs and Households)	7,689	13,485	5,796

1 Includes hotel rooms and university students as part of “jobs” consistent with the presentation of growth figures in the prior 2011 EIS. However, these elements make up only three (3) percent of the job totals. 

For the purposes of this section:

a. Infill means residential developments, non-retail commercial developments less than sixty-five thousand (65,000) square feet in size, and mixed use developments on unused and underutilized lands within the designated mixed use and infill development categorical exemption area.

b. Mixed use development means two (2) or more permitted uses or conditional uses developed in conjunction with one another on the same site. A mixed use development may include two (2) or more separate buildings if the requirements of this section are met; provided, that at least twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area, as defined in KCC 15.02.170, be a permitted commercial use. For mixed use development in the general commercial district, the percentage of gross floor area that must be a permitted commercial use may be reduced to five (5) percent. The residential component of any mixed use development cannot be permitted or occupied prior to the permitting and/or occupancy of the commercial component.

2. To be considered for the infill exemption, where a proposal includes the construction of a new building, the minimum height shall be two stories. The maximum height shall be consistent with those studied in the Combined DSAP Planned Action EIS and applicable in the subject zoning district.

3. For infill residential and mixed use development in the area designated in subsection (A) of this section, the city may permit up to three thousand seven hundred forty (3,740) new trips over the existing trips, consistent with Alternative 2, as established by the SEPA responsible official in the City of Kent Downtown Subarea Action Plan Planned Action Draft and Final SEIS issued June 21, 2013, and October 4, 2013, respectively.

C. Traffic analysis, concurrency, impact fees. In determining whether or not a proposal is exempt, the SEPA responsible official shall consider a traffic analysis based on the quantity of development units and the related applicable trip generation.

1. Concurrency. All exempt development applications shall meet the transportation concurrency requirements and the LOS thresholds established in Chapter 12.11 KCC, as amended by the 2008 Transportation Master Plan, and the multimodal levels of service established in the 2013 DSAP SEIS.

2. Traffic impact mitigation. Until the 2008 Transportation Master Plan and Impact Fee Ordinance are updated, infill exemption proposals shall pay their cost per trip for the street, pedestrian, and bicycle improvements identified below as part of the DSAP Study Area fee program in addition to the 2008 Transportation Master Plan and associated impact fee program, Chapter 12.14 KCC, Transportation Impact Fees.

 

Alternative 2 – Mitigation Measure Cost Estimates per Trip 

	Mitigation Measure Type	Infill Exemption Area 

3,740 Trip Growth Over Existing 

	Cost	Cost Per Trip

	Street	$7,0001	$1.87

	Pedestrian	$1,400,000	$374.33

	Bicycle	$1,428,000	$381.82

	Total	$2,835,000	$758.02

Notes:

1 The total cost of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) is shared proportionately between the Planned Action and Infill Exemption Areas according to the number of trips generated (thirty (30) percent by the Planned Action Area and seventy (70) percent by the Infill Exemption Area).

Source: Fehr & Peers, 2013

3. Impact fees. Chapter 12.14 KCC requires development to pay its fair share for capital improvement projects in the city’s Transportation Master Plan and provides guidance for how impact fees are to be assessed.

4. Discretion. The public works director or the director’s designee shall have discretion to determine incremental and total trip generation, consistent with the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual (latest edition) or an alternative manual, accepted at the director’s sole discretion, for each project permit application proposed under this section.

D. Development will be allowed under this exemption up to the point that development levels of housing, jobs, and trips have been achieved, unless denied by concurrency.

E. Parks and open space. Until such time as the city adopts a new parks and open space plan, and adopts Kent City Code amendments addressing public and private open space and recreation standards and requirements applicable to the mixed use and infill development categorical exemption area, the following mitigation measures shall apply. Following adoption of a new parks and open space plan and Kent City Code amendments such standards shall supersede the measures below.

1. Urban park space. Each infill exemption proposal shall dedicate onsite two hundred fifty (250) square feet of public park area per dwelling unit or provide a fee in lieu of dedication consistent with subsection (E)(3) of this section. 

2. Private onsite recreation and open space. Each infill exemption proposal shall provide private onsite recreation space for leisure, play, and sport activities at a ratio of two hundred (200) square feet per dwelling unit. Each residential or mixed-use development is required to provide the private space in one (1) or more of the following arrangements.

a. An individual balcony or screened patio for each unit.

b. Small, shared courtyards and a furnished children’s play area.

c. Roof-top open space – roof garden or game court.

The recreation space proposed by the applicant shall be approved by the parks and community services director. Alternatively up to fifty (50) percent of the private open space may be accomplished offsite or through a fee in lieu consistent with subsection (E)(3) of this section.

3. Through a negotiated voluntary agreement the city may allow up to fifty (50) percent of the private recreation space and up to one hundred (100) percent of the public recreation space in subsections (E)(1) and (E)(2) of this section to be: (a) accomplished offsite as approved by the parks and community services director; or (b) a fee in lieu of providing the space onsite following the procedures in KCC 12.04.065. 

F. Cultural resources. The following mitigation measures shall apply to infill exemption proposals:

1. In the event that a future development project in the study area is proposed on or immediately surrounding a site containing an archaeological resource, as defined in Chapter 27.53 RCW, the potential impacts on the archaeological resource shall be considered and, if needed, a study conducted by a professional archaeologist shall be required to be conducted at the applicant’s expense to determine whether the proposed development project would materially impact the archaeological resource.

2. If the impacts on archaeological resources cannot be avoided, the city shall require that an applicant obtain all appropriate permits consistent with state and federal laws and that any required archaeological studies are completed before permitting any project that would disturb archaeological resource(s). Under Chapter 27.53 RCW, a permit must be obtained from the Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation (DAHP) prior to disturbing a known archaeological resource or site. The avoidance of archaeological resources through selection of project alternatives and changes in design of project features in the specific area of the affected resource(s) would eliminate the need for measuring or mitigating impacts.

3. Developers and property owners shall immediately stop work and notify the city, DAHP and affected tribes if archaeological resources are uncovered during excavation. Following such notification, the city may require implementation of subsections (F)(1) and (F)(2) of this section.

4. If impacts cannot be avoided on a historic resource that is determined eligible for listing on either state or national historic registers, the applicant shall consult with DAHP regarding mitigation options and shall provide documentation of consultation to the city.

5. To include DAHP in the review of historic properties within the infill exemption area, the city will notify the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) regarding proposals involving eligible or designated historic properties through the evaluation of proposals consistent with Chapter 12.01 KCC.

G. Water quality. By December 31, 2016, regulations will be in place to address water quality treatment and promote low impact development measures that are equivalent to the 2012 Department of Ecology Western Washington Stormwater Management Manual. Prior to 2016, the city shall require that applicants identify any low impact development (LID) techniques described in the 2012 Ecology manual and demonstrate why unincorporated LID techniques are not feasible. As part of required land use, building, or construction permits, the city may condition applications to incorporate feasible and site-appropriate LID techniques.

H. Air quality control plans. The city shall require all construction contractors to implement air quality control plans for construction activities. The air quality control plans will include best management practices (BMPs) to control fugitive dust and odors emitted by diesel construction equipment, including but not limited to the following measures:

1. Develop a fugitive dust control plan.

2. Use water sprays or other non-toxic dust control methods on unpaved roadways.

3. Minimize vehicle speed while traveling on unpaved surfaces.

4. Prevent track out of mud onto public streets.

5. Cover soil piles when practical.

6. Minimize work during periods of high winds when practical. 

7. Maintain the engines of construction equipment according to manufacturers’ specifications.

8. Minimize idling of equipment while the equipment is not in use.

9. Burning of slash or demolition debris will not be permitted without express approval from the Puget Sound Clean Air Agency (PSCAA). No slash burning is anticipated for any construction projects in the study area.

I. Greenhouse gas reduction. Infill exemption applicants shall identify the greenhouse gas reduction measures that are being implemented in their projects, and explain why other measures listed in the 2011 City of Kent Comprehensive Plan Review and Midway Subarea Planned Action EIS are not included or are not applicable. The city shall, as appropriate, condition infill exemption applications to incorporate reduction measures determined by the city to be feasible and appropriate for site conditions, based on the development application.

J. Solar access for public pedestrian spaces, pedestrian/bicycle pathways, parks, schools and other areas sensitive to shading shall be preserved by requiring upper-story or ground-level setbacks for adjacent development. To the greatest extent possible, new development shall minimize casting shadows on public spaces during their primary hours of daytime use.

K. The city may condition infill exemption proposals to incorporate site design measures that preserve significant public views from public areas.

L. Infill exemptions shall comply with the following noise mitigation measures:

1. To reduce construction noise at nearby receptors, the following mitigation measures shall be incorporated into construction plans and contractor specifications:

a. Locating stationary equipment away from receiving properties to decrease noise from that equipment.

b. Erecting portable noise barriers around loud stationary equipment located near sensitive receivers to reduce noise.

c. Limiting construction activities between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. to avoid sensitive nighttime hours.

d. Turning off idling construction equipment to eliminate unnecessary noise. 

e. Requiring contractors to rigorously maintain all equipment to potentially reduce noise effects.

f. Training construction crews to avoid unnecessarily loud actions (e.g., dropping bundles of rebar onto the ground or dragging steel plates across pavement) near noise-sensitive areas to reduce noise effects.

2. At its discretion, the city may require all prospective infill exemption developers to use low-noise mechanical equipment adequate to ensure compliance with the city’s daytime and nighttime noise ordinance limits. Depending on the nature of the proposed development, the city may require the developer to conduct a noise impact study to forecast future noise levels and to specify appropriate noise control measures. 

3. To address traffic and transit noise, the city may, at its discretion, require new residential development to install triple-pane glass windows or other building insulation measures using its authority under the Washington State Energy Code (KCC 14.01.010).

M. Exemption procedure. Upon approval of the proposal according to the provisions of Chapter 12.01 KCC, the SEPA responsible official shall remove dwellings, jobs, and trips from the levels specified in subsections (B)(1) and (B)(3) of this section. These exempt levels are not applicable once the total available units, jobs, or trips have been utilized.

N. General monitoring. The SEPA responsible official will monitor the total development approved as part of the development approval process for any development in the area designated in subsection (A) of this section, whether considered exempt or not, in order to ensure that the available units, square feet, and trips cumulatively address growth planned for the designated mixed use and infill development categorical exemption area.

(Ord. No. 4097, § 3, 12-10-13; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14)


11.03.220 Use of exemptions.

A. Each department within the city that receives an application for a license or, in the case of governmental proposals, the department initiating the proposal, shall determine whether the license and/or the proposal is exempt. The department’s determination that a proposal is exempt shall be final and not subject to administrative review. If a proposal is exempt, none of the procedural requirements of this chapter apply to the proposal. The city shall not require completion of an environmental checklist for an exempt proposal.

B. In determining whether or not a proposal is exempt, the department shall make certain the proposal is properly defined and shall identify the governmental licenses required (WAC 197-11-060). If a proposal includes exempt and nonexempt actions, the department shall determine the lead agency, even if the license application that triggers the department’s consideration is exempt.

C. If a proposal includes both exempt and nonexempt actions, the city may authorize exempt actions prior to compliance with the procedural requirements of this chapter, except that:

1. The city shall not give authorization for:

a. Any nonexempt action;

b. Any action that would have an adverse environmental impact; or

c. Any action that would limit the choice of reasonable alternatives.

2. A department may withhold approval of an exempt action that would lead to modification of the physical environment, when such modification would serve no purpose if nonexempt actions were not approved; and

3. A department may withhold approval of exempt actions that would lead to substantial financial expenditures by a private applicant when the expenditures would serve no purpose if nonexempt actions were not approved.

D. The city may authorize a categorical exemption for residential mixed use, non-retail commercial space, and residential infill development for specifically designated portions of the Downtown Subarea Action Plan area pursuant to KCC 11.03.215.

(Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 4097, § 4, 12-10-13; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.220)


11.03.230 Environmental checklist.

A. A completed environmental checklist or a copy in the form provided in WAC 197-11-960 shall be filed in conjunction with an application for a permit, license, certificate or other approval not specifically exempted in this chapter; except, a checklist is not needed if the city and the applicant agree that an environmental impact statement is required, SEPA compliance has been completed or SEPA compliance has been initiated by another agency. The city shall use the environmental checklist to determine the lead agency and, if the city is the lead agency, for determining the responsible official and for making the threshold determination.

B. For private proposals, the city will require the applicant to complete the environmental checklist, providing assistance as necessary. For city proposals, the department initiating the proposal shall complete the environmental checklist for that proposal.

C. The city may assist the applicant in completing the environmental checklist for a private proposal, if either of the following occurs:

1. The city has technical information on a question or questions that is unavailable to the private applicant; or

2. The applicant has provided inaccurate information on previous proposals or on proposals currently under consideration.

D. For projects submitted as planned actions under WAC 197-11-164, the city shall use its existing environmental checklist form or may modify the environmental checklist form as provided in WAC 197-11-315. If a modified form is prepared, it must be sent to the Department of Ecology to allow at least a thirty (30) day review prior to use and the city shall:

1. Develop a modified environmental checklist form and adopt it along with or as part of a planned action ordinance; or

2. Develop a modified environmental checklist form and send it to the Department of Ecology.

(Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 3424, § 11, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.230)


11.03.240 Mitigated determination of nonsignificance.

A. As provided in this section and in WAC 197-11-350, the responsible official may issue a determination of nonsignificance based on conditions attached to the proposal by the responsible official or on changes to or clarifications of the proposal made by the applicant.

B. An applicant may request in writing early notice of whether a determination of significance is likely under WAC 197-11-350. The request must:

1. Follow submission of a project permit application and an environmental checklist for a nonexempt proposal for which the department is the lead agency and include detailed site plans and a description of the proposal; or

2. Follow a pre-application conference; 

3. Precede the city’s actual threshold determination for the proposal; and

4. State that the applicant may change or clarify the proposal to mitigate the indicated impacts, revising the environmental checklist and/or project permit application as necessary to reflect the changes or clarifications.

5. The responsible official should respond to the request for early notice within thirty (30) working days. The response shall:

a. Be written;

b. State whether the city currently considers issuance of a DS likely and, if so, indicate the general or specific area(s) of concern that is/are leading the city to consider a DS; and

c. State that the applicant may change or clarify the proposal to mitigate the indicated impacts, revising the environmental checklist and/or permit application as necessary to reflect the changes or clarifications.

C. As much as possible, the city should assist the applicant with identification of impacts to the extent necessary to formulate mitigation measures.

D. When an applicant submits a changed or clarified proposal, along with a revised environmental checklist, the city shall base its threshold determination on the changed or clarified proposal and should make the determination in accordance with the timing requirements of Chapter 12.01 KCC. 

1. If the city indicates in writing specific mitigation measures which will allow it to issue a determination of nonsignificance in its response to the request for early notice, and the applicant changes or clarifies the proposal to include those specific mitigation measures, the city shall issue and circulate a determination of nonsignificance under WAC 197-11-340(2). This section shall not be construed so as to interfere with the city council’s ability to impose conditions on a project or application for which it is the final decision maker.

2. If the city indicated areas of concern, but did not indicate specific mitigation measures that would allow it to issue a determination of nonsignificance, the city shall make the threshold determination, issuing a determination of nonsignificance or determination of significance, as appropriate.

3. The applicant’s proposed mitigation measures (clarifications, changes or conditions) must be in writing and must be specific. For example, proposals to “control noise” or “prevent storm water run-off” are inadequate, whereas proposals to “muffle machinery to X decibel” or “construct two hundred (200) foot storm water retention pond at Y location” are adequate.

4. Mitigation measures which justify issuance of a mitigated determination of nonsignificance may be incorporated in the determination of nonsignificance by reference to agency staff reports, studies or other documents.

E.  A mitigated DNS is issued under either WAC 197-11-340(2), requiring a fourteen (14) calendar day comment period and public notice, or WAC 197-11-355(5), which may require no additional comment period beyond the comment period on the notice of application.

F. Mitigation measures incorporated in the mitigated determination of nonsignificance shall be deemed conditions of approval of the permit decision and may be enforced in the same manner as any term or condition of the permit or enforced in any manner specifically prescribed by the city.

G. If the city’s tentative decision on a permit or approval does not include mitigation measures that were incorporated in a mitigated determination of nonsignificance for the proposal, the city should evaluate the threshold determination to assure consistency with WAC 197-11-340(3)(a) regarding withdrawal of determination of nonsignificance.

H. The city’s written response under subsection (D)(2) of this section shall not be construed as a determination of significance. In addition, preliminary discussion of clarifications or changes to a proposal, as opposed to a written request for early notice, shall not bind the city to consider the clarifications or changes in its threshold determination.

(Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 3424, § 12, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.240)

PART 3. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT (EIS)


11.03.300 Purpose of this part and adoption by reference.

This part contains the rules for preparing environmental impact statements. The city adopts the following sections of the Washington Administrative Code by reference, as supplemented by this part:

197-11-400     Purpose of EIS.

197-11-402     General requirements.

197-11-405     EIS types.

197-11-406     EIS timing.

197-11-408     Scoping.

197-11-410     Expanded scoping.

197-11-420     EIS preparation.

197-11-425     Style and size.

197-11-430     Format.

197-11-435     Cover letter or memo.

197-11-440     EIS contents.

197-11-442     Contents of EIS on nonproject proposals.

197-11-443     EIS contents when prior nonproject EIS.

197-11-444     Elements of the environment.

197-11-448     Relationship of EIS to other considerations.

197-11-455     Issuance of DEIS.

197-11-460     Issuance of FEIS.

(Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.300)


11.03.310 Preparation of environmental impact statements – Additional considerations.

A. Preparation of draft and final environmental impact statements (DEISs and FEISs) and draft and final supplemental environmental impact statements (SEISs) is the responsibility of the economic and community development department under the direction of the responsible official. Before the city issues an environmental impact statement, the responsible official shall be satisfied that it complies with this chapter and Chapter 197-11 WAC.

B. The DEIS and FEIS or draft and final SEIS shall be prepared by city staff, the applicant, a consultant selected by the city at the applicant’s request, or a consultant selected by the applicant with confirmation of the economic and community development department. The responsible official shall notify the applicant of the city’s procedure for EIS preparation, including approval of the DEIS and FEIS prior to distribution.

C. The city may require an applicant to provide information the city does not possess, including specific investigations. However, the applicant is not required to supply information that is not required under this chapter or that is being requested from another agency. This does not apply to information the city may request under another ordinance or statute.

D. A DEIS and FEIS shall be completed within one (1) year of the scoping meeting or as otherwise agreed to by the applicant.

(Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 3424, § 13, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.310)


11.03.320 Using existing environmental documents.

The rules for using and supplementing existing environmental documents prepared under the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) or the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) for the city’s own environmental compliance are contained in this section. The city adopts the following sections of the Washington Administrative Code by reference:

197-11-600     When to use existing environmental documents.

197-11-610     Use of NEPA documents.

197-11-620     Supplemental environmental impact statement – Procedures.

197-11-625     Addenda – Procedures.

197-11-630     Adoption – Procedures.

197-11-635     Incorporation by reference – Procedures.

197-11-640     Combining documents.

(Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.320)

PART 4. COMMENTING


11.03.400 Adoption by reference.

This part contains rules for consulting, commenting, and responding on all environmental documents under the State Environmental Policy Act, including rules for public notice and hearings. The city adopts the following sections of the Washington Administrative Code by reference, as supplemented in this part:

197-11-500     Purpose of this part.

197-11-502     Inviting comment.

197-11-504     Availability and cost of environmental documents.

197-11-535     Public hearings and meetings.

197-11-545     Effect of no comment.

197-11-550     Specificity of comments.

197-11-560     FEIS response to comments.

197-11-570     Consulted agency costs to assist lead agency.

(Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.400)


11.03.410 Public notice.

A. Whenever the city issues a determination of nonsignificance under WAC 197-11-340(2), a determination of significance under WAC 197-11-360, an addendum to any existing environmental document or any existing environmental document as defined in KCC 11.03.320, the city shall give public notice as follows:

1.  If a SEPA document is issued concurrently with the notice of application, the public notice requirements for the notice of application will suffice to meet the SEPA public notice requirements.

2. If no public notice is otherwise required for the permit or approval, the city shall give notice of the DNS or DS by:

a. Posting the property for site specific proposals;

b. Publishing notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the county, city or general area where the proposal is located; and

c. Notifying all parties of record, any individual or group which has appeared at a city of Kent public hearing relating specifically to the issue of environmental review or submitted comments on a certain proposal.

3. Whenever the city issues a DS under WAC 197-11-360, the city shall state the scoping procedure of the proposal in the DS as required in WAC 197-11-408 and in the public notice.

B. Whenever the city issues a DEIS under WAC 197-11-455 or a SEIS under WAC 197-11-620, notice of the availability of those documents shall be given by indicating the availability of the DEIS in any public notice required for a nonexempt license, and the following additional methods:

1. Posting the property for site specific proposals;

2. Publishing notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the county, city or general area where the proposal is located; and

3. Notifying all parties of record, any individual or group which has appeared at a city of Kent public hearing relating specifically to the issue of environmental review or has expressed interest in a certain proposal.

C. Whenever possible, the city shall integrate the public notice required under this section with existing notice procedures for the city’s nonexempt permits or approvals required for the proposal.

D. If any costs are incurred beyond the initial notice of the department’s action, as provided in subsection (A)(2) of this section, the city may require an applicant to complete the public notice requirements for the applicant’s proposal at his expense.

(Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 3141, § 1, 11-2-93; Ord. No. 3424, § 14, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.410)


11.03.420 Designation of official to perform consulted agency responsibilities for the city.

A. The planning director shall be responsible for preparation of written comments for the city in response to a consultation request prior to a threshold determination, participation in scoping or reviewing a draft environmental impact statement.

B. The planning director shall be responsible for the city’s compliance with WAC 197-11-550 whenever the city is a consulted agency and is authorized to develop operating procedures that will ensure that responses to consultation requests are prepared in a timely fashion and include data from all appropriate departments of the city.

(Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.420)

PART 5. STATE ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY ACT AND AGENCY DECISIONS


11.03.500 Purpose of this part and adoption by reference.

This part contains the rules and policies for the State Environmental Policy Act substantive authority, such as decisions to mitigate or reject proposals as a result of State Environmental Policy Act. This part also contains procedures for appealing State Environmental Policy Act determinations to agencies or the courts. The city adopts the following sections of the Washington Administrative Code by reference:

197-11-650    Purpose of this part.

197-11-655     Implementation.

197-11-660     Substantive authority and mitigation.

197-11-680     Appeals.

(Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.500)


11.03.510 Substantive authority.

A. The policies and goals set forth in this chapter are supplementary to those in the existing authorization of the city.

B. The city may attach conditions to a permit or approval for a proposal so long as:

1. Such conditions are necessary to mitigate specific probable significant adverse environmental impacts identified in environmental documents prepared pursuant to this chapter;

2. Such conditions are in writing;

3. The mitigation measures included in such conditions are reasonable and capable of being accomplished;

4. The city has considered whether other local, state, or federal mitigation measures applied to the proposal are sufficient to mitigate the identified impacts; and

5. Such conditions are based on one (1) or more laws or regulations as provided in this chapter and subsection (D) of this section and identified in writing in the license or other decision document.

C. The city may deny a permit or approval for a proposal on the basis of the State Environmental Policy Act so long as:

1. A finding is made that approving the proposal would result in probable significant adverse environmental impacts that are identified in a final environmental impact statement or final supplementary environmental impact statement prepared pursuant to this chapter;

2. A finding is made that there are no reasonable mitigation measures capable of being accomplished that are sufficient to mitigate the identified impact; and

3. The denial is based on one (1) or more policies identified in subsection (D) of this section and identified in writing in the license or other decision document.

D. The city designates and adopts by reference the following additional policies as the basis for the city’s exercise of authority pursuant to this section:

1. The city shall use all practicable means, consistent with other essential considerations of state policy, to improve and coordinate plans, functions, programs and resources to the end that the state and its citizens may:

a. Fulfill the responsibilities of each generation as trustee of the environment for succeeding generations;

b. Assure for all people of the state safe, healthful, productive and aesthetically and culturally pleasing surroundings;

c. Attain the widest range of beneficial uses of the environment without degradation, risk to health or safety or other undesirable and unintended consequences;

d. Preserve important historic, cultural and natural aspects of our national heritage;

e. Maintain, wherever possible, an environment which supports diversity and variety of individual choice;

f. Achieve a balance between population and resource use which will permit high standards of living and a wide sharing of life’s amenities; and

g. Enhance the quality of renewable resources and approach the maximum attainable recycling of depletable resources.

2. The city recognizes that each person has a fundamental and inalienable right to a healthful environment and that each person has a responsibility to contribute to the preservation and enhancement of the environment.

3. The city adopts by reference the policies in the following city codes, ordinances, and resolutions:

a. The citywide comprehensive plan as prepared and adopted pursuant to the State Growth Management Act and adopted on April 18, 1995, by the Kent city council by Ordinance 3222 and its specific components and elements, and including all amendments thereto.

b. Shoreline master program as adopted by the Washington State Department of Ecology on June 16, 1992, and as adopted by the Kent city council on July 21, 1992, by Ordinance 3056 and including all amendments thereto.

c. The surface water and drainage code, Chapter 7.07 KCC and including all amendments thereto.

d. Underground installation of electrical or communications facilities, Chapter 7.10 KCC and including all amendments thereto.

e. Transportation master plan (Resolution 1014 and amended by Resolution 1032) and Green River Valley transportation action plan (Resolution 1127) as may hereafter be amended and including all amendments thereto.

f. Wastewater facilities master plan, Chapter 7.09 KCC and including all amendments thereto.

g. Comprehensive water plan (Ordinances 2829 and 2960) and conservation element (Resolution 1361) and including all amendments thereto.

h. Construction standards for public works, KCC 6.02.010 and 6.02.020 (Ordinance 3117) and including all amendments thereto.

i. Street use permit requirements, Chapter 6.07 KCC and including all amendments thereto.

j. Flood hazard protection, Chapter 14.09 KCC and including all amendments thereto.

k. Subdivisions, Chapter 12.04 KCC and including all amendments thereto.

l. Mobile home parks, Chapter 12.05 KCC and including all amendments thereto.

m. Valley studies (as adopted in Resolutions 920, 921, 922, 923, and 924).

n. Noise control, Chapter 8.05 KCC and including all amendments thereto.

o. State building code, together with the local implementing ordinances, KCC Title 14 and including all amendments thereto.

p. State fire code, together with the local implementing ordinances, KCC Title 13 and including all amendments thereto.

q. Zoning, KCC Title 15 and including all amendments thereto.

r. Recreational vehicle park, Chapter 12.06 KCC and including all amendments thereto.

s. Water shortage emergency regulations, Chapter 7.13 KCC and Water Conservation Ordinance 2227 and including all amendments thereto.

t. Required public improvements, Chapters 6.02 and 6.03 KCC and including all amendments thereto.

u. Storm and surface water drainage utility, Chapter 7.05 KCC and including all amendments thereto.

v. Storm drainage policies (Ordinance 2547) and including all amendments thereto.

w. Six (6) year transportation improvement plan (Resolution 1444) and including all amendments thereto.

x. Comprehensive sewerage plan (Resolution 915) and including all amendments thereto.

y. Fire master plan (Ordinance 2511) and including all amendments thereto.

z. Critical areas, Chapter 11.06 KCC and including all amendments thereto.

(Ord. No. 2329; Ord. No. 2369; Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 2511; Ord. No. 2547, § 4; Ord. No. 2818, § 2, 11-1-88; Ord. No. 3282, § 1, 3-19-96; Ord. No. 3573, § 1, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 3746, § 1, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.510)


11.03.520 Appeals.

A. Administrative appeals. The city establishes the following administrative appeal procedures under RCW 43.21C.075 and WAC 197-11-680:

1. Procedural appeals.

a. Any party of record may appeal the city’s procedural compliance with Chapter 197-11 WAC for issuance of the following:

i. A final determination of nonsignificance: Appeal of the DNS must be made to the hearing examiner within fourteen (14) calendar days of the date the determination of nonsignificance is final. Notice of the issuance of a final DNS shall be provided in accordance with KCC 11.03.410(A)(2). Except as provided in subsection (A)(1)(a)(iii) of this section, the appeal shall be consolidated with any hearing or appeal of the underlying permit.

ii. A determination of significance: Appeal of the DS must be made to the hearing examiner within fourteen (14) calendar days of the date the determination of significance is issued. Notice of the issuance of a determination of significance shall be provided in accordance with KCC 11.03.410(A)(2). An appeal is not required to be consolidated with a hearing or appeal on the underlying permit.

iii. Agency action: An appeal is not required to be consolidated with a hearing or appeal on the underlying permit if it is an appeal (A) of a procedural determination made by the city when the city is the project proponent, or is funding a project, and chooses to conduct its review under SEPA, including any appeals of its procedural determinations, prior to submitting an application for a project permit; (B) of a procedural determination made by an agency on a nonproject action; and (C) to the city council under RCW 43.21C.060 or other applicable state statute.

b. The decision of the land use hearing examiner shall be final, pursuant to RCW 43.21C.075(3)(a). No right to appeal the decision of the hearing examiner is granted by this section.

c. The procedural determination by the city’s responsible official shall carry substantial weight in any appeal proceeding.

2. Substantive appeals. There shall be no administrative appeal when any proposal or action is conditioned or denied on the basis of State Environmental Policy Act by a nonelected official.

3. No other appeal provided. Except as provided in subsection (A)(1) of this section, or as otherwise provided by law, no right to appeal is created by this section.

B. Judicial appeals.

1. No right to judicial review or appeal, which does not now exist, is created by this chapter. The decision by the city to issue or deny nonexempt permits or licenses shall be final. As authorized in RCW 43.21C.075(5), judicial review with superior court must be sought within twenty-one (21) calendar days of the issuance or denial of the permit or license, if at all, by an aggrieved party or person. RCW 43.21C.075(5).

2. The city shall give official notice under WAC 197-11-680(5) whenever it issues a permit or approval for which a statute or ordinance establishes a time limit for commencing judicial review.

(Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 3424, § 15, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3574, § 2, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.520)


11.03.530 Record on appeal.

A. Any judicial appeal under this chapter shall be on the record. The city shall provide for a record consisting of the following:

1. Findings and conclusions;

2. Testimony under oath; and

3. A taped or written transcript.

B. The cost of providing a taped or written transcript shall be borne by an appellant.

(Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.530)


11.03.540 Notice of action.

A. The city, applicant or proponent of an action may publish a notice of action pursuant to RCW 43.21C.080 for any action.

B. The form of the notice shall be substantially in the form provided in WAC 197-11-990. The notice shall be published by the city clerk or the responsible official pursuant to RCW 43.21C.080. An applicant’s request for publication shall include payment of the costs associated with such notice.

(Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.540)

PART 6. DEFINITIONS


11.03.600 Purpose of this part and adoption by reference.

This part contains uniform usage and definitions of terms under State Environmental Policy Act. The city adopts the following sections by reference, as supplemented by WAC 173-806-040.

197-11-700     Definitions.

197-11-702     Act.

197-11-704     Action.

197-11-706     Addendum.

197-11-708     Adoption.

197-11-710     Affected tribe.

197-11-712     Affecting.

197-11-714     Agency.

197-11-716     Applicant.

197-11-718     Built environment.

197-11-720     Categorical exemption.

197-11-721    Closed record appeal.

197-11-722     Consolidated appeal.

197-11-724     Consulted agency.

197-11-726     Cost-benefit analysis.

197-11-728     County/city.

197-11-730     Decision maker.

197-11-732     Department.

197-11-734     Determination of nonsignificance (DNS).

197-11-736     Determination of significance (DS).

197-11-738     Environmental impact statement (EIS).

197-11-740     Environment.

197-11-742     Environmental checklist.

197-11-744     Environmental document.

197-11-746     Environmental review.

197-11-750     Expanded scoping.

197-11-752     Impacts.

197-11-754     Incorporation by reference.

197-11-756     Lands covered by water.

197-11-758     Lead agency.

197-11-760     License.

197-11-762     Local agency.

197-11-764     Major action.

197-11-766     Mitigated DNS.

197-11-768     Mitigation.

197-11-770     Natural environment.

197-11-772     National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA).

197-11-774     Nonproject.

197-11-775    Open record hearing.

197-11-776     Phased review.

197-11-778     Preparation.

197-11-780     Private project.

197-11-782     Probable.

197-11-784     Proposal.

197-11-786     Reasonable alternative.

197-11-788     Responsible official.

197-11-790     State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA).

197-11-792     Scope.

197-11-793     Scoping.

197-11-794     Significant.

197-11-796     State agency.

197-11-797     Threshold determination.

197-11-799     Underlying governmental action.

(Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 3424, § 16, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.600)

Cross reference(s) – Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.01.030.


11.03.610 Additional definitions.

In addition to those definitions contained within WAC 197-11-700 through 197-11-799, when used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context indicates otherwise:

Day or calendar day. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this chapter, if the last day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday the period shall run until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday.

Department means any division, subdivision or organizational unit of the city established by ordinance, rule, or order.

Early notice means the city’s response to an applicant stating whether it considers issuance of a determination of significance likely for the applicant’s proposal (mitigated NS procedures).

Ordinance means the ordinance, resolution, or other procedure used by the city to adopt regulatory requirements.

Site plan means a vicinity map and diagram, showing north arrow, scale, any significant manmade or natural features such as creeks, wetlands or steep slopes, dimensions of the lot, shape of the lot, location and size of existing and proposed buildings and development, adjacent streets, and points of ingress and egress.

State Environmental Policy Act rules means Chapter 197-11 WAC adopted by the State Department of Ecology.

(Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.610)

Cross reference(s) – Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.01.030.

PART 7. AGENCY COMPLIANCE


11.03.700 Purpose of this part and adoption by reference.

This part contains rules for the city’s compliance with the State Environmental Policy Act, including rules for charging fees, categorical exemptions that do not apply within critical areas, listing agencies with environmental expertise, selecting the lead agency and applying these rules to current agency activities. The city adopts the following sections of the Washington Administrative Code by reference:

197-11-900     Purpose of this part.

197-11-902     Agency State Environmental Policy Act policies.

197-11-916     Application to ongoing actions.

197-11-920     Agencies with environmental expertise.

197-11-922     Lead agency rules.

197-11-924     Determining the lead agency.

197-11-926     Lead agency for governmental proposals.

197-11-928     Lead agency for public and private proposals.

197-11-930     Lead agency for private projects with one (1) agency with jurisdiction.

197-11-932     Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from more than one (1) agency, when one (1) of the agencies is a county/city.

197-11-934     Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from a local agency, not a county/city, and one (1) or more state agencies.

197-11-936     Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from more than one (1) state agency.

197-11-938     Lead agencies for specific proposals.

197-11-940     Transfer of lead agency status to a state agency.

197-11-942     Agreements on lead agency status.

197-11-944     Agreements on division of lead agency duties.

197-11-946     DOE resolution of lead agency disputes.

197-11-948     Assumption of lead agency status.

(Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 3424, § 17, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.700)


11.03.710 Responsibility of agencies – State Environmental Policy Act public information.

A. The city shall retain all documents required by the State Environmental Policy Act rules, Chapter 197-11 WAC, and make them available in accordance with Chapter 42.56 RCW.

B. The following location constitutes the city State Environmental Policy Act public information center:

Economic and Community Development Department, Permit Center

Kent City Hall

Centennial Center

400 West Gowe Street

Kent, WA 98032-5895

Telephone: (253) 856-5300

C. All reasonable means will be used to make the existence and location of the city’s State Environmental Policy Act public information center known to both the public generally and the employees of the city.

D. The State Environmental Policy Act public information center shall contain the documents and provide the services required by this section.

(Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.710)


11.03.720 Critical areas. Amended Ord. 4361

Critical or environmentally sensitive areas, as defined in Chapter 11.06 KCC:

A. WAC 197-11-908 is hereby adopted by reference.

B. Wetlands, as defined under KCC 11.06.530, the wetlands inventory, the maps filed under KCC 11.06.050, entitled critical areas maps, and the special flood hazard areas as described in KCC 14.09.060 designate the location of critical areas within the city and are adopted by reference. Within those critical areas, the exemptions of WAC 197-11-800 which are inapplicable are (1), (2)(a) through (i), (3), (6)(d), (23)(a) through (g). Unidentified exemptions shall continue to apply within critical areas of the city.

C. The scope of environmental review of actions within these areas shall be limited to:

1. Documenting whether the proposal is consistent with the requirements of the critical areas ordinance; and

2. Evaluating potentially significant impacts on the critical area resources not adequately addressed by GMA planning documents and development regulations, if any, including any additional mitigation measures needed to protect the critical areas in order to achieve consistency with SEPA and with other applicable environmental review laws.

3. All other categorical exemptions apply whether or not the proposal will be located in a critical area.

(Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 2544, § 7; Ord. No. 3424, § 18, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.715)


11.03.730 Fees.

The city shall require the following fees for its activities in accordance with the provisions of this chapter:

1. Threshold determination. For every environmental checklist the city will review when it is lead agency, the city shall collect a fee as established by the city council from the proponent of the proposal prior to undertaking the threshold determination. The time periods provided by this chapter for making a threshold determination shall not begin to run until payment of the fee, and receipt of the checklist by the economic and community development department. When the city completes the environmental checklist at the applicant’s request, an additional fee shall be collected. This fee shall be based on the actual preparation time and rate of salary and benefits for staff time.

2. Environmental impact statement.

a. When the city is the lead agency for a proposal requiring an environmental impact statement and the environmental impact statement is prepared by employees of the city, the city may charge and collect a reasonable fee from any applicant to cover costs incurred by the city in preparing the environmental impact statement. Costs will be determined based upon the costs of staff assigned to the preparation of the environmental impact statement, including hourly salary and benefits. The responsible official shall advise the applicants of the projected costs for the environmental impact statement prior to actual preparation. The applicant shall post bond or otherwise ensure payment of such costs.

b. The city reserves the right under WAC 197-11-420 to contract directly with a consultant for the preparation of an environmental impact statement, or a portion of an environmental impact statement, at the determination of the city. Consultants shall be selected by the city after a call for proposals. Consultant actions in preparing an environmental impact statement or portions thereof shall be exclusively managed and administered by the city to assure that the environmental impact statement is prepared in a professional manner and with appropriate interdisciplinary methodology. The applicant shall post a deposit with the city, according to the established fee schedule, to ensure payment of consultant costs and the preparation of an environmental impact statement. Further, the costs incurred in the preparation of an environmental impact statement shall be paid by the applicant to the city, who shall then make payment to the consultant.

c. If a proposal is modified so that an environmental impact statement is no longer required, the responsible official shall refund any fees collected under subsection (2)(a) or (2)(b) of this section which remain after incurred costs are paid.

3. State Environmental Policy Act appeals. For every appeal filed under KCC 11.03.520, the city shall collect a fee as established by the city council.

4. The city shall not collect a fee for performing its duties as a consulted agency.

5. The city may charge any person for copies of any document prepared under this chapter, and for mailing the document, in a manner provided by Chapter 42.56 RCW.

(Ord. No. 2494; Ord. No. 2667, § 2; Ord. No. 3434, § 2, 12-8-98; Ord. No. 4131, § 1, 12-9-14. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.12A.720)


Chapter 11.04 SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM*

Sections:

11.04.010    Adopted.

*State law reference(s) – Shoreline Management Act, Chapter 90.58 RCW.


11.04.010 Adopted.

The city hereby approves and adopts the updated Shoreline Master Program as set forth in Exhibit “A” attached to the ordinance codified in this section and incorporated by this reference.

(Ord. No. 3931, § 2, 9-15-09; Ord. No. 4328, § 1, 7-16-19)


Chapter 11.05 WETLANDS MANAGEMENT

(Repealed by Ord. No. 3746)




Chapter 11.06 CRITICAL AREAS

Sections:

Article I. Procedural and Administrative Provisions

11.06.010    Title.

11.06.020    Purpose and intent.

11.06.030    Regulated activities.

11.06.040    Exemptions.

11.06.045    Review and inspection fees.

11.06.050    Critical areas maps.

11.06.060    Relationship to other regulations.

11.06.070    Critical area review process and application requirements.

11.06.080    Procedural provisions.

11.06.090    Reasonable use provision.

11.06.100    Variances.

Article II. Definitions

11.06.105    Definitions.

11.06.110    Applicability.

11.06.115    Adjacent wetland.

11.06.120    Applicant.

11.06.125    Aquifer.

11.06.130    Aquifer susceptibility.

11.06.135    Aquifer vulnerability.

11.06.140    Artificially created wetland.

11.06.145    Best available science (BAS).

11.06.150    Best management practices (BMPs).

11.06.155    Bog.

11.06.160    Buffer or buffer area.

11.06.165    Building setback line (BSBL).

11.06.170    Clearing.

11.06.175    Repealed.

11.06.180    Compensatory mitigation.

11.06.185    Comprehensive plan.

11.06.190    Contaminant loading potential.

11.06.193    Corridor.

11.06.195    Creation of critical areas.

11.06.200    Critical area.

11.06.205    Critical area report.

11.06.210    Critical aquifer recharge areas.

11.06.215    Critical facilities.

11.06.220    Repealed.

11.06.225    Dedication.

11.06.227    Degraded wetland buffer.

11.06.230    Delineation manual or wetland delineation manual/methodology.

11.06.235    Department.

11.06.240    Director.

11.06.245    Earth/earth material.

11.06.250    Elevated construction.

11.06.255    Emergent wetland.

11.06.260    Enhancement.

11.06.265    Erosion.

11.06.270    Erosion hazard areas.

11.06.275    Essential habitat.

11.06.280    Excavation.

11.06.285    Existing and ongoing agricultural activities.

11.06.290    Repealed.

11.06.295    Fen.

11.06.300    Fill/fill material.

11.06.305    Filling.

11.06.307    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation area.

11.06.310    Forested wetland.

11.06.315    Functions, beneficial functions, or functions and values.

11.06.320    Geologic hazard areas.

11.06.325    Grading.

11.06.330    Growing season.

11.06.335    Habitat management.

11.06.340    Hydric soil.

11.06.345    Repealed.

11.06.350    Hydrophytic vegetation.

11.06.355    In-kind compensation or mitigation.

11.06.357    Inundation zone.

11.06.360    Intentionally created streams.

11.06.363    Isolated wetlands.

11.06.365    Lahar.

11.06.370    Landslide.

11.06.375    Landslide hazard areas.

11.06.380    Mitigation sequencing.

11.06.385    Native vegetation.

11.06.387    Repealed.

11.06.388    Naturally occurring pond (deepwater aquatic habitat).

11.06.390    Offsite mitigation.

11.06.395    Onsite mitigation/compensation.

11.06.397    Ordinary high water mark.

11.06.400    Out-of-kind mitigation.

11.06.405    Permanent erosion control.

11.06.410    Plant association of infrequent occurrence.

11.06.415    Repealed.

11.06.420    Practicable alternative.

11.06.425    Priority habitat/species or priority wildlife habitat/species.

11.06.430    Qualified professional.

11.06.435    Repealed.

11.06.440    Repair or maintenance.

11.06.445    Restoration.

11.06.450    Secondary habitat.

11.06.455    Seismic hazard areas.

11.06.460    Scrub-shrub wetland.

11.06.465    Sensitive area tract.

11.06.470    Site.

11.06.475    Slope.

11.06.480    Slope, top.

11.06.485    Streams.

11.06.490    Stream reconnaissance report.

11.06.495    Structural diversity, vegetative.

11.06.497    Sub-basin.

11.06.500    Substantial improvement or reconstruction.

11.06.505    Substrate.

11.06.510    Temporary erosion control.

11.06.515    Unavoidable and necessary impacts.

11.06.520    Utility.

11.06.525    Volcanic hazard area.

11.06.530    Wetland.

11.06.533    Wetland category.

11.06.535    Wetland class.

11.06.540    Wetland edge.

11.06.543    Wetlands of high conservation value (previously known as natural heritage wetland).

11.06.545    Wildlife habitat.

11.06.547    Wildlife-passable fence.

Article III. General Mitigation and Monitoring

11.06.550    Mitigation standards.

11.06.560    Location and timing of compensatory mitigation.

11.06.570    Mitigation monitoring.

Article IV. Wetlands

11.06.580    Wetlands rating system.

11.06.590    Determination of wetland boundary by delineation.

11.06.600    Wetland buffers and building setback lines.

11.06.610    Avoiding wetland impacts.

11.06.620    Repealed.

11.06.630    Fencing and signage.

11.06.640    Sensitive area tracts, easements.

11.06.650    Notice on title.

11.06.660    Compensating for wetland impacts.

Article V. Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas

11.06.670    Stream classifications and rating.

11.06.680    Stream buffer areas, setbacks, fencing, and signage.

11.06.690    Alteration or development – Standards and criteria.

11.06.700    Mitigation performance standards.

11.06.710    Wildlife habitat classification and rating.

11.06.720    Wildlife habitat buffer areas and setbacks.

11.06.730    Performance standards – Alteration or development of wildlife habitat.

11.06.740    Performance standards for mitigation planning.

Article VI. Geological Hazard Areas

11.06.750    Buffers and setbacks.

11.06.760    Alterations of geologic hazard areas.

Article VII. Critical Aquifer Recharge Areas

11.06.770    Critical aquifer recharge areas designation, rating, and mapping.

11.06.780    Critical aquifer recharge area reporting requirements.

11.06.790    Critical aquifer recharge area performance standards.

11.06.800    Prohibited uses.

Article I. Procedural and Administrative Provisions


11.06.010 Title.

This chapter shall be hereinafter known as the city of Kent critical areas code.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.020 Purpose and intent.

A. The city of Kent contains numerous areas that can be identified and characterized as critical. Such areas within the city include wetlands, streams, wildlife and fisheries habitat, geologic hazard areas, frequently flooded areas, and critical aquifer recharge areas. 

B. The city finds that these critical areas perform a variety of valuable and beneficial biological, physical, and economic functions that benefit the city and its residents. Alteration of certain critical areas may pose a threat to public safety, private property, and the environment. The city finds, therefore, that identification, regulation, and protection of critical areas is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. The city further finds that the functions of critical areas, and the purpose of these regulations, include the following: 

1. Wetlands. Wetlands perform a variety of functions that include maintaining water quality; storing and conveying storm water and floodwater; recharging groundwater; providing important fish and wildlife habitat; and providing areas for recreation, education, scientific study, and aesthetic appreciation.

Wetland buffers serve to moderate runoff volume and flow rates; reduce sediment, chemical nutrient, and toxic pollutants; provide shading to maintain desirable water temperatures; provide habitat for wildlife; and protect wetland resources from harmful intrusion.

The primary goals of wetland regulation are to avoid wetland impacts; to achieve no net loss of wetland function and value; to provide levels of protection that reflect the sensitivity of individual wetlands and the intensity of proposed land uses; and to restore or enhance existing wetlands, where possible.

The city of Kent’s program for wetland protection is a combination of regulatory and nonregulatory programs designed to collectively provide for protection of wetland functions and values in a manner which is consistent with best available science and the other goals and objectives of the Growth Management Act, Chapter 36.70A RCW.

Protection of the water quality and hydrologic functions of wetlands is accomplished in Kent by a combination of storm water management controls (including both water quality controls and flow controls) regulated pursuant to Chapters 6.02, 7.07, and 7.14 KCC, and wetland buffers imposed pursuant to this chapter. Taken together these programs will provide adequate water quality and hydrologic protection to meet best available science requirements.

2. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas.

a. Streams and their associated riparian corridors provide important fish and wildlife habitat, including habitat for threatened and endangered species; help maintain water quality; store and convey storm water and floodwater; recharge groundwater; and serve as areas for recreation, education, scientific study, and aesthetic appreciation. Stream buffers serve to moderate storm water runoff volume and flow rates; reduce sediment, chemical nutrient, and toxic pollutants; provide shading to maintain desirable water temperatures; provide habitat for wildlife; and protect stream resources from harmful intrusion.

The primary goals of stream regulation are to avoid or otherwise mitigate significant impacts to streams and associated riparian corridors; to protect threatened and endangered species; to protect water quality through appropriate management techniques; and, where possible, to provide for stream enhancement and rehabilitation. 

b. Wildlife habitat provides opportunities for food, cover, nesting, breeding, and movement for fish and wildlife within the city; maintains and promotes diversity of species and habitat within the city; integrates habitat protection with elements of the city’s open space system; helps maintain air and water quality; helps control erosion; and serves as areas for recreation, education, and scientific study and aesthetic appreciation.

The primary goals of wildlife habitat regulations are to identify and protect fish and wildlife habitat; to avoid impacts to critical habitats for fish and wildlife; to implement the goals of the Endangered Species Act; to promote connectivity between habitat areas to allow for wildlife movement; to provide multi-purpose open space corridors; and where possible to enhance and rehabilitate wildlife habitat. 

3. Geologic hazard areas. Geologic hazard areas include lands characterized by geologic, hydrologic, hydrogeologic, topographic, and vegetative conditions that render them susceptible to varying degrees of risk from landslides, erosion, or seismic or volcanic activity.

The primary goals of regulating geologic hazards are to avoid and minimize potential impacts to life and property; to regulate land uses where necessary; and to conduct appropriate levels of analysis to ensure sound engineering and construction practices to address, mitigate, and potentially avoid identified hazards.

4. Critical aquifer recharge areas. Aquifer recharge areas provide a source of potable water and contribute to stream discharge/flow during periods of low flow. The city finds that certain locations are susceptible to contamination of water supplies by infiltration of pollutants through soil to groundwater aquifers.

The primary goals of aquifer recharge regulations are to protect critical aquifer recharge areas and groundwater quality by avoiding or limiting land use activities that pose potential risk of aquifer contamination; and to minimize impacts to significant aquifer recharge areas through the application of performance standards.

5. Frequently flooded areas. Floodplains and other areas subject to flooding perform important hydrologic functions and may present a risk to persons and property. The primary goals of flood hazard regulations are to limit the effects of flooding on human health and safety, and to protect public facilities and services. The city of Kent’s flood hazard regulations, located in Chapter 14.09 KCC, regulate activities within frequently flooded areas in order to promote public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in the city, to the extent reasonably possible.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.030 Regulated activities. 

A. This chapter shall apply to any regulated activity that may affect a critical area or a potential critical area, or its buffer, unless otherwise exempted by these regulations. Regulated activity that takes place within an area shown as a critical area on the critical areas inventory maps maintained by the department pursuant to KCC 11.06.050 raises a rebuttable presumption that the activity affects a potential critical area or its buffer. This presumption may be overcome by information properly submitted by a qualified professional and confirmed by the department. Applicable activities include, but are not limited to, the following:

1. Removing, excavating, disturbing, or dredging soil, sand, gravel, minerals, organic matter, or materials of any kind.

2. Dumping, discharging, or filling with any material.

3. Draining, flooding, or disturbing the water level or water table, or diverting or impeding water flow.

4. Driving pilings or placing obstructions.

5. Constructing, substantially reconstructing, demolishing, or altering the size of any structure or infrastructure.

6. Destroying or altering vegetation through clearing, grading, harvesting, shading, or planting vegetation that would negatively affect the character of a critical area.

7. Activities that result in significant changes in water temperature or physical or chemical characteristics of water sources, including quantity and pollutants.

8. Any other activity potentially affecting a critical area or buffer not otherwise exempt from the provisions of this chapter as determined by the department.

9. The construction of new recreation trails within the buffer.

Where a regulated activity would be partly within and partly outside a critical area or its buffer, the entire activity shall be reviewed pursuant to the requirements of this chapter.

B. To avoid duplication, all permits and approvals identified in Chapter 12.01 KCC shall be subject to, and coordinated with, the requirements of this chapter. 

C. Nonproject actions, including but not limited to rezones, comprehensive plan map amendments, annexations, and the adoption of plans and programs, shall be subject to this chapter. However, the department may, at its discretion, permit any studies or evaluations required by this chapter to use methodologies and provide a level of detail appropriate to the action proposed. 

D. Activities within the Green River Natural Resources Area shall be subject to this chapter with the exception of activities allowed by Resolution 922, adopted by the city of Kent in March 1981.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.040 Exemptions.

A. The following activities, when performed on sites containing critical areas, or on sites that may affect critical areas, as defined by this chapter, shall be exempt from these regulations:

1. Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, and other wildlife that does not entail changing the structure or functions of the critical area.

2. Existing and ongoing agricultural activities, as defined in this chapter.

3. Activities involving artificially created wetlands or streams intentionally created from nonwetland sites, including, but not limited to, grass-lined swales, irrigation and drainage ditches, retention or detention facilities, and landscape features, except wetlands or streams created as mitigation or that provide critical habitat for anadromous fish.

4. Operation, maintenance, repair, and reconstruction of existing structures, roads, trails, streets, utilities, and associated structures, dikes, levees, or drainage systems; provided, that reconstruction of any facilities or structures is not “substantial reconstruction,” may not further encroach on a critical area or its buffer, and shall incorporate best management practices.

5. Normal maintenance, repair, and reconstruction of public, residential, or commercial structures, facilities, and landscaping; provided, however, that reconstruction of any structure does not increase its preexisting footprint. 

6. The addition of floor area within an existing building that does not increase the building footprint.

7. Site investigative work and studies that are prerequisite to preparation of an application for development including soils tests, water quality studies, wildlife studies, and similar tests and investigations; provided, however, that any disturbance of the critical area must only be the absolute minimum necessary to carry out the work or studies.

8. Educational activities, scientific research, and outdoor recreational activities, including but not limited to interpretive field trips, birdwatching, boating, swimming, fishing, and hiking, that will not have a significant effect on the critical area.

9. Harvesting of wild crops and seeds to propagate native plants in a manner that is not injurious to natural reproduction of such crops, provided the harvesting does not require tilling of soil, planting of crops, or alteration of the critical area by changing existing topography, water conditions, or water sources.

10. Emergency activities necessary to prevent an immediate threat to public health, safety, property, or the environment which requires immediate action within a time too short to allow full compliance with this chapter as determined by the department.

11. Development of lots vested or legally created through a subdivision, short subdivision, or other legal means and approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; provided the division of land was for a specified use, and that the development is consistent with that approved use.

12. Removal of invasive plants and planting of native vegetation in wetlands, or in wetland or stream buffers, for the purpose of enhancing habitat values of these areas pursuant to an approved mitigation plan.

13. Stabilization of sites where erosion or landsliding threatens public or private structures, utilities, roadways, driveways, or publicly maintained trails or where erosion or landsliding threatens any lake, stream, wetland, or shoreline. Stabilization work shall be performed in a manner which causes the least possible disturbance to the slope and its vegetative cover. This activity shall be performed in accordance with approved site stabilization plans.

14. Minor activities not mentioned above and determined in advance and in writing by the director to have minimal impacts to a critical area.

B. Notwithstanding the exemptions provided by this section, any otherwise exempt activities occurring in or near a critical area or its buffer shall comply with the intent of these standards and shall consider onsite alternatives that avoid or minimize significant adverse impacts. Emergency activities shall mitigate for any impacts caused to critical areas upon abatement of the emergency.

C. With the exception of emergency actions, existing and ongoing agricultural activities, and educational and recreation activities that will not have a significant effect on a critical area, no property owner or other entity shall undertake exempt activities prior to providing 14 days’ notice to the director and receiving confirmation in writing that the proposed activity is exempt. In case of any question as to whether a particular activity is exempt from the provisions of this section, the director’s determination shall prevail and shall be confirmed in writing.

D. Legally established uses, developments, or structures that are nonconforming solely due to inconsistencies with the provisions of this chapter shall not be considered nonconforming pursuant to KCC 15.08.100. Reconstruction or additions to existing structures that intrude into critical areas or their buffers shall not increase the amount of such intrusion except as provided by KCC 11.06.100(A). Once a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of six months, that use cannot be reestablished.

E. The exemptions established by this section shall apply only to activities that are otherwise permitted by federal, state, and local laws.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 3805, § 1, 8-15-06; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.045 Review and inspection fees.

The city council shall, by resolution, establish the fees to be assessed to implement and operate the regulations adopted in this chapter. The resolution may require that certain fees be pre-paid and designated to be nonrefundable because staff time and materials will be expended whether or not the permit applied for is approved by the city or pulled by the applicant. In the event of any conflict or ambiguity regarding any fees authorized under this chapter and established by council resolution, the director is authorized to interpret the applicable fee schedule to resolve that conflict or ambiguity.

(Ord. No. 4019, § 10, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.050 Critical areas maps.

The approximate location and extent of critical areas within the city are shown on the critical areas inventory maps. Except as provided in KCC 11.06.030(A), these maps shall be used for informational purposes and as a general guide only, for the assistance of property owners and other interested parties; the boundaries and locations shown are generalized. The actual presence or absence, type, extent, boundaries, and classification of critical areas on a specific site shall be identified in the field by a qualified professional and confirmed by the department, according to the procedures, definitions, and criteria established by this chapter. In the event of any conflict between the critical area location or designation shown on the city’s maps and the criteria or standards of this chapter, the criteria and standards shall prevail. Maps are adopted pursuant to this chapter and regularly updated with new information from resources deemed reliable by the director. These maps shall be kept on file at the permit center, posted on the city’s website, and made available for public inspection upon request.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.060 Relationship to other regulations. 

A. These critical area regulations shall apply as an overlay and in addition to zoning, land use, and other regulations established by the city of Kent. In the event of any conflict between these regulations and any other city regulations, those regulations which provide greater protection to environmentally critical areas shall apply, as determined by the director.

B. Areas characterized by specific critical areas may also be subject to other regulations established by this chapter due to the overlapping or multiple functions of some critical areas. Wetlands, for example, may be defined and regulated according to the wetland, wildlife habitat, and stream management provisions of this chapter. In the event of any conflict between regulations for particular critical areas in this chapter, the regulations which provide greater protection to environmentally critical areas shall apply, as determined by the director.

C. Compliance with this chapter does not constitute compliance with other federal, state, or local regulations or permit conditions that may be required, including but not limited to the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife hydraulic project approval (HPA), Army Corps of Engineers Section 404 permits, Ecology Section 401 permits, and National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits. The applicant is responsible for complying with these requirements, in addition to the processes established in this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.070 Critical area review process and application requirements.

A. Pre-application conference.

1. The applicant is encouraged to meet with the city prior to submitting an application, as described in the pre-application guidelines of Chapter 12.01 KCC.

2. The purpose of these meetings shall be to discuss the city’s critical area requirements, processes, and procedures; to review any conceptual site plans prepared by the applicant; to identify potential impacts to critical areas and appropriate mitigation measures; and, to the extent it can be determined, generally inform the applicant of any known federal or state regulations or approvals applicable to the subject critical area. Such conference shall be for the convenience of the applicant, shall not constitute legal advice or scientific opinion, and any recommendations shall not be binding on the applicant or the city. It shall be the applicant’s sole responsibility to identify and secure all necessary permits from any agencies with jurisdiction notwithstanding that the city of Kent may also have the authority to issue a permit.

B. Application requirements.

1. Timing of submittals. Concurrent with submittal of a SEPA checklist, or concurrent with submittal of an application for projects exempt from SEPA, a critical area report must be submitted to the city for review. The purpose of the report is to determine the extent, characteristics, and functions of any critical areas located on or potentially affected by activities on a site where regulated activities are proposed. The report will also be used by the department to determine the appropriate critical area rating or classification, where applicable, and to establish appropriate buffer requirements. 

2. Report contents. Reports and studies required to be submitted by this chapter shall contain, at a minimum, information indicated in the subsequent sections of this chapter applicable to each critical area, and the following:

a. The name and contact information of the applicant, a description of the proposal, and identification of the permit requested; 

b. Addresses and parcel numbers of the critical areas;

c. A map, to scale, depicting critical areas, buffers, flag and test pit numbers, the development proposal, and any areas to be cleared;

d. A description of the proposed stormwater management plan for the development and consideration of impacts to drainage alterations;

e. The names and qualifications of all people involved in preparing the report and documentation of any fieldwork performed on the site, as well as the dates on which fieldwork took place;

f. Identification and characterization of all critical areas, wetlands, water bodies, and buffers adjacent to the proposed project area; 

g. A statement specifying the accuracy of the report, and all assumptions made and relied upon; 

h. An assessment of the probable impacts to critical areas resulting from development of the site, the proposed development, and potential impacts from critical areas to the proposed development of the site;

i. A description of reasonable efforts made to apply mitigation sequencing pursuant to KCC 11.06.380 to avoid, minimize, and mitigate impacts to critical areas; 

j. Plans for adequate mitigation, as needed, to offset any impacts, in accordance with KCC 11.06.550, including, but not limited to: 

i. The impacts of any proposed development within or adjacent to a critical area or buffer on the critical area, and the potential adverse impact of a critical area to the development; and

ii. The impacts of any proposed alteration of a critical area or buffer on the development proposal, other properties, and the environment; 

k. A discussion of the performance standards applicable to the critical area and all proposed activity; 

l. Financial guarantees, in a form and for an amount acceptable to both the director and the city attorney, to ensure compliance; and 

m. Any additional information required for the critical area as specified in the corresponding chapter. 

3. The department may tailor the information required to reflect the complexity of the proposal and the sensitivity of critical areas that may potentially be present. 

4. Unless otherwise provided, a critical area report may be supplemented by or composed, in whole or in part, of any reports or studies required by other laws and regulations or previously prepared for and applicable to the development proposal site, as approved by the director.

5. The director may require additional information to be included in the critical area report when the director deems it to be necessary for proper review of the proposed activity in accordance with this title. Additional information that may be required includes, but is not limited to: 

a. Historical data, including original and subsequent mapping; aerial photographs; data compilations and summaries; and available reports and records relating to the site or past operations at the site; 

b. Grading and drainage plans; and 

c. Information specific to the type, location, and nature of the critical area involved.

C. Critical area professionals – Qualifications and city review. All reports and studies required of the applicant by this section shall be prepared by a qualified professional as defined in these regulations. The director may, at the director’s discretion, retain a qualified professional to review and confirm the applicant’s reports, studies, and plans. Such review shall be paid for by the applicant.

D. Review process. This section is not intended to create a separate critical area review permit process for development proposals. To the extent possible, the city shall consolidate and integrate the review and processing of critical area-related aspects of proposals with other land use and environmental considerations, reviews, and approvals. Any permits required by separate codes or regulations, such as shoreline substantial development permits, shall continue to be required. 

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.080 Procedural provisions. 

A. Interpretation and conflicts. The director shall have the authority to administer the provisions of this chapter, to make determinations with regard to the applicability of the regulations, to interpret the intent of unclear provisions, to require additional information, to determine the level of detail and appropriate methodologies for critical area reports and studies, to prepare application and informational materials as required, and to promulgate procedures and rules for unique circumstances not anticipated by the standards and procedures contained within this chapter.

B. Penalties and enforcement. Compliance with these regulations and penalties for their violation shall be enforced pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.04 KCC. 

C. Appeals from critical area review decisions. Appeals from critical area review decisions shall be governed by the procedures set forth in KCC 12.01.190 and Chapter 2.32 KCC.

D. Burden of proof. The burden of proving that a proposed activity meets the standards established by this chapter shall be on the applicant.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.090 Reasonable use provision.

A. The standards and requirements of these regulations are not intended, and shall not be construed or applied in a manner, to deny all reasonable use of private property. If an applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the hearing examiner that strict application of these standards would deny all reasonable use of a property, development may be permitted subject to appropriate conditions.

B. Applications for a reasonable use exception shall be processed as a Process III application, pursuant to Chapter 12.01 KCC.

C. An applicant requesting relief from strict application of these standards shall demonstrate that all of the following criteria are met:

1. No reasonable use with less impact on the critical area and its buffer is possible.

2. There is no feasible and reasonable onsite alternative to the activities proposed, considering possible changes in site layout, reductions in density, and similar factors that would allow a reasonable economic use with fewer adverse impacts.

3. The proposed activities, as conditioned, will result in the minimum possible impacts to affected critical areas, considering their functions and values and the risks associated with proposed development.

4. All reasonable mitigation measures have been implemented or assured.

5. The inability to derive reasonable economic use is not the result of the applicant’s actions or that of a previous property owner, including, but not limited to, segregating or dividing the property in a manner that created an undevelopable condition, or exacerbating an existing condition to such a degree that reasonable economic use is no longer possible under the terms of this chapter.

6. The applicant adequately undertook reasonable efforts to acquire sufficient knowledge of existing limitations on the subject property at the time when the applicant acquired the property. For purposes of this section, “reasonable efforts” includes, but is not limited to: visual inspection of the site; review of critical area maps; site assessment by a qualified professional; and a price comparison to other properties that are comparable in terms of size, location, zoning, and access.

7. Any alteration of a critical area approved under this section shall be subject to appropriate conditions and will require mitigation under an approved mitigation plan. 

D. No reasonable use application shall be approved if the city can demonstrate, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the applicant had actual or constructive knowledge of existing conditions, at any time prior to the applicant’s acquisition of the subject property, that would significantly lessen the applicant’s distinct, investment-backed expectations in acquiring the subject property.

E. Approval of a reasonable use exception shall not eliminate the need for any other permit or approval otherwise required for a proposal by applicable city regulations.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.100 Variances.

A. Applications for variances from the strict application of the terms of this chapter to a specific property may be submitted to the city. All variances except administrative variances per subsection (B) of this section shall be considered by the hearing examiner as a Process III application, pursuant to Chapter 12.01 KCC. Approval of variances from the strict application of the critical area requirements shall be consistent with the following criteria:

1. There are unique physical conditions peculiar and inherent to the affected property that make it difficult or infeasible to strictly comply with the provisions of this chapter.

2. The variance is the minimum necessary to accommodate the building or structure footprint and access.

3. The proposed variance would preserve the functions and values of the critical area, and the proposal does not create or increase a risk to the public health, safety, and general welfare, or to public or private property.

4. The proposed variance would not adversely affect properties surrounding the subject site.

5. Adverse impacts to critical areas resulting from the proposal are minimized.

6. The special circumstances or conditions affecting the property are not a result of the actions of the applicant or previous owner.

7. The variance shall not constitute a grant of special privilege.

B. Other minor buffer modifications may be permitted by the director, as outlined in the provisions of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)

Article II. Definitions


11.06.105 Definitions.

The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.110 Applicability.

The definitions contained in this chapter are those that are generally used throughout this code, except for those definitions specified in Chapters 14.09 and 15.02 KCC, which are specific to those respective sections and chapters.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.115 Adjacent wetland.

Adjacent wetland means a wetland bordering, contiguous to, or neighboring a river, stream, or lake.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.120 Applicant.

Applicant means the person, party, firm, corporation, or other entity that proposes or has performed any activity that affects or may affect a critical area or potential critical area, or its buffer.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.125 Aquifer.

Aquifer is, generally, any water bearing soil unit or geologic formation. Specifically, a body of soil unit or geologic formation that contains sufficient saturated permeable material to conduct groundwater and yield economically significant quantities of groundwater to wells or springs.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.130 Aquifer susceptibility.

Aquifer susceptibility is a contributory factor of potential contamination of an aquifer that results from soil, rock, and groundwater characteristics within a recharge area.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.135 Aquifer vulnerability.

Aquifer vulnerability means the combined effect of aquifer susceptibility and contaminant loading potential. It includes hydrogeologic, land use, and other factors that affect the potential for groundwater contamination.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.140 Artificially created wetland.

Artificially created wetland means a wetland created from nonwetland sites through purposeful, legally authorized human action, including but not limited to irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, canals, retention or detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and landscape amenities. 

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.145 Best available science (BAS).

Best available science (BAS) is the current scientific information used in the process to designate, protect, or restore critical areas, that is derived from a valid scientific process as defined by WAC 365-195-900 through 365-195-925, as amended.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.150 Best management practices (BMPs).

Best management practices (BMPs) means the conservation practices or systems of practices and management measures that: (1) control soil loss and reduce water quality degradation caused by nutrients, animal waste, toxics, and sediment; and (2) minimize adverse impacts to surface water and groundwater flow, circulation patterns, and to the chemical, physical, and biological characteristics of critical areas.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.155 Bog.

Bog means a wet, spongy, poorly drained area that is usually rich in very specialized plants, such as acidophilic mosses, particularly sphagnum; contains a high percentage of organic remnants and residues; and frequently is associated with a spring, seepage area, or other subsurface water source. A bog sometimes represents the final stage of the natural process of eutrophication by which lakes and other bodies of water are very slowly transformed into land areas.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.160 Buffer or buffer area.

Buffer or buffer area is a vegetated zone contiguous to and surrounding a critical area that protects the critical area from adverse impacts to its integrity and value. Buffers are necessary for the continued maintenance, function, and structural stability of a critical area, and are an integral part of the resource’s ecosystem. Buffers may either be enhanced or revegetated, or both, where they are degraded or as part of a mitigation program. Buffers shall be measured perpendicular from the edge of the critical area.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.165 Building setback line (BSBL).

Building setback line (BSBL) means an area in which structures, including but not limited to sheds, homes (including overhangs), buildings, and awnings, shall not be permitted within, or allowed to project into, a critical area buffer. Roads, parking areas, uncovered at-grade decks, patios, lawns, and landscaping are permitted within the BSBL.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.170 Clearing.

Clearing means the removal of timber, brush, grass, ground cover, or other vegetative matter from a site which exposes the earth’s surface of the site, or any actions that disturb the existing ground surface. 

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.175 Compensatory flood storage.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4159.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05)


11.06.180 Compensatory mitigation.

Compensatory mitigation means restoration (re-establishment or rehabilitation), establishment (creation), enhancement, and, in certain circumstances, preservation of aquatic resources for the purposes of offsetting unavoidable adverse impacts which remain after all appropriate and practicable avoidance and minimization has been achieved.

1. Restoration means actions performed to reestablish stream or wetland functional characteristics and processes which have been lost by alterations, activities, or catastrophic events within an area that no longer meets the definition of a stream or wetland.

2. Establishment means actions performed to intentionally create a wetland at a site where it did not formerly exist.

3. Enhancement means actions performed to improve the condition of existing wetlands or riparian areas so that the functions they provide are of a higher quality.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.185 Comprehensive plan.

Comprehensive plan means the document, including maps, adopted by the city council, which outlines the city’s goals and policies relating to management of growth, and prepared in accordance with Chapter 36.70A RCW. The term also includes adopted subarea plans.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.190 Contaminant loading potential.

Contaminant loading potential means the availability within an aquifer recharge area of any potential physical, chemical, biological, or radiological substance that enters the hydrological cycle and may cause a deleterious effect on groundwater resources.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.193 Corridor.

Corridor means a continuous strip of undisturbed vegetation connecting two critical areas, protected in perpetuity from development via a restrictive covenant in the form of a conservation easement, sensitive area easement, or sensitive area tract.

(Ord. No. 3805, § 1, 8-15-06; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.195 Creation of critical areas.

Creation of critical areas means the purposeful and legally authorized construction or forming of a wetland or stream from an upland (nonwetland or dry) site through artificial means. 

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.200 Critical area.

Critical area means an area that possesses important natural functions and embodies a variety of important natural and community values. Such areas include wetlands, streams, fish, and wildlife habitat, geologic hazard areas, critical aquifer recharge areas, and flood hazard areas. If not conducted properly, development or alteration of such areas may cause significant impacts to the valuable functions and values of these areas and may generate risks to the public health and general welfare, or to public and private property.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.205 Critical area report.

Critical area report means a report prepared by a qualified professional to determine the presence, type, class, size, function, or value of an area subject to these regulations. 

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.210 Critical aquifer recharge areas.

Critical aquifer recharge areas means areas designated wellhead protection areas pursuant to adopted wellhead protection plans, susceptible groundwater areas pursuant to Chapter 173-100 WAC, and special protection areas pursuant to WAC 173-200-090.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.215 Critical facilities.

Critical facilities means those facilities necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare which are defined under the occupancy categories of essential facilities and special occupancy structures in the International Building Code, as the same may be amended. 

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.220 Critical habitat, or critical wildlife habitat, or critical fish and wildlife conservation area.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4159.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05)


11.06.225 Dedication.

Dedication means conveyance of land by deed, easement, or other legal instrument of conveyance.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.227 Degraded wetland buffer.

Degraded wetland buffer means a buffer area which cannot adequately protect its adjacent wetland due to one or more of the following existing conditions: (1) lack of vegetative cover or presence of bare soils (resulting from disturbance, fill, debris, or trash); (2) significant cover (over 50 percent) in nonnative vegetation; (3) significant cover (over 50 percent) in invasive species or noxious weeds; or (4) presence of existing nonconforming structures or improvements.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.230 Delineation manual or wetland delineation manual/methodology.

Delineation manual or wetland delineation manual/methodology means the manual and methodology used for the identification of wetlands and delineation of their boundaries pursuant to this chapter. Work shall be done in accordance with the approved federal wetland delineation manual and applicable regional supplements as set forth in WAC 173-22-035, as amended. 

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.235 Department.

Department means the city of Kent department of economic and community development or successor agency, unless the context indicates a different city department.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.240 Director.

Director means the city of Kent economic and community development director or the director’s designee.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.245 Earth/earth material.

Earth/earth material means naturally occurring rock, soil, stone, sediment, sand, or any combination thereof.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.250 Elevated construction.

Elevated construction means a construction technique that employs posts or pilings to raise a structure so that waters can flow freely beneath the structure.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.255 Emergent wetland.

Emergent wetland means a wetland with at least 30 percent of the surface area covered by erect, rooted, herbaceous vegetation as the uppermost vegetative strata.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.260 Enhancement.

Enhancement means the improvement of an existing viable wetland, stream, or habitat area or the buffers established for such areas, through such measures as increasing plant diversity, increasing wildlife habitat, installing environmentally compatible erosion controls, increasing structural diversity, or removing plant or animal species that are not indigenous to the area. Enhancement also includes actions performed to improve the quality of an existing degraded wetland, stream, or habitat area. See also “Restoration.”

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.265 Erosion.

Erosion means a process whereby gravity, wind, rain, water, freeze-thaw, and other natural agents mobilize and transport soil particles.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.270 Erosion hazard areas.

Erosion hazard areas means areas within the city of Kent underlain by soils which are subject to severe erosion when disturbed. Such soils include, but are not limited to, those delineated in the “Soil Survey, King County Area, Washington” (USDA, 1973) as having a moderate to severe, severe, or very severe erosion hazard potential. These soils consist of the following: Alderwood gravelly sandy loam, 15 to 30 percent slopes (AgD); Alderwood and Kitsap soils, very steep (AkF); Arents, Alderwood material, six to 15 percent slopes (AmC); Beausite gravelly sandy loam, 15 to 30 percent slopes (BeD); Beausite gravelly sandy loam, 40 to 75 percent slopes (BeF); Everett gravelly sandy loam, 15 to 30 percent slopes (EvD); Indianola loamy fine sand, 15 to 30 percent slopes (InD); Kitsap silt loam, eight to 15 percent slopes (KpC); Kitsap silt loam, 15 to 30 percent slopes (KpD); Ovall gravelly loam, 15 to 25 percent slopes (OvD); Ovall gravelly loam, 40 to 75 percent slopes (OvF); Pilchuck loamy fine sand (Pc); Ragnar fine sandy loam, 15 to 25 percent slopes (RaD); Ragnar-Indianola association, moderately steep (RdE); and riverwash (Rh).

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.275 Essential habitat.

Essential habitat means habitat necessary for the survival of federally listed threatened, endangered, or sensitive species, and state-listed priority species.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.280 Excavation.

Excavation means the removal or displacement of earth material by human or mechanical means.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.285 Existing and ongoing agricultural activities.

Existing and ongoing agricultural activities includes those activities conducted on lands defined in RCW 84.34.020(2), as amended, and those activities involved in the production of crops and livestock; provided, that such activity was actively being conducted as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The definition includes, but is not limited to: operation and maintenance of farm and stock ponds or drainage ditches; irrigation systems; changes between agricultural activities or crops; and normal operation, maintenance, or repair of existing serviceable structures, facilities, or improved areas. Activities that bring an area into agricultural use from a previous nonagricultural use are not considered part of an ongoing activity. An operation ceases to be ongoing when the area on which it was conducted is proposed for conversion to a nonagricultural use or has lain idle for longer than five consecutive years, unless the idle land is registered in a federal or state soils conservation program. Forest practices are not included in this definition.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.290 Exotic.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4159.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05)


11.06.295 Fen.

Fen means a peat-accumulating wetland that receives some drainage from surrounding mineral soil and usually supports marsh-like vegetation.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.300 Fill/fill material.

Fill/fill material means a deposit of earth or other material placed by human or mechanical means. Earth material is defined in KCC 11.06.245. Other material may include, but is not limited to, plastics, construction debris, wood chips, overburden from excavation activities, or materials used to create any structure or infrastructure. 

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.305 Filling.

Filling means the act of transporting or placing (by any manner or mechanism) fill material from, to, or on any surface water body or wetland, soil surface, sediment surface, or other fill material.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.307 Fish and wildlife habitat conservation area.

Fish and wildlife habitat conservation area means and includes the following: habitat where federally and state endangered, threatened, and sensitive species have a primary association; state priority habitats and areas associated with state priority species; habitats and areas associated with species of local importance (as determined by the city); naturally occurring ponds less than 20 acres and their submerged aquatic beds, which provide fish or wildlife habitat; and waters of the state.

(Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.310 Forested wetland.

Forested wetland means a wetland defined by the Cowardin system with at least 30 percent of the surface area covered by woody vegetation greater than 20 feet in height that is at least partially rooted in the wetland.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.315 Functions, beneficial functions, or functions and values.

Functions, beneficial functions, or functions and values means the beneficial roles served by wetlands including, but not limited to, water quality protection and enhancement, fish and wildlife habitat, food chain support, flood storage, conveyance and attenuation, groundwater recharge and discharge, erosion control, wave attenuation, historical and archaeological and aesthetic value protection, and recreation. These beneficial roles are not listed in order of priority.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.320 Geologic hazard areas.

Geologic hazard areas means lands or areas characterized by geologic, hydrologic, hydrogeologic, vegetative, and topographic conditions that render them susceptible to varying degrees of potential risk of landslides, erosion, or seismic or volcanic activity; and areas characterized by geologic, hydrogeologic, and hydrologic conditions that make them vulnerable to contamination of groundwater supplies through infiltration of contaminants to aquifers.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.325 Grading.

Grading means any excavating, filling, clearing, leveling, movement, or redistribution of the ground surface by human or mechanical means.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.330 Growing season.

Growing season means the average frost-free period of the year in Kent as recorded in National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Frost/Freeze Data from Climatology of the U.S., No. 20, supplement No. 1, or in equivalent U.S. government agency records. Growing season, for the purposes of these regulations, may be considered to be the period from March 1st through October 31st of any calendar year.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.335 Habitat management.

Habitat management means management of land and its associated resources/features to maintain species in suitable habitats within their natural geographic distribution so that isolated subpopulations are not created. This does not imply maintaining all habitat or individuals of all species in all cases.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.340 Hydric soil.

Hydric soil means soil that is saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part. The presence of hydric soil shall be determined following the methods described in the federal manual.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.345 Hydrologically isolated.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4159.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05)


11.06.350 Hydrophytic vegetation.

Hydrophytic vegetation means macrophytic plant life growing in water or on a substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive water content. The presence of hydrophytic vegetation shall be determined following the methods described in the federal manual.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.355 In-kind compensation or mitigation.

In-kind compensation or mitigation means replacement of wetlands or other critical areas with substitute wetlands or resources whose characteristics closely approximate those destroyed or degraded by a regulated activity. 

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.357 Inundation zone.

Inundation zone means an area where deposition or flow of debris, mudflows, or related flooding events from geologic and volcanic events on Mount Rainier may occur within the city.

(Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.360 Intentionally created streams.

Intentionally created streams means manmade streams created through purposeful human action, such as irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, and canals. This definition does not include stream modifications performed pursuant to city authorization, such as changes or redirection of stream channels, and does not include streams created as mitigation. Purposeful creation must be demonstrated through documentation, photographs, statements, or other evidence. Intentionally created streams are excluded from regulation under this chapter, except manmade streams that provide “critical habitat,” as designated by federal or state agencies, for anadromous fish.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.363 Isolated wetlands.

Isolated wetlands means those wetlands that are outside of and not contiguous to any 100-year floodplain of a lake, river, or stream, and which have no contiguous hydric soil or hydrophytic vegetation between the wetland and any surface water, including other wetlands. Any project involving filling or altering an isolated wetland is subject to regulation by the State Department of Ecology under the Water Pollution Control Act, Chapter 90.48 RCW, as amended, in addition to this chapter. While wetland fill is also regulated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under the federal Clean Water Act, isolated wetlands are not subject to federal review. 

(Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.365 Lahar.

Lahar means mudflows or debris flows associated with volcanic activity, which pose a threat to life, property, or structures.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.370 Landslide.

Landslide means episodic downslope movement of a mass of soil or rock. 

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.375 Landslide hazard areas.

Landslide hazard areas means and includes:

1. Any existing active or dormant landslide or debris flow that has shown movement during the Holocene epoch (from 10,000 years ago to the present) or that is underlain or covered by mass wastage debris of that epoch.

2. Areas delineated in the Soil Survey, King County Area, Washington (USDA, 1973) as having a “severe” limitation for building site development. These soils consist of the following: Alderwood gravelly sandy loam, 15 to 30 percent slopes (AgD); Alderwood and Kitsap soils, very steep (AkF); Beausite gravelly sandy loam, 15 to 30 percent slopes (BeD); Beausite gravelly sandy loam, 40 to 75 percent slopes (BeF); Everett gravelly sandy loam, 15 to 30 percent slopes (EvD); Indianola loamy fine sand, 15 to 30 percent slopes (InD); Kitsap silt loam, eight to 15 percent slopes (KpC); Kitsap silt loam, 15 to 30 percent slopes (KpD); Ovall gravelly loam, 15 to 25 percent slopes (OvD); Ovall gravelly loam, 40 to 75 percent slopes (OvF); Ragnar fine sandy loam, 15 to 25 percent slopes (RaD); and Ragnar-Indianola association, moderately steep (RdE).

3. Areas designated as quaternary slumps, earth flows, mudflows, or landslides on maps published by the U.S. Geological Survey, Washington Department of Natural Resources, geologic consultant reports completed for the city of Kent, or as identified on LIDAR maps completed for the city of Kent.

4. Areas with all three of the following characteristics: slopes steeper than 15 percent; slopes intersecting granular material over silts or clays; and springs or groundwater seepage or evidence of seasonal springs or groundwater seepage.

5. Slopes that are parallel or subparallel to planes of weakness (such as bedding planes, joint systems, and fault planes) in subsurface materials.

6. Slopes subject to failure during seismic shaking.

7. Areas potentially unstable as a result of rapid stream incision or stream bank erosion.

8. Areas located in a canyon or on an active alluvial fan, presently or potentially subject to inundation by debris flows or catastrophic flooding.

9. Any area with a slope of 40 percent or steeper and with a vertical relief of 10 or more feet. A slope is delineated by establishing its toe and top and measured by averaging the inclination over 10 feet of vertical relief.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.380 Mitigation sequencing.

Mitigation sequencing means that applicants shall demonstrate that all reasonable efforts have been examined with the intent to avoid and minimize impacts to critical areas. When an alteration to a critical area is proposed, such an alteration shall be avoided, minimized, or compensated for in the following sequential order of preference, pursuant to WAC 197-11-768, as amended: 

1. Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of actions.

2. Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation.

3. Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment.

4. Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the action.

5. Compensating for the impact by replacing or providing substitute resources or environments.

6. The enhancement, restoration, or creation of critical areas as compensation for impacts resulting from development activities.

While monitoring without additional actions is not considered mitigation for the purposes of these regulations, it may be part of a comprehensive mitigation program. 

Also see KCC 11.06.180, “Compensatory mitigation.”

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.385 Native vegetation.

Native vegetation means plant species indigenous to the Puget Sound region that could occur or could have occurred naturally on the site, which are or were indigenous to the area in question.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.387 Natural heritage wetland.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4159.

(Ord. No. 3805, § 1, 8-15-06)


11.06.388 Naturally occurring pond (deepwater aquatic habitat).

Naturally occurring pond (deepwater aquatic habitat) means a pond less than 20 acres in size and its submerged aquatic beds, which provide fish or wildlife habitat. Also see definition of “Wetlands” for exclusions of certain types of ponds from regulation.

(Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.390 Offsite mitigation. 

Offsite mitigation means performance of mitigation actions, pursuant to standards established in this chapter, on a site or in an area other than that proposed for conduct of a regulated activity.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.395 Onsite mitigation/compensation.

Onsite mitigation/compensation means replacing wetlands or other resources at or adjacent to the site on which a wetland or other resource has been adversely affected by a regulated activity.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.397 Ordinary high water mark.

Ordinary high water mark means that mark on all lakes, streams, and tidal water that may be found by examining the bed and banks and ascertaining where the presence and action of waters are so common and usual, and so long continued in all ordinary years, as to mark upon the soil a character distinct from that of the abutting upland, in respect to vegetation as that condition exists on June 1, 1971, as it may naturally change thereafter, or as it may change thereafter in accordance with permits issued by the city of Kent or Department of Ecology; provided, however, that in any area where the ordinary high water mark cannot be found, the ordinary high water mark adjoining fresh water shall be the line of mean high water.

(Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.400 Out-of-kind mitigation.

Out-of-kind mitigation means replacement of wetlands or habitat with substitute wetlands or habitat whose characteristics do not closely approximate those adversely affected, destroyed, or degraded by a regulated activity.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.405 Permanent erosion control.

Permanent erosion control means continuous onsite and offsite control measures that are needed to control conveyance or deposition of earth, turbidity, or pollutants after development, construction, or restoration.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.410 Plant association of infrequent occurrence.

Plant association of infrequent occurrence means one or more plant species, which, because of the rarity of the habitat or the species involved, or for other botanical or environmental reasons, do not often occur in the city of Kent. Examples include but are not limited to:

1. Wetlands with a coniferous forested class or subclass consisting of trees such as western red cedar, Sitka spruce, or lodge pole pine growing on organic soils;

2. Bogs with a predominance of sphagnum moss, or those containing sphagnum moss, and typically including one or more species such as Labrador tea, sundew, bog laurel, or cranberry.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.415 Pond (deepwater aquatic habitat).

Repealed by Ord. No. 4159.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05)


11.06.420 Practicable alternative.

Practicable alternative means an alternative that is available and capable of being carried out after taking into consideration cost, existing technology, and logistics in light of overall project purposes, and having less of a negative effect on critical areas. It may involve using an alternative site in the general region that is available to the applicant and may feasibly be used to accomplish the project.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.425 Priority habitat/species or priority wildlife habitat/species.

Priority habitat/species or priority wildlife habitat/species means habitats and species of local importance and concern in urban areas, as identified by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife priority habitat and species (PHS) program. “Priority species” are wildlife species of concern due to their population status and their sensitivity to habitat alteration. “Priority habitats” are areas with one or more of the following attributes: comparatively high wildlife density; high wildlife species richness; significant wildlife breeding habitat; significant wildlife seasonal ranges; significant movement corridors for wildlife; limited availability; or high vulnerability. General types of priority habitat identified in the PHS program – some of which do not occur in the city of Kent – include Aspen stands, cliffs, meadows, oak woodlands, old-growth/mature forests, riparian areas, shrub-steppe, snag-rich areas, and wetlands.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.430 Qualified professional.

Qualified professional means a person with experience and training in the pertinent scientific discipline, and who is a qualified scientific expert with expertise appropriate for the relevant critical area subject in accordance with WAC 365-195-905, as amended. A qualified professional must have obtained a B.S. or B.A. or equivalent degree in biology, engineering, geology, environmental studies, fisheries, geomorphology, or a related field, or have at least five years of related work experience. A qualified engineer, geologist, and hydrogeologist must have an active license to practice within the state of Washington.

1. A qualified professional for wetlands must be a professional wetland scientist, or meet the education requirements in this section and have at least two years of full-time work experience as a wetlands professional, including delineating wetlands using the federal manuals and supplements, preparing wetlands reports, conducting function assessments, and developing and implementing mitigation plans.

2. A qualified professional for habitat must have a degree in biology or a related degree and professional experience related to the subject species.

3. A qualified professional for a geological hazard must be a professional engineer or geologist, licensed in the state of Washington.

4. A qualified professional for critical aquifer recharge areas must be a hydrogeologist, geologist, engineer, or other scientist with experience in preparing hydrogeologic assessments.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.435 Regulated activity.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4159.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05)


11.06.440 Repair or maintenance.

Repair or maintenance means an activity that restores the character, scope, size, and design of a structure or land use to its previously authorized and undamaged condition. Activities that change the character, size, or scope of a project beyond the original design and drain, dredge, fill, flood, or otherwise alter additional critical areas are not included in this definition.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.445 Restoration.

Restoration means actions taken to reestablish wetland, stream, or habitat functional values and characteristics that have been destroyed or degraded by past alterations (e.g., filling or grading). See also “Enhancement.”

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.450 Secondary habitat.

Secondary habitat means areas that offer less diversity of animal and plant species than priority habitat but that are important for performing the essential functions of habitat.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.455 Seismic hazard areas.

Seismic hazard areas means areas subject to a risk of earthquake damage due to soil liquefaction. These areas generally contain alluvial sediments, normally consolidated glacial deposits, vegetated materials (peat) that either are or can become saturated, and poorly compacted fill that either is or can become saturated. These areas are generally mapped as Category I and Category II liquefaction susceptibility areas on maps contained within: Palmer, Walsh, Logan, Gerstel, Liquefaction Susceptibility for the Auburn and Poverty Bay 7.5-Minute Quadrangles, Washington, Washington State Department of Natural Resources, September 1995; Palmer, Shasse, and Norman, Liquefaction Susceptibility for the Des Moines and Renton 7.5-Minute Quadrangles, Washington, Washington State Department of Natural Resources, December 1994; and slopes that could fail during an earthquake. In the city of Kent, these slope areas are generally mantled with Vashon ice-contact deposits. Vashon ice-contact deposits (Qvi) are mapped in: Luzier, Water Supply Bulletin No. 28, Geology and Ground-Water Resources of Southwestern King County, Washington, State of Washington Department of Water Resources, 1969; Booth DB, and Waldron HH, Geologic Map of the Des Moines Quadrangle, King County, Washington, 2004; Booth DB, Waldron HH, and Troost KG, Geologic Map of the Poverty Bay Quadrangle, King County, Washington, 2004.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.460 Scrub-shrub wetland.

Scrub-shrub wetland means a wetland with at least 30 percent of its surface area covered by woody vegetation less than 20 feet in height as the uppermost strata.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.465 Sensitive area tract.

Sensitive area tract means a separate tract that is created to protect a critical area and its buffer.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.470 Site.

Site means the location containing a regulated critical area and on which a regulated activity is proposed. The location may be a parcel or portion thereof, or any combination of contiguous parcels, where a proposed activity may affect a critical area. 

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.475 Slope.

Slope means an inclined earth surface, the inclination of which is expressed as the ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.480 Slope, top.

Slope, top means the uppermost limit of an area where the ground surface drops 10 feet or more vertically within a horizontal distance of 25 feet on slopes greater than 40 percent. 

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.485 Streams.

Streams means those areas where surface waters produce a defined channel or bed. A defined channel or bed is an area that demonstrates clear evidence of the passage of water and includes, but is not limited to, bedrock channels, gravel beds, sand and silt beds, and defined-channel swales. The channel or bed need not contain water year-round. This definition is not intended to include artificially created irrigation ditches, canals, storm or surface water devices, or other entirely artificial watercourses, unless they are used by salmonids or created for the purposes of stream mitigation.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.490 Stream reconnaissance report.

Stream reconnaissance report means a type of critical area report prepared by an applicant’s qualified professional to describe a stream and to characterize its conditions, wildlife, habitat values, and water quality.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.495 Structural diversity, vegetative.

Structural diversity, vegetative means the relative degree of diversity or complexity of vegetation in a wildlife habitat area as indicated by the stratification or layering of different plant communities (e.g., ground cover, shrub layer, and tree canopy); the variety of plant species; and the spacing or pattern of vegetation.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.497 Sub-basin.*

Sub-basin means a smaller drainage basin that is part of a larger drainage basin or watershed. 

(Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)

*Code reviser’s note: Ord. 4159 adds these provisions as Section 11.06.505. The section has been editorially renumbered to avoid duplication of numbering.


11.06.500 Substantial improvement or reconstruction.

Substantial improvement or reconstruction means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement the cost of which is more than 50 percent of the market value of the structure either (1) before the improvement is started or (2) before the damage occurred if the structure damaged is being replaced. An improvement occurs when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. Substantial improvement does not include (1) an improvement to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety (International Building Code/International Fire Code) specifications which are necessary to assure safe conditions; or (2) alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.505 Substrate.

Substrate means the soil, sediment, decomposing organic matter, or combination of those located on the bottom surface of the wetland, lake, stream, or river.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.510 Temporary erosion control.

Temporary erosion control means onsite and offsite control measures that are needed to control conveyance or deposition of earth, turbidity, or pollutants during development, construction, or restoration.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.515 Unavoidable and necessary impacts.

Unavoidable and necessary impacts means impacts to a critical area or applicable buffers that remain after an applicant has demonstrated that no practicable alternative exists for the proposed project. These impacts are subject to the mitigation provisions contained in this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.520 Utility.

Utility means natural gas, electric, telephone, and telecommunications, cable communications, water, sewer, or storm drainage and their respective facilities, lines, pipes, mains, equipment, and appurtenances.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.525 Volcanic hazard area.

Volcanic hazard area means an area subject to a risk of inundation by lahars or other related flooding events resulting from volcanic activity originating from Mount Rainier. These areas are mapped as inundation zones for Class M lahars on maps contained within: Hoblitt, R.P., Walder, J.S., Driedger, C.L., Scott, K.M., Pringle, P.T., and Vallance, J.W., Volcano Hazards from Mount Rainier, Washington, U.S. Geologic Survey Open File Report 98-428, 1998. 

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.530 Wetland.

Wetland or wetlands means areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Wetlands do not include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland sites, including, but not limited to, irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and landscape amenities, or those wetlands created after July 1, 1990, that were unintentionally created as a result of construction or alteration of a public road, street, or highway. However, wetlands include those artificial wetlands intentionally created to mitigate conversion of wetlands. Identification of wetlands and delineation of their boundaries pursuant to this chapter shall be done in accordance with the approved federal wetland delineation manual and applicable regional supplements as set forth in WAC 173-22-035, as amended. Wetlands determined prior converted cropland (PCC) by federal agencies may still be considered wetlands by the city of Kent. If these wetlands meet requirements of the approved federal wetland delineation manual, the wetlands shall be regulated, and the critical area shall be protected like any other wetland pursuant to this code.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 3805, § 1, 8-15-06; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.533 Wetland category.

Wetland category means the numeric designation (I through IV) assigned to a wetland to provide an indication of that wetland’s overall function and value. Wetland categories rank the city’s wetlands from highest (Category I) to lowest (Category IV).

(Ord. No. 3805, § 1, 8-15-06; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.535 Wetland class.

Wetland class means the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service wetland classification scheme that uses an hierarchy of systems, subsystems, classes, and subclasses to describe wetland types (refer to USFWS, December 1979, Classification of Wetlands and Deepwater Habitats of the United States for a complete explanation of the wetland classification scheme). Eleven class names are used to describe wetland and deepwater habitat types. These include: forested wetland, scrub-shrub wetland, emergent wetland, moss-lichen wetland, unconsolidated shore, aquatic bed, unconsolidated bottom, rock bottom, rocky shore, streambed, and reef.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.540 Wetland edge.

Wetland edge means the boundary of a wetland as delineated based on the definitions in this chapter and the procedures specified in this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.543 Wetlands of high conservation value (previously known as natural heritage wetland).

Wetlands of high conservation value means wetlands identified by the Washington State Department of Natural Resources Natural Heritage Program as either high-quality undisturbed wetlands or wetlands that support state threatened, endangered, or sensitive plant species. Wetlands of high conservation value inventories are available from the Washington State Department of Natural Resources.

(Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.545 Wildlife habitat.

Wildlife habitat means areas that provide food, protective cover, nesting, loafing, breeding, or movement for fish and wildlife and with which individual species have a primary association. Wildlife habitat includes naturally occurring ponds less than 20 acres in size. 

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.547 Wildlife-passable fence.

Wildlife-passable fence means a fence that is designed and placed to allow wild animals of all sizes to pass beneath or through, in order to promote wildlife mobility and habitat corridors. A wildlife-passable fence may include split-rail cedar, or other non-pressure treated fencing type approved by the director.

(Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)

Article III. General Mitigation and Monitoring


11.06.550 Mitigation standards.

A. Mitigation sequencing shall be avoidance, minimization, mitigation. Any proposal to impact a critical area shall demonstrate that it is unavoidable or will provide a greater function and value to the critical area.

B. Adverse impacts to critical area functions and values shall be mitigated. Mitigation actions shall be implemented in the preferred sequence as identified in KCC 11.06.380. Proposals that include less preferred or compensatory mitigation shall demonstrate that:

1. All feasible and reasonable measures have been taken to reduce impacts and losses to the critical area, or to avoid impacts where avoidance is required by these regulations.

2. The restored, created, or enhanced critical area or buffer will at a minimum be as viable and enduring as the critical area or buffer area it replaces.

3. In the case of wetlands and streams, no overall net loss will occur in wetland or stream functions and values. The mitigation shall be functionally equivalent to the altered wetland or stream in terms of hydrological, biological, physical, and chemical functions.

4. In the case of isolated emergent Category III or IV wetlands less than 5,000 square feet in size, avoidance of impacts is not required. However, replacement wetland area must be created pursuant to KCC 11.06.660(D).

C. Mitigation banking and in-lieu fee mitigation. The city may approve mitigation banking or in-lieu fee mitigation as a form of compensatory mitigation for wetland and habitat conservation area impacts when the provisions of this chapter require mitigation and the use of a mitigation bank/in-lieu fee program will provide equivalent or greater replacement of critical area functions and values when compared to conventional permittee-responsible mitigation. Mitigation banks and in-lieu fee programs shall only be used when it can be demonstrated that they provide significant ecological benefits including long-term conservation of critical areas, important species, and habitats or habitat linkages, and when they are documented to provide a viable alternative to the piecemeal mitigation for individual project impacts to achieve ecosystem-based conservation goals. Mitigation banks and in-lieu fee programs shall not be used unless they are certified in accordance with applicable federal and state mitigation rules and expressly authorized through city legislative action.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 3805, § 1, 8-15-06; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.560 Location and timing of compensatory mitigation.

A. Mitigation shall be provided onsite where possible, unless the director agrees that a higher function and value can be accomplished offsite within the same drainage basin. Mitigation may be allowed offsite only when the director determines that onsite mitigation is not scientifically feasible or practical due to physical features of the property. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to demonstrate that mitigation cannot be provided onsite.

B. When mitigation cannot be provided onsite, mitigation shall be provided in the same drainage basin as the permitted activity on property owned, secured, or controlled by the applicant where such mitigation is practical and beneficial to the critical area and associated resources. Mitigation sites shall be located within the city, unless otherwise approved by the director.

C. In-kind mitigation shall be provided except when the applicant demonstrates, and the director concurs, that greater function and value can be achieved through out-of-kind mitigation.

D. When wetland, stream, or habitat mitigation is permitted by these regulations onsite or offsite, the mitigation project shall occur near an adequate water supply (river, stream, groundwater) with a hydrologic connection to the critical area to ensure a successful mitigation or restoration. A natural hydrologic connection is preferential as compared to one which relies upon manmade features requiring routine maintenance.

E. Any agreed upon mitigation plan shall be completed prior to issuance of a building or construction permit, unless a phased or concurrent schedule that assures completion prior to occupancy has been approved by the department. 

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.570 Mitigation monitoring.

A. For any actions permitted by this chapter which require a mitigation plan, a monitoring program shall be prepared and implemented by the applicant to evaluate the success of the mitigation project and to determine necessary corrective actions. This program shall determine if the original goals and objectives of the mitigation plan are being met. The monitoring program shall be submitted to, reviewed, and approved by the department as a part of the mitigation plan.

B. The monitoring program shall include a contingency plan in the event that implementation of the mitigation plan fails to satisfy the approved goals and objectives. A financial guarantee or other security device, acceptable to both the director and the city attorney, is required to ensure the applicant’s compliance with the terms of the approved mitigation plan. The amount of the financial guarantee shall equal 125 percent of the cost of the mitigation project for the length of the monitoring period. Financial guarantees shall not be reduced or released until the maintenance and monitoring period is complete and has been approved in writing by the director.

C. The following elements shall be incorporated into monitoring programs prepared to comply with this chapter and shall be a part of the approved mitigation plan:

1. Appropriate, accepted, and unbiased qualitative or precise and accurate quantitative sampling methods to evaluate the success or failure of the project. 

2. Quantitative sampling methods that include permanent photopoints installed at the completion of construction and maintained throughout the monitoring period, permanent transects, sampling points (e.g., quadrants or water quality or quantity monitoring stations), and wildlife monitoring stations.

3. Clearly stipulated qualitative and quantitative sampling methods.

4. Appropriate qualitative and quantitative performance standards that will be used to measure the success or failure of the mitigation. These will include, at a minimum, standards for plant survival and diversity, including structural diversity, the extent of wetland hydrology, hydric soils, and habitat types and requirements as appropriate. Where plantings are proposed, a soil analysis is required. Soil amendments shall be considered as appropriate for site conditions.

5. Monitoring programs shall be for a period of at least five years and include at a minimum: preparation of an as-built plan; annual monitoring and preparation of annual monitoring reports following implementation; and a maintenance plan. Monitoring periods may be reduced to three years at the discretion of the director if the annual monitoring report proves that the mitigation project has met established performance standards. More stringent monitoring requirements may be required on a case-by-case basis for more complex mitigation plans.

6. Monitoring reports shall be submitted to the department at intervals identified in the approved mitigation plan. A schedule for the submittal of monitoring reports and maintenance periods shall be described in the approved mitigation plan. The reports shall be prepared by a qualified professional and must contain all qualitative and quantitative monitoring data, photographs, and an evaluation of each of the applicable performance standards. If performance standards are not being met, appropriate corrective or contingency measures must be identified and implemented to ensure that performance standards will be met. 

7. The director may extend the monitoring period beyond the minimum time frame if performance standards are not being met at the end of the initial five-year period; and may require additional financial guarantees to ensure that any additional monitoring and contingencies are completed to ensure the success of the mitigation.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)

Article IV. Wetlands


11.06.580 Wetlands rating system.

A. Wetlands are classified as Category I, II, III, or IV based on the 2014 Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington, Washington State Department of Ecology Publication No. 14-06-029, published October 2014.

B. Wetland rating categories shall not recognize illegal modifications that have been made to a wetland or its buffers.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 3805, § 1, 8-15-06; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.590 Determination of wetland boundary by delineation. 

A. The approved federal wetland delineation manual and applicable regional supplements shall be used to conduct wetland delineations. Delineations shall be required when a development is proposed on property containing wetlands identified on the city of Kent wetland inventory or when any other credible evidence may suggest that wetlands could be present. Delineations shall also be performed when the evidence suggests that buffers of wetlands on adjacent properties may have an impact on the proposed development.

B. The exact location of the wetland boundary shall be determined through the performance of a field investigation applying the wetland definition of this chapter. Where the applicant has provided a delineation of the wetland boundary, the department shall verify the accuracy of, and may render adjustments to, the boundary delineation. The decision of the department may only be appealed pursuant to procedures outlined in this chapter.

C. The delineation shall contain the following information:

1. A written assessment and accompanying maps of wetlands and buffers within 275 feet of the project area, including the following information at a minimum: all known wetland inventory maps (including a copy of the city of Kent wetland inventory map); field delineation data sheets, wetland rating forms, wetland delineations, and required buffers; existing wetland acreage; wetland category; vegetative, faunal, and hydrologic characteristics; soil and substrate conditions; and topographic data.

2. A discussion of measures, including avoidance, minimization, and mitigation proposed to preserve existing wetlands and restore any wetlands that were degraded prior to the current proposed land use activity, a discussion of the wetland’s hydrologic regime, discussion of existing wetland functions, landscape setting, and discussion of potential direct or indirect impacts that may occur to the wetland due to the proposed activity.

3. A habitat and native vegetation conservation strategy that addresses methods to protect and enhance onsite habitat and wetland functions.

D. A wetland delineation that has been approved by the department pursuant to a properly vested and valid city permit or land use approval for a proposed project shall be binding upon the city and the applicant. If the department has approved a wetland delineation report that is not part of a properly vested and valid city permit or land use approval, or the department has approved a wetland delineation report for another purpose, the wetland delineation report shall be valid for a period of five years from the date of the approved report.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 3805, § 1, 8-15-06; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.600 Wetland buffers and building setback lines.

A. Purpose.

1. The establishment of buffers is required for all development proposals and activities in or adjacent to wetlands. The purpose of the buffer is to protect the integrity, function, value, and resources of the wetland. Buffers shall typically consist of an undisturbed area of native vegetation established to achieve the purpose of the buffer. No buildings, structures, impervious surfaces, or nonnative landscaping are allowed in a buffer unless otherwise permitted by this chapter. Where flexible buffer widths are permitted by this chapter, such enhancement shall be considered in determining appropriate buffer widths. Buffers must be protected during construction by placement of a temporary barricade, notice of the presence of the critical area, and implementation of appropriate erosion and sedimentation controls.

2. Required buffer widths shall reflect the functions and values of the wetland, the risks associated with development, and the type and intensity of human activity proposed to be conducted near the wetland in those circumstances where such activity is permitted by these regulations.

B. Standard buffer widths.

1. Standard buffers shall be determined by the wetland category pursuant to KCC 11.06.580 and the habitat score from the Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington, Washington State Department of Ecology Publication No. 14-06-029, published October 2014. Standard buffers shall be applied to wetlands unless otherwise reduced pursuant to subsection (C) of this section, increased pursuant to subsection (D) of this section, or otherwise adjusted under other provisions of this chapter. Standard buffers (in feet) and reduced buffers permitted pursuant to subsection (C) of this section are provided in the following table:

	Habitat Score (Points)	3 – 4 Points	3 – 4 Points w/Subsection (C) of This Section	5 – 7 Points	5 – 7 points w/Subsection (C) of This Section	8 – 9 points	8 – 9 points w/Subsection (C) of This Section

	Category I	125	100	150	125	225	200

	Category II	100	75	125	110	200	175

	Category III	75	60	125	110	n/a	n/a

	Category IV	50	40	n/a	n/a	n/a	n/a

2. Wetland buffer zones shall be required for all regulated activities adjacent to wetlands. Any wetland created, restored, or enhanced as compensation for approved wetland alterations shall also include the standard buffer required for the category of the created, restored, or enhanced wetland. All buffers shall be measured from the wetland boundary as surveyed in the field. The width of the wetland buffer zone shall be determined according to the rating assigned to the wetland.

3. Bogs shall have a standard buffer of 215 feet. However, a 25-foot reduction is allowed with implementation of subsection (C) of this section.

4. Wetlands of high conservation value shall have a standard buffer of 215 feet. However, a 25-foot reduction is allowed with implementation of subsection (C) of this section.

C. Reduced buffer widths. Standard buffer widths, as noted in subsection (B) of this section, may be reduced through a combination of buffer enhancement and mitigation measures. The applicant must demonstrate that by enhancing the buffer and use of applicable mitigation measures identified in the following table, the reduced buffer will function at a level equivalent to or greater than the level of the standard buffer. 

1. Prior to approval of a reduced buffer, a critical areas application shall meet all of the criteria listed below. A reduced buffer will be approved only if:

a. It will provide an overall improvement in water quality;

b. It will provide an overall enhancement to fish, wildlife, or their habitat;

c. It will not result in an alteration of current drainage and stormwater detention capabilities;

d. It will not lead to unstable earth conditions or create an erosion hazard;

e. It will not be materially detrimental to any other property or the city as a whole; and

f. All exposed areas are stabilized with native vegetation, as appropriate.

2. Standard buffer widths as noted in subsection (B) of this section may be reduced, as provided in that subsection’s table, if the applicant implements all applicable mitigation measures identified in the following table:

	Examples of Disturbance	Activities and Uses That Cause Disturbances	Examples of Measures to Minimize Impacts

	Lights	• Parking lots

• Warehouses

• Manufacturing

• Residential	• Direct lights away from wetland

	Noise	• Manufacturing

• Residential	• Locate activity that generates noise away from wetland

	Toxic runoff*	• Parking lots

• Roads

• Manufacturing

• Residential areas

• Application of agricultural pesticides

• Landscaping	• Route all new, untreated runoff away from wetland while ensuring wetland is not dewatered

• Establish covenants limiting use of pesticides within 150 feet of wetlands

• Apply integrated pest management

	Change in water regime	• Impermeable surfaces

• Lawns

• Tilling	• Infiltrate or treat, detain, and disperse into buffer new runoff from impervious surfaces and new lawns

	Pets and human disturbance	• Residential areas	• Contain pets to prevent disturbance, i.e., dog run, chicken coop

	Dust	• Tilled fields	• Use best management practices to control dust

	* These examples are not necessarily adequate for minimizing toxic runoff if threatened or endangered species are present.

	• This is not a complete list of measures. Other similar measures may be proposed by the applicant for approval by the director or his/her designee.

	• Applicant shall discuss all applicable mitigation measures in the mitigation plan, including benefits to the wetlands for those used and rationale for not including specific measures.

D. Increased buffer widths.

1. If a Category I or II wetland with a habitat score greater than five points is located within 300 feet of a priority habitat area as defined by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, or as mapped by the city of Kent as a priority habitat area in accordance with the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife definitions, the buffer established in subsection (B) of this section shall be increased by 50 feet unless:

a. The applicant provides a relatively undisturbed vegetated corridor at least 100 feet wide between the wetland and all priority habitat areas located within 300 feet of the wetland. The corridor shall be protected for the entire distance between the wetland and the priority habitat area pursuant to KCC 11.06.640; and

b. The applicant incorporates all applicable mitigation design criteria pursuant to subsection (C) of this section.

2. The director may require increased buffer widths on a case-by-case basis when a larger buffer is necessary to protect species listed by the federal government or the state as endangered, threatened, sensitive, or documented priority species or habitats. Such increased buffers shall be based on recommendations by a qualified professional wetland biologist and, if applicable, best management practices for protection of the species adopted by an agency with jurisdiction.

E. Buffer averaging.

1. Wetland buffer width averaging shall be allowed where the applicant demonstrates the following:

a. The ecological functions and values of the buffer after averaging are equivalent to or greater than the functions and values before averaging as determined by a qualified professional and as approved by the city. Properly functioning buffers shall not be reduced through buffer averaging except in exceptional circumstances, such as a need to gain access to property or other similar circumstances, to be approved by the director.

b. Averaging will not adversely impact the wetland functions and values.

c. The total area contained within the wetland buffer after averaging shall be no less than the total area contained within the standard buffer prior to averaging.

d. At no point shall the buffer width be reduced by more than 25 percent of the standard buffer or be less than 37 and one-half feet.

e. The additional buffer shall be contiguous with the standard buffer and located in a manner to provide buffer functions to the wetland.

f. If the buffers are degraded pursuant to KCC 11.06.227, they shall be restored pursuant to an approved restoration/enhancement plan.

g. If restoration or enhancement of the buffer is required in order to establish a suitable growth of native plants, maintenance and monitoring of the buffer for a period of at least five years shall be provided pursuant to an approved monitoring plan as required by KCC 11.06.570, including an appropriate financial guarantee until the maintenance and monitoring period is completed and has been approved by the city.

F. Buffer restoration required. If the buffers, including both standard buffers and buffers which are averaged, are degraded, they shall be restored during development pursuant to an approved restoration plan. If the plan includes establishing a suitable growth of native plants, maintenance and monitoring of the buffer for a period of at least five years shall be provided pursuant to an approved monitoring plan as required by KCC 11.06.570, including an appropriate financial guarantee until the maintenance and monitoring period is completed and has been approved by the city. Where it can be demonstrated that there will be no impacts from the proposed development to the wetland or wetland buffer, the director shall have the authority to waive or modify this requirement.

G. Required report for buffer reduction or averaging. A request to reduce the buffer or buffer average pursuant to subsection (C) or (E) of this section shall be supported by a buffer enhancement/restoration plan prepared by a qualified professional. The plan shall assess the habitat, water quality, storm water detention, groundwater recharge, shoreline protection, and erosion protection functions of the buffer; assess the effects of the proposed decreased or modified buffer on those functions; and address the applicable criteria listed in this section. A buffer restoration or enhancement plan shall also provide the following: (1) a map locating the specific area of restoration or enhancement; (2) a planting plan that uses native plant species indigenous to this region including ground cover, shrubs, and trees; and (3) provisions for monitoring and maintenance throughout the monitoring period. 

H. Buffer condition. Except as otherwise allowed by this section, wetland buffers shall be retained in their natural condition. Where buffer disturbance has occurred during construction, re-vegetation with native vegetation shall be required pursuant to an approved restoration/enhancement plan consistent with this code.

I. Buffer utilization for landscape requirements. Enhanced wetland buffers may be used to satisfy landscaping requirements in Chapter 15.07 KCC when all of the following criteria are satisfied:

1. The buffer, as enhanced by applicant, will provide equivalent or greater protection of wetland functions.

2. The enhanced buffer will meet the landscaping requirements as outlined in Chapter 15.07 KCC. The proposed landscape vegetation satisfies wetland buffer vegetation requirements.

3. The enhanced buffer is of the full landscape width required by Chapter 15.07 KCC.

J. Permitted uses in a wetland buffer. Activities shall not be allowed in a wetland buffer except for the following, and then only when properly mitigated and conducted in a manner so as to minimize impacts to the buffer and the adjacent wetland:

1. When the improvements are part of an approved enhancement, restoration, or mitigation plan.

2. For construction of new public or private roads and utilities, and accessory structures, when no practicable alternative location exists.

3. Construction of foot, pedestrian, or bicycle trails, according to the following criteria:

a. Designed to minimize impact on the wetland system.

b. Where feasible, located within the outer half of the buffer, i.e., the portion of the buffer that is farther away from the wetland, except to cross a wetland when approved by the city and all other applicable agencies and except as appropriate to provide outlook points or similar locations for recreational, educational, scientific, and other purposes which will not adversely affect the overall functions and values of the wetland.

4. Construction of footbridges and boardwalks.

5. Construction of educational facilities, such as viewing platforms and informational signs.

6. Construction of outdoor recreation structures, such as fishing piers, boat launches, benches, and picnic tables.

7. Maintenance of existing facilities or temporary uses having minimal adverse impacts on buffers and no adverse impacts on wetlands. These may include but are not limited to: maintenance of existing drainage facilities, low intensity passive recreational activities such as pervious trails, nonpermanent wildlife watching blinds, short-term scientific or educational activities, and sports fishing.

8. Stormwater discharge outlets with energy dissipation structures as approved by the city of Kent. Unless otherwise approved by the director, these shall be located as close to the outer perimeter of the buffer as feasible through proper design and function of the discharge system. To the extent that construction of such outlets impacts vegetation in the buffer, restoration of the vegetation shall be required.

9. Ongoing city maintenance activities by its public works and parks department vegetation and management divisions shall be permitted to continue general maintenance of wetlands and associated buffers. Maintenance shall include but not be limited to trash removal, removal of nonnative vegetation, maintenance of existing vegetation as necessary, restoration, enhancement, and sign and fence maintenance.

K. Building setback lines. A minimum BSBL of 15 feet shall be required from the edge of a wetland buffer, provided the director may reduce the building setback limit by up to five feet if construction, operation, and maintenance of the building does not and will not create a risk of negative impacts on the adjacent buffer area. Alterations of the building setback lines shall not be permitted to create additional lots for subdivisions. Approval of alterations of the BSBL shall be provided in writing by the director, and may require mitigation such as buffer enhancement.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 3805, § 1, 8-15-06; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.610 Avoiding wetland impacts.

Regulated activities shall not be authorized in Category I wetlands except where it can be demonstrated that the impact is both unavoidable and necessary as described below, or that all reasonable economic uses are denied.

A. Where regulated activities are proposed, the applicant must demonstrate that:

1. The basic project purpose cannot reasonably be accomplished using an alternative site in the general region that is available to the applicant.

2. A reduction in the size, scope, configuration, or density of the project as proposed, and all alternative designs of the project as proposed that would avoid or result in less adverse impacts on a wetland or its buffer, will not accomplish the basic purpose of the project.

3. In cases where the applicant has rejected alternatives to the project as proposed due to constraints such as zoning, deficiencies of infrastructure, or parcel size, the applicant has made a reasonable attempt to remove or accommodate such constraints.

B. Filling of an isolated emergent Category III or Category IV wetland less than 5,000 square feet in size shall be permitted, provided a replacement wetland area is created pursuant to KCC 11.06.660(D).

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 3805, § 1, 8-15-06; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.620 Limits of impacts to wetlands.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4159.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 3805, § 1, 8-15-06)


11.06.630 Fencing and signage.

All development and subdivisions to which this chapter applies shall construct a wildlife-passable fence along the entire wetland buffer edge, unless otherwise approved by the director. Critical area signs must also be attached to the fence or located just inside the wildlife-passable fence attached to a four-by-four-inch cedar post (or other non-pressure treated materials approved by the city). Signs must be located at a rate of one sign per residential lot and one sign per 100 feet for all public rights-of-way, trails, parking areas, playgrounds, and all other uses located adjacent to wetlands and associated buffers.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.640 Sensitive area tracts, easements.

A. Condition of approval. As a condition of approval pursuant to this chapter, the director shall require creation of a separate sensitive area tract containing the areas determined to be wetlands or wetland buffers. Sensitive area tracts or easements are separate tracts containing wetlands and wetland buffers with perpetual deed restrictions requiring that the tracts remain undeveloped. Sensitive area tracts are an integral part of the lot in which they are created, are not intended for sale, lease, or transfer, and may be included in the area of the parent lot for purposes of subdivision method and minimum lot size.

B. Protection of wetlands and buffers. The director shall require that a critical area be protected by one of the following methods:

1. Protection of a regulated wetland and its associated buffer shall be provided by placing it in a separate tract on which development is prohibited; executing an easement in favor of the city, in a form and manner acceptable to both the director and the city attorney; dedication to a conservation organization or land trust; or similarly preserved through a permanent protective mechanism acceptable to the city. The location and limitations associated with the wetland and its buffer shall be shown on the face of the deed or plat, as applicable, to the property and shall be recorded with the King County recorder’s office; or

2. The applicant shall record against the property a permanent and irrevocable deed restriction on all lots containing a sensitive area tract or tracts created as a condition of approval. All deed restrictions shall be approved by the director and the city attorney and shall prohibit in perpetuity the development, alteration, or disturbance of vegetation within the sensitive area tract except for purposes of habitat enhancement as part of an enhancement project which has received prior written approval from the city and any other agency with jurisdiction over such activity.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.650 Notice on title.

The owner of any property with field-verified presence of wetlands or wetland buffers for which a permit application is submitted shall, as a condition of permit issuance, record a notice of the existence of such wetland or wetland buffer against the property with the King County recorder’s office. The notice shall be approved by the director and the city attorney for compliance with this provision. The titleholder will have the right to challenge this notice and to have it released if the wetland designation no longer applies; however, the applicant shall be responsible for completing a wetland delineation report, which will be subject to approval by the director. Any unapproved alterations of a wetland will constitute a code violation and will be enforced to the fullest extent of the Kent City Code.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.660 Compensating for wetland impacts.

A. Condition of approval. As a condition of any approval allowing alteration of wetlands or wetland buffers, or as an enforcement action, the director shall require that the applicant engage in the restoration, creation, or enhancement of wetlands and their buffers in order to offset the impacts resulting from the applicant’s or violator’s actions. The applicant shall develop a plan that provides for construction, maintenance, and monitoring of replacement wetlands or buffers and, as appropriate, land acquisition that recreates as nearly as practicable or improves the original wetlands in terms of acreage, function, geographic location, and setting. Compensatory mitigation plans shall be consistent with Wetland Mitigation in Washington State – Part 2: Developing Mitigation Plans – Version 1 (Ecology Publication No. 06-06-011b, Olympia, WA, March 2006 or as revised) and Selecting Wetland Mitigation Sites Using a Watershed Approach (Western Washington) (Publication No. 09-06-32, Olympia, WA, December 2009), and may incorporate guidance from Calculating Credits and Debits for Compensatory Mitigation in Wetlands of Western Washington (Ecology Publication No. 10-06-011, Hruby, 2012).

B. Goal. The overall goal of any compensatory mitigation project shall be no net loss of overall wetland acreage or function and to replace any wetland area lost with wetland(s) and buffers of equivalent functions and values. Compensation shall be completed prior to wetland destruction, where practicable. Compensatory mitigation programs shall incorporate the standards and requirements contained in KCC 11.06.550 and 11.06.560.

C. Preference of mitigation actions. Mitigation for lost or diminished wetland and buffer functions shall rely on the types below in the following order of preference:

1. Restoration (re-establishment and rehabilitation) of wetlands.

a. The goal of re-establishment is returning natural or historic functions to a former wetland. Re-establishment results in a gain in wetland acres and functions. Activities could include removing fill material, plugging ditches, or breaking drain tiles.

b. The goal of rehabilitation is repairing natural or historic functions of a degraded wetland. Rehabilitation results in a gain in wetland function but does not result in a gain in wetland acres. Activities could involve breaching a dike to reconnect wetlands to a floodplain.

2. Establishment (creation) of wetlands on disturbed upland sites such as those with vegetative cover consisting primarily of nonnative species. Establishment results in a gain in wetland acres. This should be attempted only when there is an adequate source of water and it can be shown that the surface and subsurface hydrologic regime is conducive to the wetland community that is anticipated in the design.

a. If a site is not available for wetland restoration to compensate for expected wetland or buffer impacts, the approval authority may authorize creation of a wetland and buffer upon demonstration by the applicant’s qualified wetland scientist that:

i. The hydrology and soil conditions at the proposed mitigation site are conducive for sustaining the proposed wetland and that creation of a wetland at the site will not likely cause hydrologic problems elsewhere;

ii. The proposed mitigation site does not contain invasive plants or noxious weeds or that such vegetation will be completely eradicated at the site;

iii. Adjacent land uses and site conditions do not jeopardize the viability of the proposed wetland and buffer (e.g., due to the presence of invasive plants or noxious weeds, stormwater runoff, noise, light, or other impacts); and

iv. The proposed wetland and buffer are designed to be self-sustaining with little or no long-term maintenance.

3. Enhancement of significantly degraded wetlands in combination with restoration or creation. Enhancement should be part of a mitigation package that includes replacing the altered area and meeting appropriate ratio requirements. Enhancement is undertaken for specified purposes such as water quality improvement, flood water retention, or wildlife habitat. Enhancement alone will result in a loss of wetland acreage and is less effective at replacing the functions lost. Applicants proposing to enhance wetlands or associated buffers shall demonstrate:

a. How the proposed enhancement will increase the wetland’s or the buffer’s functions;

b. How this increase in function will adequately compensate for the impacts; and

c. How all other existing wetland functions at the mitigation site will be protected.

D. Acreage replacement and enhancement ratio. Wetland alterations shall be replaced or enhanced using the formulas in the table below; however, the director may choose to double mitigation ratios in instances where wetlands are filled or negatively affected as a result of code violations. The first number specifies the acreage of wetlands requiring replacement and the second specifies the acreage of wetlands altered. These ratios do not apply to remedial actions resulting from illegal alterations.

	Category and Type of Wetland Impacts	Re-establishment or Creation	Re-establishment or Creation (R/C) and Enhancement (E)

	Category IV	1.5:1	1:1 R/C and 1:1 E

	Category III	2:1	1:1 R/C and 2:1 E

	Category II	3:1	1:1 R/C and 4:1 E

	Category I 	6:1	1:1 R/C and 10:1 E

	Category I Wetlands of High Conservation Value	Not considered possible	R/C Not considered possible

	Category I Bog	Not considered possible	R/C Not considered possible

NOTE: Category I, II, and III wetland alterations can also be made by a combination of creation of new wetlands and enhancement of existing wetlands within the range of the ratios set out in the table so long as a minimum one to one creation ratio is met (for example, creation of new wetlands at a one and one-half to one ratio along with enhancement of existing wetlands at a ratio of five to one may be acceptable for a Category I wetland).

E. Decreased replacement ratio. The director may decrease the required replacement ratio where the applicant provides the mitigation prior to altering the wetland, and a minimum acreage replacement ratio of one to one is provided. In such a case, the mitigation must be in place, monitored for three growing seasons, and be deemed a success prior to allowing any alterations.

F. Buffer mitigation ratios. Impacts to buffers shall be mitigated at a one to one ratio. Compensatory buffer mitigation shall replace those buffer functions lost from development.

G. Wetland mitigation bank or in-lieu fee program. The city may approve mitigation banking or in-lieu fee mitigation as a form of compensatory mitigation for wetland impacts when the provisions of this chapter require mitigation and when the use of a mitigation bank or in-lieu fee program will provide equivalent or greater replacement of wetland functions and values when compared to conventional permittee-responsible mitigation. Mitigation banks and in-lieu fee programs shall only be used when it can be demonstrated that they provide significant ecological benefits, including long-term conservation of critical areas, important species, habitats, or habitat linkages, and when they are documented to provide a viable alternative to the piecemeal mitigation for individual project impacts to achieve ecosystem-based conservation goals. Mitigation banks and in-lieu fee programs shall not be used unless they are certified in accordance with applicable federal and state mitigation rules.

H. Wetland type. In-kind compensation shall be provided except that out-of-kind compensation may be accepted where:

1. The wetland system to be replaced is already significantly degraded and out-of-kind replacement will result in a wetland with greater functional value.

2. Technical problems such as exotic vegetation and changes in watershed hydrology make implementation of in-kind compensation impracticable.

3. Out-of-kind replacement will best meet identified regional goals (e.g., replacement of historically diminished wetland types).

I. Advance mitigation. Mitigation for projects with pre-identified impacts to wetlands may be constructed in advance of the impacts if the mitigation is implemented according to federal rules, state policy on advance mitigation, and state water quality regulations.

J. Location. Compensatory mitigation actions shall be conducted onsite or within the same sub-basin as the impact site unless the applicant can demonstrate that:

1. The hydrology and ecosystem of the original wetland and those who benefit from the hydrology and ecosystem will not be substantially damaged by the onsite loss.

2. Onsite compensation is not feasible due to problems with hydrology, soils, or other factors.

3. Compensation is not practical due to potentially adverse impacts from surrounding land uses.

4. Existing functional values at the site of the proposed restoration are significantly greater than lost wetland functional values.

5. Adopted goals for flood storage, flood conveyance, habitat, or other wetland functions have been established and strongly justify location of compensatory measures at another site.

K. Offsite compensation. Offsite compensation shall occur within the Green River watershed, unless:

1. Established watershed goals for water quality, flood storage or conveyance, habitat, or other wetland functions have been established by the city and strongly justify location of mitigation at another site;

2. Credits from a state-certified wetland mitigation bank are used as compensation, and the use of credits is consistent with the terms of the certified bank instrument; or

3. Fees are paid to an approved in-lieu fee program to compensate for the impacts.

L. Offsite compensation site selection. When considering offsite mitigation, preference should be given to using alternative mitigation, such as a mitigation bank, an in-lieu fee program, or advanced mitigation.

Applicants shall pursue siting in the following order of preference:

1. Upland sites which were formerly wetlands or significantly degraded wetlands. Such wetlands are typically small; have only one wetland class; and have one dominant plant species or a predominance of exotic species.

2. Idle upland sites generally having bare ground or vegetative cover consisting primarily of exotic introduced species, weeds, or emergent vegetation.

3. Other disturbed upland.

M. Timing. Where feasible, compensatory projects shall be completed prior to activities that will disturb wetlands, or immediately after activities that will temporarily disturb wetlands, or prior to use or occupancy of the activity or development which was conditioned upon such compensation. Construction of compensation projects shall be timed to reduce impacts to existing fisheries, wildlife, and flora.

N. Completion of mitigation construction. On completion of construction, any approved mitigation project must be signed off by the applicant’s qualified professional and approved by the department. A signed letter from the professional will indicate that the construction has been completed as approved, and approval of the installed mitigation plan will begin the monitoring period if appropriate.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 3805, § 1, 8-15-06; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15; Ord. No. 4249, § 1, 6-20-17)

Article V. Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas


11.06.670 Stream classifications and rating.

A. To promote consistent application of the standards and requirements of this chapter, streams within the city of Kent shall be rated or classified according to their characteristics, function, and value, or their sensitivity to disturbance.

B. Classification of streams shall be determined by the department based on consideration of the following factors:

1. Approved technical reports submitted by qualified professionals in connection with applications for activities subject to these regulations must contain those criteria outlined in KCC 11.06.070, and the following:

a. Hydrologic mapping showing patterns of water movement into, through, and out of the site area; and

b. Specific descriptions of streams, including gradient and flow characteristics; stream bed condition; stream bank and slope stability; presence of fish or habitat for fish; presence of obstructions to fish movement; general water quality; stream bank vegetation; and a summary of existing stream value for fisheries habitat;

2. Application of the criteria contained in these regulations; and

3. Maps adopted pursuant to this chapter.

C. Streams shall be designated Types 1 through 3 as follows: 

1. Type 1 water means all shorelines identified in the Kent shoreline master program.

2. Type 2 water means salmonid bearing segments of natural waters not classified as Type 1 water, with documented salmonid use. Salmonid bearing waters are used by fish for spawning, rearing, or migration. 

3. Type 3 water means nonsalmonid segments of natural waters not classified as Type 1 or 2 water. These are stream segments within the bankfull width of defined channels that are perennial and intermittent nonsalmonid habitat streams. These waters begin at a point along the channel where documented salmonid fish use ends.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.680 Stream buffer areas, setbacks, fencing, and signage.

A. Purpose.

1. The establishment of buffers is required for all development proposals and activities in or adjacent to streams. The purpose of the buffer is to protect the integrity, function, value, and resources of the stream. Buffers shall typically consist of an undisturbed area of native vegetation established to achieve the purpose of the buffer. No buildings, structures, impervious surfaces or nonnative landscaping are allowed in a buffer unless otherwise permitted by this chapter. Where flexible buffer widths are permitted by this chapter, such enhancement shall be considered in determining appropriate buffer widths. Buffers must be protected during construction by placement of a temporary barricade, notice of the presence of the critical area, and implementation of appropriate erosion and sedimentation controls.

2. Required buffer widths shall reflect the functions and values of the stream, the risks associated with development, and the type and intensity of human activity proposed to be conducted on or near the stream in those circumstances where such activity is permitted by these regulations.

B. Standard buffer widths. The following standard buffers are established for streams, as measured from the ordinary high water mark:

	Stream Type 	Standard Buffer

	Type 1 	Per Kent SMP 

	Type 2	100 feet

	Type 3	40 feet

C. Valley stream buffers. A special stream buffer and mitigation/enhancement program shall apply to the industrialized areas adjacent to portions of Mill Creek, Garrison Creek, and Springbrook Creek on the valley floor. These areas are substantially developed for industrial uses and existing, historical setbacks are typically less than 50 feet. Existing buffers are degraded. These areas are generally identified by the valley stream overlay map. The valley stream overlay area is generally described as that area beginning at the Kent city limits where the Green River and South 180th Street intersect, following South 180th Street easterly to the eastern right-of-way line to SR 167, then moving south along the SR 167 eastern right-of-way line to the intersection of 88th Avenue South, then along the Green River Valley floor to West Smith Street, then east along West Smith Street to East Titus Street, then along East Titus Street to Central Avenue, then following the Green River Valley floor to the Green River, then following the eastern edge of the Green River to the point of beginning. The following standards shall apply to development proposals adjacent to streams within the overlay: 

1. Stream buffers shall be 50 feet.

2. The goal of the special program applicable to these streams shall be to enhance existing vegetation and habitat to accomplish sediment removal and erosion control, pollutant removal, placement of large woody debris, and particularly to control water temperature. These objectives can be accomplished with the required buffers. 

3. The entire stream buffer shall be enhanced pursuant to a buffer management and enhancement plan consistent with the mitigation performance standards in this section.

4. Buffer reductions are not allowed except as permitted through the reasonable use provisions of KCC 11.06.090 or the variance provisions of KCC 11.06.100.

D. Increased buffers. A buffer width greater than the standard may be required by the city based on the findings of site-specific studies prepared consistent with these regulations, or to comply with state or federal plans to preserve endangered or threatened species.

E. Buffer reduction with enhancement. Standard buffer widths for degraded buffers may be reduced for Type 2 streams only, subject to the following criteria, and in accordance with the stream report:

1. Stream and riparian functions will not be reduced.

2. Salmonid habitat will not be adversely affected.

3. Additional enhancement of habitat is provided in conjunction with the reduced buffer.

4. The buffer width is not reduced by more than 25 percent in any location.

5. All reduced buffers shall be mitigated through buffer enhancement pursuant to the requirements of KCC 11.06.550.

F. Activities within buffer. No structures or improvements are permitted within the stream buffer area, including buildings, decks, and docks, except as otherwise permitted by this section, by the city’s adopted shoreline master program, or under one of the following circumstances, and then only when properly mitigated:

1. When the improvements are part of an approved enhancement, restoration, or mitigation plan;

2. Construction of new public roads and utilities, and accessory structures, when no feasible alternative location exists;

3. Construction of foot, pedestrian, or bicycle trails, according to the following criteria:

a. Designed to minimize impact on the stream system.

b. Where feasible, located within the outer half of the buffer, i.e., the portion of the buffer that is farther away from the stream, except to cross a stream when approved by the city and all other applicable agencies and except as appropriate to provide outlook points or similar locations for education, recreation, scientific, and other purposes which will not adversely affect the overall functions and values of the stream;

4. Construction of footbridges and boardwalks;

5. Construction of educational facilities, such as viewing platforms and informational signs;

6. Construction of outdoor recreation structures, such as fishing piers, boat launches, benches, and picnic tables;

7. Maintenance of existing facilities or temporary uses having minimal adverse impacts on buffers and no adverse impacts on streams. These may include but are not limited to: maintenance of existing drainage facilities, and low intensity passive recreational activities such as pervious trails, nonpermanent wildlife watching blinds, short-term scientific or educational activities, and sports fishing;

8. Stormwater discharge outlets with energy dissipation structures as approved by the city of Kent. Unless otherwise approved by the director, these shall be located as close to the outer perimeter of the buffer as feasible through proper design and function of the discharge system. To the extent that construction of such outlets impacts vegetation in the buffer, restoration of the vegetation shall be required; or

9. Ongoing city maintenance activities by its public works and parks department vegetation and management divisions shall be permitted to continue general maintenance of streams and associated buffers. Maintenance shall include but not be limited to trash removal, removal of nonnative vegetation, maintenance of existing vegetation as necessary, restoration, enhancement, and sign and fence maintenance.

G. Protection of streams/buffers. Long-term protection of a regulated stream and its associated buffer shall be provided by placing it in a separate tract on which development is prohibited; executing an easement in favor of the city, in a form and manner acceptable to both the director and the city attorney; dedication to a conservation organization or land trust; or similarly preserved through a permanent protective mechanism acceptable to the city. The location and limitations associated with the stream and its buffer shall be shown on the face of the deed or plat, as applicable, to the property and shall be recorded with the King County recorder’s office.

H. Buffer enhancements. The applicant may propose to implement one or more enhancement measures, listed in order of preference below, which will be considered in establishing buffer requirements:

1. Removal of fish barriers to restore accessibility to anadromous fish.

2. Enhancement of fish habitat using log structures incorporated as part of a fish habitat enhancement plan.

3. Creating or enhancing the surface channel if approved by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife.

4. Planting native vegetation within the buffer area, especially vegetation that would increase value for fish and wildlife, increase stream bank or slope stability, improve water quality, or provide aesthetic or recreational value.

5. Landscaping outside the buffer area with native vegetation or a reduction in the amount of clearing outside the buffer area.

6. Enhancement of wildlife habitat by adding structures that are likely to be used by wildlife, including wood duck houses, bat boxes, nesting platforms, snags, rootwads/stumps, birdhouses, and heron nesting areas.

7. Additional mitigating measures may include but are not limited to the following:

a. Creating a surface channel where a stream was previously culverted or piped.

b. Removing or modifying existing stream culverts (such as at road crossings) to improve fish passage and flow capabilities which are not detrimental to fish.

c. Upgrading retention/detention facilities or other drainage facilities beyond required levels.

d. Similar measures determined to be appropriate by the department.

I. Buffer restoration required. If the stream buffers, including both standard buffers and reduced buffers, are degraded, they shall be restored during development pursuant to an approved restoration plan. If the plan includes establishing a suitable growth of native plants, maintenance and monitoring of the buffer for a period of at least five years shall be provided pursuant to an approved monitoring plan as required by KCC 11.06.570, including a financial guarantee until the maintenance and monitoring period is completed and has been approved by the city. Where it can be demonstrated that there will be no impacts from the proposed development to the stream or stream buffer, the director shall have the authority to waive or modify this requirement.

J. Building setback lines. A minimum BSBL of 15 feet shall be required from the edge of a stream buffer, provided the director may reduce the building setback limit by up to five feet if construction, operation, and maintenance of the building does not and will not create a risk of negative impacts on the adjacent buffer area. Alterations of the building setback lines shall not be permitted to create additional lots for subdivisions. Approval of alterations of the BSBL shall be provided in writing by the director, and may require mitigation such as buffer enhancement.

K. Fencing and signage. All development and subdivisions to which this chapter applies shall construct a wildlife-passable fence along the entire stream buffer edge, unless otherwise approved by the director. Critical area signs must also be attached to the fence or located just inside the wildlife-passable fence attached to a four-by-four-inch cedar post or other non-pressure treated materials approved by the city. Signs must be located at a rate of one sign per residential lot and one sign per 100 feet for all public rights-of-way, trails, parking areas, playgrounds, and all other uses located adjacent to streams and associated buffers.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.690 Alteration or development – Standards and criteria.

Alteration of streams or their established buffers may be permitted by the department subject to the criteria of this section. Standards for mitigation of impacts to critical areas are identified in KCC 11.06.550.

A. Alteration shall not degrade the functions and values of the stream.

B. Activities located in water bodies and associated buffers used by anadromous fish shall give special consideration to the preservation and enhancement of fish habitat, including but not limited to the following: 

1. The activity is timed to occur only within the allowable work window for the particular species as identified by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife.

2. The activity is designed so as not to degrade the functions and values of the habitat and any impacts are mitigated.

3. An alternate location or design is not feasible.

C. Relocation of a Type 2 or 3 stream solely to facilitate general site design shall not be permitted. Relocation of a stream may be permitted only when it is part of an approved mitigation or enhancement/restoration plan, and will result in equal or better habitat and water quality, and will not diminish the flow capacity of the stream.

D. All new culverts shall be designed following guidance provided in the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife’s document: Water Crossing Design Guidelines, 2013 (or most recent version thereof). The applicant shall obtain a HPA from the Department of Fish and Wildlife. Culverts are allowed only in Types 2 and 3.

E. The applicant or successors shall, at all times, keep any culvert free of debris and sediment to allow free passage of water and, if applicable, fish.

F. The city may require that a culvert be removed from a stream as a condition of approval, unless the culvert is not detrimental to fish habitat or water quality, or removal would be a long-term detriment to fish or wildlife habitat or water quality.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.700 Mitigation performance standards.

The performance standards in this section, and the standards in KCC 11.06.550 and 11.06.560, shall be incorporated into mitigation plans submitted to the city for impacts to streams. Mitigation plans are subject to approval by the director. 

A. Use plants native to the Puget lowlands or Pacific Northwest ecoregion. Nonnative, introduced plants or plants listed by the Washington State Department of Agriculture as noxious weeds (Chapter 16-750 WAC) shall not be used.

B. Use plants adapted to and appropriate for the proposed habitats and consider the ecological conditions known or expected to be present on the site. 

C. Avoid planting significant areas of the site with species that have questionable potential for successful establishment, such as species with a narrow range of habitat tolerances. 

D. Specify plants that are commercially available from native-plant nurseries or available from local sources; if collecting some or all native plants from donor sites, collect in accordance with ecologically accepted methods, such as those described in the Washington Native Plant Society’s Policy on Collection and Sale of Native Plants, that do not jeopardize the survival or integrity of donor plant populations. 

E. Use perennial plants in preference to annual species. Annual plants shall only be used if mitigation monitoring determines that native plants are not naturally colonizing the site or if species diversity is unacceptably low compared to approved performance standards. 

F. Use plant species high in food and cover value for native fish and wildlife species that are known or likely to use the mitigation site (according to reference wetlands, published information, and professional judgment). 

G. Install a temporary irrigation system and specify an irrigation schedule unless a sufficient naturally occurring source of water is demonstrated. 

H. Confine temporary stockpiling of soils to upland areas. Unless otherwise approved by the public works department, comply with all applicable best management practices for clearing, grading, and erosion control to protect any nearby surface waters from sediment and turbidity. 

I. Show densities and placement of plants. These should be based on the ecological tolerances of species proposed for planting. 

J. Provide sufficient specifications and instructions to ensure proper placement diversity and spacing of seeds, tubers, bulbs, rhizomes, springs, plugs, and transplanted stock, and other habitat features, to provide a high probability of success, and to reduce the likelihood of prolonged losses of functions from proposed development. Prepare contingency plans as described in KCC 11.06.570 for all mitigation proposals. 

K. Do not rely on fertilizers and herbicides to promote establishment of plantings. If fertilizers are used, they must be approved in writing by the department and other applicable agencies, and shall be applied per manufacturer specifications to planting holes in organic or time-release forms, such as Osmocote® or comparable formulations, and never broadcast on the ground surface; if herbicides are used to control invasive species or noxious weeds and to help achieve performance standards, only those approved for use in aquatic ecosystems by the Washington Department of Ecology shall be used. Herbicides shall only be used in conformance with all applicable laws and regulations and be applied per manufacturer specifications by an applicator licensed in the state of Washington.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.710 Wildlife habitat classification and rating.

Wildlife habitat areas subject to these regulations include habitat classified as “fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas” and “naturally occurring ponds” according to the criteria in this section.

A. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas are those habitat areas which meet any of the following criteria:

1. The documented presence of federally or state listed endangered, threatened, or sensitive species.

2. The documented presence of species and habitats found on the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife Priority Habitats and Species databases, current city habitat maps, or other relevant databases. 

3. The presence of unusual nesting or resting sites such as heron rookeries or raptor nesting trees. This provision shall be limited to raptors which are included within the listed categories of wildlife noted in subsection (A)(2) of this section, and shall apply to active nests. 

B. Naturally occurring ponds (deepwater aquatic habitat), as defined in this chapter, which are important to and support a wide variety of species of fish, wildlife, or vegetation. 

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.720 Wildlife habitat buffer areas and setbacks. 

A. Buffer widths for fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas shall be determined by the department, based on a critical area report prepared by a qualified professional pursuant to this chapter and in consideration of the following factors:

1. Research and evaluation of best available science sources relevant to species and habitat present within the city, as documented in City of Kent Best Available Science Review for Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas, 2004, or amendments thereto.

2. Species-specific management guidelines of the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife.

3. Recommendations contained in the wildlife study submitted by a qualified professional, following the reporting requirements of these regulations.

4. The nature and intensity of land uses and activities occurring on the site and on adjacent sites. Buffers are encouraged but are not required for secondary habitat.

B. The critical area report must meet the criteria listed in KCC 11.06.070 in addition to the following conditions:

1. A narrative summary of existing habitat functions and values.

2. The documented presence of species and habitats found on the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife Priority Habitats and Species databases, current city habitat maps, or other relevant databases.

3. A description and location of any migration or movement corridors.

4. Identification of any areas that have previously been disturbed or degraded by human activity or natural processes.

5. Identification of edges between habitat types and any species commonly associated with those habitats.

6. Monitor each nesting site prior to construction and submit a report documenting that it is not currently being used by the relevant species to demonstrate that the nesting site is inactive and not subject to these regulations.

C. Buffers for ponds shall be 75 feet plus a 15-foot BSBL.

D. Certain uses and activities that are consistent with the purpose and function of the habitat buffer and do not detract from its integrity may be permitted by the department within the buffer depending on the sensitivity of the habitat area. Examples of uses and activities with minimal impact which may be permitted in appropriate cases include pedestrian trails, viewing platforms, and utility easements; provided, that any impacts to the buffer resulting from permitted facilities shall be mitigated. When permitted, such facilities shall be located in the outer 10 feet of the buffer, unless otherwise approved by the director.

E. Long-term protection of a fish and wildlife habitat conservation area and its associated buffer shall be provided by placing them in a separate tract on which development is prohibited; executing an easement in favor of the city, in a form and manner acceptable to both the director and the city attorney; dedication to a conservation organization or land trust; or similarly preserved through a permanent protective mechanism acceptable to the city. The location and limitations associated with the fish and wildlife habitat conservation area and its buffer shall be shown on the face of the deed or plat, as applicable, to the property and shall be recorded with the King County recorder’s office.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.730 Performance standards – Alteration or development of wildlife habitat.

A. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas. Alterations of fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas shall be avoided, subject to the variance or reasonable use provisions of this chapter.

B. Where permitted by these regulations, alteration shall not degrade the functions and values of the habitat.

C. Specific habitat: endangered, threatened, and sensitive species.

1. No development shall be allowed within a fish and wildlife habitat of importance or buffer, with which state or federally endangered, threatened, or sensitive species have a primary association, except as otherwise approved through this chapter. For fish habitat of importance on lands regulated under the Kent shoreline master program, development also must meet the use and development requirements of the Kent shoreline master program.

2. Whenever activities are proposed adjacent to a fish and wildlife habitat of importance with which state or federally endangered, threatened, or sensitive species have a primary association, such area shall be protected through the application of protection measures in accordance with a critical areas report prepared by a qualified professional and approved by the city. Approval for alteration of land adjacent to the fish and wildlife habitat of importance or its buffer shall not occur prior to consultation with the Department of Fish and Wildlife and the appropriate federal agency.

D. Specific habitat: great blue heron rookery.

1. A buffer, measured from the outermost nest tree in the rookery, shall be established around an active rookery. This area shall be maintained in native vegetation. 

The table below includes the year-round buffers for great blue heron rookeries recommended by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife Management Recommendations.

Great Blue Heron Rookery Recommended Buffers  

	Feet 	Setting 	% Built Within 1/4 Mile of the Nest Colony 

	984 	Undeveloped 	0 – 2% 

	656 	Suburban/Rural 	2 – 50% 

	197	Urban 	≥ 50% 

2. Between January 1st and July 31st, no clearing, grading, or land disturbing activity shall be allowed within the applicable buffer listed above unless otherwise approved by the city and the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. 

3. Approval of permits for activities within a heron rookery buffer shall not occur prior to the approval of a habitat management plan by the city and the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife.

E. Specific habitat: anadromous fish.

1. All activities, uses, and alterations proposed to be located in water bodies used by anadromous fish or in buffer areas that affect such water bodies shall give special consideration to the preservation and enhancement of anadromous fish habitat, including, but not limited to, adhering to the following standards:

a. Activities shall be timed to occur only during the allowable work window as designated by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife for the applicable species;

b. An alternative alignment or location for the activity is not feasible;

c. The activity is designed so that it will provide an overall improvement in the functions or values of the fish habitat or other critical areas; and

d. Any impacts to the functions or values of the habitat conservation area are mitigated in accordance with an approved critical areas report.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.740 Performance standards for mitigation planning. 

A. The performance standards in this section, and the general standards in KCC 11.06.550, shall be incorporated into mitigation plans submitted to the department for impacts to wildlife habitat. The following additional mitigation measures shall be incorporated in mitigation planning: 

1. Locate buildings and structures in a manner that minimizes adverse impacts on fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas used by priority, threatened, or endangered species and identified by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, National Marine Fisheries Services, and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Services.

2. Integrate retained habitat into open space and landscaping.

3. Wherever possible, consolidate fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas into larger, unfragmented, contiguous blocks.

4. Use native plant species for landscaping of disturbed or undeveloped areas and in any habitat enhancement or restoration activities.

5. Create habitat heterogeneity and structural diversity that emulates native plant communities described in Natural Vegetation of Oregon and Washington (Franklin, J.F. and C.T. Dyrness, 1988) or other regionally recognized publications on native landscapes.

6. Remove or control any noxious and invasive weeds or nonnative animals that are problematic to the critical habitat area as determined by the department.

7. Preserve significant or existing native trees, preferably in stands or groups, consistent with achieving the goals and standards of this chapter.

B. On completion of construction, any approved mitigation project must be signed off by the applicant’s qualified professional and approved by the department. A signed letter from the qualified professional will indicate that the construction has been completed as approved, and approval of the installed mitigation plan will begin the monitoring period if appropriate.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)

Article VI. Geological Hazard Areas


11.06.750 Buffers and setbacks.

A. A buffer shall be established to protect geologic hazard areas. Buffers and setbacks shall be established from the top, bottom, and sides of critical areas. Unless permitted by the director, native vegetation within buffer areas shall not be altered, and shall remain in its natural state. The width of the buffer shall be established by the department based on consideration of the following factors:

1. The recommendations contained in the geologic/geotechnical report required by this chapter; provided, that it is prepared by a qualified professional.

2. The sensitivity of the geologic hazard in question.

3. The type and intensity of the proposed land use, whether the proposed use may affect the geologic hazard, or whether the use itself will be affected by the geologic hazard.

B. All buffers shall include a minimum 15-foot BSBL.

C. When the geotechnical report demonstrates that, due to application of design and engineering solutions, lesser buffer and setback distances will meet the intent of this regulation, such reduced buffer and setback distances may be permitted. 

1. Minimum buffer width from identified landslide hazard areas shall be equal to the vertical height of the landslide hazard or 50 feet, whichever is greater, for all landslide hazard areas that measure 10 feet or more in vertical elevation change from top to toe of slope, as identified in the geotechnical report, maps, and field-checking. No disturbance may occur within the buffer except as provided within this chapter.

2. The buffer may be reduced when a qualified professional demonstrates to the department’s satisfaction that the reduction will adequately protect the proposed development, adjacent developments and uses, and the subject critical area. In no case shall the buffer be less than 25 feet.

3. To increase the functional attributes of the buffer, the department may require that the buffer be enhanced through planting of indigenous species.

4. The edge of the buffer area shall be clearly staked, flagged, and fenced prior to any site clearing or construction. The buffer boundary markers shall be clearly visible, durable, and permanently affixed to the ground. Site clearing shall not commence until the engineer has submitted written notice to the department that buffer requirements of this regulation are met. Field marking shall remain until all construction and clearing phases are completed and final approval has been granted by the department. 

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.760 Alterations of geologic hazard areas.

A. Criteria. Alterations of geological hazard areas or associated buffers may only occur for activities that meet the following criteria:

1. Will not increase the existing threat of the geological hazard to adjacent properties;

2. Will not adversely impact other critical areas;

3. Are designed so that the hazard to the project is eliminated or mitigated to a level equal to or less than pre-development conditions; and

4. Are certified as safe as designed under anticipated conditions by a qualified engineer or geologist, licensed in the state of Washington. 

The department may condition or deny proposals as appropriate to achieve these criteria. Conditions may include limitations of proposed uses, modification of density, alteration of site layout, and other appropriate changes to the proposal. 

B. Necessary public facilities. Public emergency, health, and safety facilities, and public utilities, shall not be sited within geologically hazardous areas, or in areas that could be affected by geologic hazards, such as landslide run out zones, unless there is no other practicable alternative.

C. Landslide hazard areas.

1. Alterations to landslide hazard areas may be permitted based on the findings and recommendations of a geologic report prepared consistent with the requirements of this chapter and certifying that the development complies with the criteria in subsection (A) of this section.

2. Unless otherwise provided or as a necessary part of an approved alteration, removal of any vegetation from a landslide hazard area or buffer shall be prohibited, except for removal of hazard trees as verified by the department.

3. Vegetation on slopes within a landslide hazard area or buffer which has been damaged by human activity or infested by noxious and invasive weeds may be replaced with vegetation native to Kent pursuant to an enhancement plan approved by the department. The use of hazardous substances, pesticides, and fertilizers in landslide hazard areas and their buffers is prohibited unless otherwise approved by the department in writing.

4. All alterations shall be undertaken in a manner to minimize disturbance to the landslide hazard area, slope, and vegetation unless the alterations are necessary for slope stabilization.

D. Erosion hazard areas.

1. Clearing in an erosion hazard area is not limited to time of year, except when such restrictions are recommended in the geotechnical report and approved by the department.

2. Alterations to erosion hazard areas may only occur for activities for which a hazard analysis has been completed and submitted certifying that the development complies with the criteria in subsection (A) of this section. The hazard analysis must be completed in general accordance with the requisites described in the geologic report.

3. Where the department determines that erosion from a development site in an erosion hazard area poses a significant risk of damage to downstream receiving waters, based either on the size of the project, the proximity to the receiving water, or the sensitivity of the receiving water, the applicant shall be required to provide regular monitoring of surface water discharge from the site. Monitoring reports shall be submitted to the department based on provisions in an approved mitigation plan. If the project does not meet state water quality standards, the department may suspend further development work on the site until such standards are met. 

4. The use of hazardous substances, pesticides, and fertilizers in erosion hazard areas is prohibited unless otherwise approved by the department.

E. Seismic hazard areas.

1. Alterations to seismic hazard areas may be allowed only as follows:

a. The evaluation of site-specific subsurface conditions shows that the proposed development site is not located in a seismic hazard area;

b. Mitigation based on the best available engineering and geotechnical practices shall be implemented which either eliminates or minimizes the risk of damage, death, or injury resulting from seismically induced settlement or soil liquefaction. Mitigation shall be consistent with the requirements of Chapter 14.01 KCC and shall be approved by the building official; and

c. Mobile homes may be placed in seismic hazard areas without performing special studies to address the seismic hazard. Such mobile homes may be subject to special support and tie-down requirements.

F. Volcanic hazard areas. The city shall maintain a map that indicates the location of volcanic hazard areas. Sites that are located on or within 200 feet of an identified volcanic hazard area shall include a notation on the title to the affected property disclosing the presence of the hazard. 

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)

Article VII. Critical Aquifer Recharge Areas


11.06.770 Critical aquifer recharge areas designation, rating, and mapping.

A. Critical aquifer recharge areas designation. Critical aquifer recharge areas (CARAs) are those areas with a critical recharging effect on aquifers used for potable water as defined by WAC 365-190-030(3). CARAs have prevailing geologic conditions associated with infiltration rates that create a high potential for contamination of groundwater resources or contribute significantly to the replenishment of groundwater. These areas include the following:

1. Wellhead protection areas. Wellhead protection areas shall be defined by the boundaries of the 10-year time of groundwater travel, or boundaries established using alternate criteria approved by the Department of Health in those settings where groundwater time of travel is not a reasonable delineation criterion, in accordance with WAC 246-290-135.

2. Susceptible groundwater management areas. Susceptible groundwater management areas are areas that have been designated as moderately or highly vulnerable or susceptible in an adopted groundwater management program developed pursuant to Chapter 173-100 WAC.

3. Special protection areas. Special protection areas are those areas defined by WAC 173-200-090.

4. Private wells. Private wells are not governed by this code; however, all provisions of the King County Board of Health Code Section 12.24.010 shall be applicable.

B. Mapping of critical aquifer recharge areas.

1. The approximate location and extent of critical aquifer recharge areas are shown on the wellhead protection area inventory map, maintained by the department.

2. These maps are to be used as a guide for the city of Kent, project applicants, or property owners, and may be continuously updated as new critical areas are identified or when updates to the city of Kent wetland wellhead protection program are completed. They are a reference and do not provide a final critical area designation.

3. This mapping does not include private water wells for single-family residences. 

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.780 Critical aquifer recharge area reporting requirements.

A. Activities that require a critical area report. If located within a CARA, the following land use proposals shall be required to complete a critical aquifer recharge area report. The report shall be submitted to, and reviewed and approved by, the department for:

1. Above ground storage tanks.

2. Dry cleaners.

3. Pipelines (hazardous liquid transmission).

4. Auto repair shops (including oil/lube facilities).

5. Underground storage tanks.

6. Gas stations.

7. Other land use types as determined by the director that may have the potential to significantly impact groundwater resources.

B. Requirements for critical aquifer recharge area reports.

1. A critical aquifer recharge area report shall be prepared by a qualified professional who is a hydrogeologist, or engineer, who is licensed in the state of Washington, and has experience in preparing hydrogeologic assessments.

2. A critical aquifer recharge area report shall include the following site- and proposal-related information at a minimum:

a. Available information regarding geologic and hydrogeologic characteristics of the site including the surface location of all critical aquifer recharge areas located onsite or immediately adjacent to the site, and permeability of the unsaturated zone based on available information.

b. Groundwater depth, flow direction, and gradient based on available information.

c. Currently available data on wells and springs within 1,300 feet of the project area.

d. Location of other critical areas, including surface waters, within 1,300 feet of the project area.

e. Available historic water quality data for the area to be affected by the proposed activity.

f. Best management practices proposed to be utilized.

g. Historic water quality data for the area to be affected by the proposed activity compiled for at least the previous five-year period based on available information.

h. Groundwater monitoring plan provisions.

i. Discussion of the effects of the proposed project on the groundwater quality and quantity, including:

i. Predictive evaluation of groundwater withdrawal effects.

ii. Predictive evaluation of contaminant transport based on potential releases to groundwater.

j. A spill plan that identifies equipment and structures that could fail, resulting in an impact for construction periods and for general operating business procedures post-construction. Spill plans shall include provisions for regular inspection, repair, and replacement of structures and equipment that could fail.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.790 Critical aquifer recharge area performance standards.

A. General requirements.

1. Activities may only be permitted in a critical aquifer recharge area if the applicant can show that the proposed activity will not cause contaminants to enter the aquifer and that the proposed activity will not adversely affect the recharging of the aquifer.

2. The proposed activity must comply with the water source protection requirements and recommendations of the federal Environmental Protection Agency, State Department of Health, and the Seattle-King County health department. 

3. The proposed storm water management facilities must be designed and constructed in accordance with the Kent Surface Water Design Manual, as adopted by the city of Kent pursuant to Chapter 7.07 KCC, including any amendments thereto.

B. Specific uses.

1. Storage tanks. All storage tanks proposed to be located in a critical aquifer recharge area must comply with all applicable codes including, but not limited to, the Washington State Department of Ecology and local code requirements and must conform to the following:

a. Underground tanks. All new underground storage facilities proposed for use in the storage of hazardous substances or hazardous wastes shall be designed and constructed so as to:

i. Prevent releases due to corrosion or structural failure for the operational life of the tank.

ii. Be protected against corrosion, constructed of noncorrosive material, steel clad with a noncorrosive material, or designed to include a secondary containment system to prevent the release or threatened release of any stored substances.

iii. Use material in the construction or lining of the tank that is compatible with the substance to be stored.

b. Above ground tanks. All new above ground storage facilities proposed for use in the storage of hazardous substances or hazardous wastes shall be designed and constructed so as to:

i. Not allow the release of a hazardous substance to the ground, groundwaters, or surface waters.

ii. Have primary containment areas enclosing or underlying the tank or part thereof.

iii. A secondary containment system either built into the tank structure or a dike system built outside the tank for all tanks.

iv. All outside above ground storage tanks shall be covered to prevent rainwater from filling secondary containment areas.

2. Vehicle repair and servicing. Vehicle repair and servicing must be conducted over impermeable pads and within a covered structure capable of withstanding normally expected weather conditions. Chemicals used in the process of vehicle repair and servicing must be stored in a manner that protects them from weather and provides containment should leaks occur.

3. Dry wells. No dry wells shall be allowed in critical aquifer recharge areas. Dry wells existing on the site prior to facility establishment must be abandoned using techniques approved by the State Department of Ecology prior to commencement of the proposed activity.

4. Residential use of pesticides and nutrients. Application of household pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers shall not exceed times and rates specified on the packaging. 

5. Spreading or injection of reclaimed water. Water reuse projects for reclaimed water must be in accordance with the adopted water or sewer comprehensive plans that have been approved by the Departments of Ecology and Health.

a. Surface spreading must meet the groundwater recharge criteria given in RCW 90.46.010(10) and 90.46.080.

b. Direct injection must be in accordance with the standards developed by authority of RCW 90.46.042.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


11.06.800 Prohibited uses.

The following activities and uses are prohibited in critical aquifer recharge areas:

A. Landfills. Landfills, including hazardous or dangerous waste, municipal solid waste, special waste, wood waste, and inert and demolition waste landfills.

B. Underground injection wells. Class I, III, and IV wells and subclasses F01, 5D03, 5F04, 5W09, 5W10, 5W11, 5W31, 5X13, 5X14, 5W20, 5X28, and 5N24 of Class V wells.

C. Mining.

1. Metals and hard rock mining.

2. Sand and gravel mining is prohibited from critical aquifer recharge areas determined to be highly susceptible or vulnerable.

D. Wood treatment facilities. Wood treatment facilities that allow any portion of the treatment process to occur over permeable surfaces (both natural and manmade).

E. Storage, processing, or disposal of radioactive substances. Facilities that store, process, or dispose of radioactive substances.

F. Private wells. Any property within the city of Kent using a private well for water supply shall abate the well in accordance with Department of Ecology standards, when development is proposed and can be serviced by a municipal water purveyor. Retention of exempt wells shall not be permitted for irrigation purposes to prevent potential cross-contamination issues.

1. All property currently with a private well, or within 200 feet of a private well, shall follow all conditions of the King County Board of Health Code Section 12.24.010 in the design of the development of the property. Any proposed development plans shall show all private wells within 200 feet.

G. Other uses. Activities that would significantly reduce the recharge to aquifers currently or potentially used as a potable water source or activities that would significantly reduce the recharge to aquifers that are a source of significant base flow to a regulated stream.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 7-21-15)


Title 12 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT Revised 8/19 Revised 1/20

Chapters:

12.01    Administration of Development Regulations 

12.02    Procedures for Amendments to Comprehensive Plan and Development Regulations

12.04    Subdivisions, Binding Site Plans, and Lot Line Adjustments Revised 8/19

12.05    Mobile Home Parks

12.06    Recreational Vehicle Park

12.07    Repealed

12.11    Concurrency Management 

12.13    School Impact Fees  Revised 8/19 Revised 1/20

12.14    Transportation Impact Fees 

12.15    Fire Impact Fees

12.20    Adoption and Administration of Impact Fees


Chapter 12.01 ADMINISTRATION OF DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS*

Sections:

12.01.010    Purpose and applicability.

12.01.020    Definitions.

12.01.030    Application processes and classification.

12.01.040    Project permit application framework.

12.01.050    Exemptions from project permit application processing.

12.01.055    Fees.

12.01.060    Joint public hearings.

12.01.070    Process VI legislative actions.

12.01.080    Pre-application conference.

12.01.090    Project permit applications.

12.01.100    Submission and acceptance of application.

12.01.105    Application vesting.

12.01.110    Procedure for complete but incorrect applications.

12.01.115    Procedure for ready-to-issue permits.

12.01.120    Referral and review of project permit applications.

12.01.125    Notification of proximity to agricultural resource lands.

12.01.130    Public notice – Generally.

12.01.140    Notice of application.

12.01.145    Notice of open record hearing.

12.01.147    Notice of city council meetings on project permit applications.

12.01.150    Consistency with development regulations and SEPA.

12.01.155    Code of conduct.

12.01.160    Open record hearings.

12.01.170    Notice of decision.

12.01.180    Time limitations.

12.01.185    Expiration of permits.

12.01.190    Open record appeal.

12.01.195    Closed record appeal.

12.01.200    Judicial appeals.

*Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3169, § 3, adopted May 16, 1994, repealed former ch. 12.01, §§ 12.01.010 – 12.01.080, which pertained to the board of adjustment.


12.01.010 Purpose and applicability.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish a set of processes to be used for land use and development proposals subject to review under the following portions of the Kent City Code:

A. Chapter 2.32 KCC, Office of Hearing Examiner;

B. Chapter 11.03 KCC, Environmental Policy;

C. Chapter 12.04 KCC, Subdivisions, Binding Site Plans, and Lot Line Adjustments;

D. Chapter 14.01 KCC, Building Codes; and

E. KCC Title 15, Zoning. 

(Ord. No. 3424, § 19, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3574, § 3, 9-18-01)


12.01.020 Definitions.

Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter.

A. Closed record appeals are administrative appeals under Chapter 36.70B RCW which are heard by the city council or hearing examiner, following an open record hearing on a project permit application when the appeal is on the record with no or limited new evidence or information allowed to be submitted and only appeal arguments allowed.

B. Judicial appeals are appeals filed by a party of record in King County superior court.

C. Open record hearing means a hearing held under Chapter 36.70B RCW and conducted by the Kent hearing examiner who is authorized by the city to conduct such hearings, that creates the city’s record through testimony and submission of evidence and information, under procedures prescribed by the city by ordinance or resolution. An open record hearing may be held prior to the city’s decision on a project permit to be known as an “open record predecision hearing.” An open record hearing may be held on an appeal, to be known as an “open record appeal hearing,” if no open record predecision hearing has been held on the project permit.

D. Parties of record means:

1. The applicant;

2. The property tax payer as identified by the records available from the King County assessor’s office;

3. Any person who testified at the open record public hearing on the application; and/or

4. Any person who submitted written comments during administrative review or has submitted written comments concerning the application at the open record public hearing (excluding persons who have only signed petitions or form letters).

E. Project permit means any land use or environmental permit or license required from the city of Kent for a project action, including but not limited to building permits, site development permits, site plan review, land use preparation permits, subdivisions, binding site plans, planned unit developments, conditional uses, shoreline substantial development permits, development plan review, or site-specific rezones authorized by the comprehensive plan; but excluding adoption or amendment of the comprehensive plan and development regulations, zoning of newly annexed land, area-wide rezones, and zoning map amendments except as otherwise specifically included in this subsection.

F. Planning director means the director of the planning department of the city of Kent or his/her designee.

G. Public meeting means an informal meeting, hearing, workshop, or other public gathering of persons to obtain comments from the public or other agencies on a proposed project permit prior to the city’s decision. A public meeting may include, but is not limited to, a design review meeting, a special committee meeting, such as the short subdivision committee, or a scoping meeting on a draft environmental impact statement. A public meeting does not include an open record hearing. The proceedings at a public meeting may be recorded and a report or recommendation may be included in the city’s project permit application file.

(Ord. No. 3424, § 19, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3574, § 3, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 3801, § 1, 6-6-06; Ord. No. 4044, § 1, 8-21-12)


12.01.030 Application processes and classification.

A. Application processes. Project permit applications for review pursuant to this chapter shall be classified as a Process I, Process II, Process III, Process IV, or Process V action. Process VI actions are legislative. Project permit applications and decisions are categorized by type as set forth in KCC 12.01.040.

B. Determination of proper process type. The planning director shall determine the proper process types for all applications. If there is a question as to the appropriate process type, the planning director shall resolve it in favor of the higher process type number. Process I is the lowest and Process VI is the highest.

C. Optional consolidated permit processing. An application that involves two (2) or more process types may be treated collectively under the highest numbered process type required for any part of the application or treated individually under each process type identified by this chapter. An applicant may ask that his or her application be treated collectively or individually. If the application is administered under the individual process option, the highest numbered process procedure must be finalized prior to the subsequent lower numbered process being finalized. If the application is processed under the individual procedure option, there shall be no more than one (1) open record hearing and no more than one (1) closed record appeal for all application processes. Open record hearings and closed record appeals must be consolidated under the higher process type number. An application for rezone may be processed separately from an application for another project permit.

D. Decision maker(s). Applications processed in accordance with subsection (C) of this section which have the same highest numbered process type but are assigned different hearing bodies shall be heard collectively by the highest decision maker(s). The city council is the highest, followed by the hearing examiner, and then the short subdivision committee and the downtown design review committee. Joint public hearings with other agencies shall be processed according to KCC 12.01.060, Joint public hearings. 

E. Environmental review. Process I, II, III, IV, and V permits which are subject to environmental review under SEPA (Chapter 43.21C RCW) are subject to the provisions of this chapter. An environmental checklist shall be submitted in conjunction with the submittal of a project permit application. One (1) environmental threshold determination shall be made for all related project permit applications. The city will not issue a threshold determination, other than a DS, prior to the submittal of a complete project permit application and the expiration of the public comment period for the notice of application pursuant to KCC 12.01.140, but may utilize the public notice procedures as outlined in KCC 11.03.410(A)(1) to consolidate public notice. 

(Ord. No. 3424, § 19, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3574, § 3, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 3760, § 1, 9-6-05; Ord. No. 4044, § 2, 8-21-12)


12.01.040 Project permit application framework.

A. Process types. The following table lists the process types, the corresponding applications, and, parenthetically, the corresponding final decision maker and appellate body.

	 	Process I	Process II	Process III	Process IV	Process V	Process VI

	Applications:	Zoning permit review (1) (7)	Administrative design review (1) (7)	Conditional use permit (5) (10)	Planned unit development (6) (10) with change of use	Final plat (1) (10)	Zoning of newly annexed lands (6) (10)

	 	Performance standards procedures (1) (7)	Shoreline substantial development permit (1) (9)	Sign variance (5) (10)	Special use combining district (6) (10)	 	Area-wide rezones to implement new city policies (6) (10)

	 	Sign permit (1) (7)	Accessory dwelling unit permit (1) (7)	Special home occupation permit (5) (10)	Rezone (6) (10)	 	Comprehensive plan amendments (6) (10)

	 	Lot line adjustment (1) (7)	Administrative variance (1) (7)	Variance (5) (10)	 	 	Development regulations (6) (10)

	 	Administrative interpretation (1) (7)	Downtown design review, all except for minor remodels (3) (7)	Shoreline conditional use permit (5) (9)	 	 	Zoning map amendments (6) (10)

	 	Application conditional certification multifamily tax exemption (12) (8), all other multifamily tax exemption (12) (7)	Downtown design review, only minor remodels (1) (7)	Shoreline variance (5) (9)	 	 	Zoning text amendments (6) (10)

	 	Development plan review (planning director, building official, or public works director) (7)	Midway design review (1) (7)	Preliminary plat (5) (10)

 	 	 	 

	 	Site plan review (planning director, building official, or public works director) (7)	Midway design review (1) (7)	 	 	 	 

	 	Administrative approval/WTF (1) (7)	Binding site plan (2) (7)	 	 	 	 

	 	Mobile home park closure (11) (7)	Short subdivision (4) (7)	Planned unit development (5) (10) without a change of use	 	 	 

	(1) Final decision made by planning director.

(2) Final decision by binding site plan committee.

(3) Final decision made by downtown design review committee.

(4) Final decision made by short subdivision committee.

(5) Final decision made by hearing examiner.

(6) Final decision made by city council.

(7) Appeal to hearing examiner.	(8) Appeal to city council.

(9) Appeal to shoreline hearings board.

(10) No administrative appeals.

(11) Final decision made by manager of housing and human services.

(12) Final decision made by economic and community development director.

B. Process procedures. The following table lists the process types and the corresponding procedures.

	 	Project Permit Applications (Processes I – V)	Legislative

	Process I	Process II	Process III	Process IV	Process V	Process VI

	Notice of application:	Yes, for projects requiring SEPA review	Yes, for projects requiring SEPA review, short plats, and shoreline substantial development permits	 	Yes	No	No

	Recommendation made by:	N/A	N/A	N/A	Hearing examiner	N/A	Land use and planning board

	Final decision made by:	Planning director, building official, public works director, economic and community development director, or manager of housing and human services as applicable	Planning director, downtown design review committee, binding site plan committee, or short subdivision committee, as noted in subsection (A) of this section	Hearing examiner	City council, based upon record made before hearing examiner	Planning director	City council

	Open record appeal:	Yes, if appealed, then before hearing examiner	Yes, if appealed, then before hearing examiner	No	No	No	No

	Open record hearing:	No	No	Yes, before hearing examiner to make final decision	Yes, before hearing examiner to make recommendation to council	No	Yes, before land use and planning board to make recommendation to city council, and/or before city council

	Reconsideration: 	No	No	Yes, of hearing examiner’s decision	Yes, of hearing examiner’s recommendation	No	No

	Closed record appeal:	Only if appeal of denial of multifamily conditional certificate, then before the city council	Only if appealed, then before the shoreline hearings board if applicable	Only if appealed, then before the shoreline hearings board if applicable	No	No	No

	Judicial appeal:	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes

(Ord. No. 3424, § 19, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3574, § 3, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 3614, § 1, 9-17-02; Ord. No. 3801, § 2, 6-6-06; Ord. No. 4011, § 2, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 4044, § 3, 8-21-12; Ord. No. 4252, § 1, 9-19-17)


12.01.050 Exemptions from project permit application processing.

A. General exemptions. The following permits or approvals are specifically excluded from the notification and procedural requirements set forth in this chapter:

1. Landmark designations.

2. Street vacations.

3. Street use permits.

4. Pursuant to RCW 36.70B.140(2), boundary line adjustments, building permits, and other construction permits, which are categorically exempt from environmental review under SEPA or that do not require street improvements or for which environmental review under SEPA has been completed in connection with other project permits. For example, if public notice and environmental review for a project was completed with an initial application for a project permit, a subsequent application for a different permit for the same project is specifically excluded from the public notification and procedures set forth in this chapter and would be subject to the procedures and regulations related specifically to that subsequent permit; for example, Chapter 14.01 KCC for an application for building permit.

5. Administrative approvals which are categorically exempt from environmental review under SEPA (Chapter 43.21C RCW) and the city’s SEPA/environmental policy ordinance, Chapter 11.03 KCC, or for which environmental review has been completed in connection with other project permits. 

(Ord. No. 3424, § 19, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3574, § 3, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 4044, § 4, 8-21-12)


12.01.055 Fees.

The city council shall, by resolution, establish the fees to be assessed to implement and operate the regulations adopted in this chapter. The resolution may require that certain fees be pre-paid and/or designated to be nonrefundable because staff time and materials will be expended whether or not the permit applied for is approved by the city or pulled by the applicant. In the event of any conflict or ambiguity regarding any fees authorized under this chapter and established by council resolution, the planning director is authorized to interpret the fee schedule(s) to resolve that conflict or ambiguity.

(Ord. No. 4019, § 11, 12-13-11)


12.01.060 Joint public hearings. 

A. Planning director’s decision to hold joint hearing. The planning director may combine any public hearing on a project permit application with any hearing that may be held by another local, state, regional, federal, or other agency on the proposed action, as long as:

1. The other agency consents to the joint hearing;

2. The other agency is not expressly prohibited by statute from doing so; 

3. Sufficient notice of the hearing is given to meet each of the agencies’ adopted notice requirements as set forth in statute, ordinance, or rule; 

4. The agency has received the necessary information about the proposed project from the applicant in enough time to hold its hearing at the same time as the local government hearing; and 

5. The hearing is held within the Kent city limits.

B. Applicant’s request for a joint hearing. The applicant may request that the public hearing on a permit application be combined as long as the joint hearing can be held within the time periods set forth in this chapter. In the alternative, the applicant may agree to a particular schedule if additional time is needed in order to complete the hearings. 

(Ord. No. 3424, § 19, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3574, § 3, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 4044, § 5, 8-21-12)


12.01.070 Process VI legislative actions.

A. Legislative actions. The following process VI actions are legislative, and are not subject to the notification and procedural requirements in this chapter, unless otherwise specified:

1. Zoning newly annexed lands;

2. Area-wide rezones and zoning map amendments to implement city policies;

3. Comprehensive plan text amendments;

4. Comprehensive plan map amendments;

5. Development regulations and zoning text amendments; and

6. Other similar actions that are non-project related. 

(Ord. No. 3424, § 19, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3574, § 3, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 4044, § 6, 8-21-12)


12.01.080 Pre-application conference.

A. Applicability. The purpose of a pre-application conference is to provide city staff with a sufficient level of detail about a proposal prior to submittal of a project permit application so that the city staff can acquaint the applicant with the requirements of the Kent City Code. Pre-application conferences are encouraged for Process I, II, III, and IV permits which require environmental review and for projects that are complex or where applicants are unfamiliar with city codes, ordinances, and procedures. 

B. Pre-application conference initiation. To initiate a pre-application conference, an applicant shall submit a completed form provided by the city and all information pertaining to the proposal as prescribed by administrative procedures of the planning services office. Failure to provide all pertinent information may prevent the city from identifying all applicable issues or providing the most effective pre-application conference.

C. Scheduling. A pre-application conference may be conducted at any point prior to application for a project permit. A pre-application conference shall be scheduled by the city at the time of submittal of a completed pre-application conference request. The pre-application conference shall be held within thirty (30) calendar days of the receipt of a completed request, unless the applicant agrees to an extension of this time period in writing.

D. At the conference the applicant may request the following information be provided:

1. A form which lists the requirements of a complete project permit application;

2. A general summary of the procedures to be used to process the application;

3. The references to the relevant code provisions on development; and 

4. The city’s design guidelines.

E. It is impossible for the conference to be an exhaustive review of all potential issues. The discussion at the conference or the form sent to the applicant under subsection (D)(1) of this section shall not bind or prohibit the city’s future application or enforcement of the applicable law. 

(Ord. No. 3424, § 19, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3574, § 3, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 4044, § 7, 8-21-12)


12.01.090 Project permit applications.

A. Required materials. Applications for all project permits shall be submitted upon forms provided by the city. 

(Ord. No. 3424, § 19, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3574, § 3, 9-18-01)


12.01.100 Submission and acceptance of application.

A. Determination of completeness. A project permit application consistent with instructions for a complete application is deemed complete upon acceptance by the permit center.

Acceptance of a project permit application means that the application is sufficient for continued processing even though additional information may be required or project modifications may be undertaken subsequently. Acceptance of a project permit application shall not preclude the city from requesting additional information or studies if new information is required or where there are substantial changes in the proposal.

B. Project review. Following a determination that an application is complete, the city shall begin project review. 

(Ord. No. 3424, § 19, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3574, § 3, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 4044, § 8, 8-21-12)


12.01.105 Application vesting.

A project permit application shall vest upon acceptance of a complete project permit application, as defined in KCC 12.01.100; provided, that the applicant also includes a concurrent submittal of a fully completed application for any known code deviations or variances required for the proposed project. A project permit application that contains a knowing misrepresentation or an omission of material fact shall not vest any development rights. Vesting shall apply to land use regulations in effect on the land at the time a fully completed project permit application has been accepted as complete pursuant to KCC 12.01.100(A).

(Ord. No. 3574, § 3, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 4044, § 9, 8-21-12)


12.01.110 Procedure for complete but incorrect applications.

A. Following submittal of a complete application and the commencement of project review, the city may make a determination in writing that some information is incorrect, and that corrected information be submitted. The applicant shall have up to one hundred eighty (180) calendar days to submit corrected information (deemed the “resubmittal period”). The applicant shall submit concurrently all of the corrected information that was requested.  The planning director may, in writing, extend the resubmittal period for up to an additional one hundred eighty (180) days if the applicant can demonstrate a good faith effort to comply with the resubmittal request. Evidence of an applicant’s good faith efforts shall include the following:

1. Length of time since the initial permit application;

2. Time period the applicant had to submit corrected information;

3. Availability of necessary information;

4. Potential to provide necessary information within the extended resubmittal period;

5. Reason for the applicant’s delay; and

6. Applicant’s reasonable reliance on an expectation that the application would not expire.

The economic and community development director may authorize additional time extensions of the resubmittal period in rare or unique circumstances when the inability of the applicant to comply within the resubmittal period is due solely to factors outside of the applicant’s control, including but not limited to unusual delay in obtaining permits or approvals from other agencies or jurisdictions. 

B. The city shall have fourteen (14) calendar days to review the submittal of corrected information. If the corrected information is still not sufficient, the city shall notify the applicant in writing that the submitted information is incorrect, and the resubmittal period set forth in subsection (A) of this section shall be repeated. This process may continue until complete or corrected information is obtained.

C. If the applicant within the resubmittal period either refuses in writing to submit corrected information, does not submit the corrected information within the resubmittal period, or submits only a portion of the corrected information that was requested, the application shall lapse. This does not preclude the applicant from working with individual divisions of the city for informal review of a portion of the requested corrected information within the resubmittal period.

D. If the requested corrected information is sufficient, the city shall continue with project review, in accordance with the time calculation exclusions set forth in KCC 12.01.180. 

(Ord. No. 3424, § 19, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3574, § 3, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 3914, § 1, 4-21-09; Ord. No. 4044, § 10, 8-21-12)


12.01.115 Procedure for ready-to-issue permits. 

A. Following the end of project review, the city will notify the applicant that the permit is ready to issue. The applicant shall have up to one hundred eighty (180) calendar days to obtain the permit after notification that it is ready to issue (deemed the “period for permit pickup”). The planning director may, in writing, extend the period for permit pickup for up to an additional one hundred eighty (180) days if the applicant can demonstrate a good faith effort to pick up the permit. Evidence of an applicant’s good faith efforts shall include the following:  

1. Length of time since the initial permit application;

2. Reason for the applicant’s delay; and

3. Applicant’s reasonable reliance on an expectation that the application would not expire.

The economic and community development director may authorize additional time extensions of the period for permit pickup in rare or unique circumstances when the inability of the applicant to comply within the period for permit pickup is due solely to factors outside of the applicant’s control, including but not limited to unusual delay in obtaining permits or approvals from other agencies or jurisdictions.

B. If the applicant within the period for permit pickup either refuses in writing to pick up the permit or does not pick up the permit after notification by the city that the permit was ready to issue, the application shall lapse.

(Ord. No. 4044, § 11, 8-21-12)


12.01.120 Referral and review of project permit applications.

Within ten (10) calendar days of accepting a complete application, the planning director shall do the following:

A. Transmit a copy of the application, or appropriate parts of the application, to each affected agency and city department for review and comment, including those responsible for determining compliance with state, federal, and county requirements. The affected agencies and city departments shall have fifteen (15) calendar days to comment. The referral agency or city department is presumed to have no comments if comments are not received within the specified time period. The planning director shall grant an extension of time only if the application involves unusual circumstances. Any extension shall only be for a maximum of three (3) additional calendar days. 

(Ord. No. 3424, § 19, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3574, § 3, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 4044, § 12, 8-21-12)


12.01.125 Notification of proximity to agricultural resource lands.

For all plats, short plats, development permits, and substantial building permits for residential development activities on or within five hundred (500) feet of land designated as agricultural resource lands within the city of Kent, or the comparable land use designation within unincorporated King County, the city shall inform the project permit applicant of the proximity to agricultural resource lands on which commercial agricultural activities may occur that are not compatible with residential development for certain periods of limited duration. 

(Ord. No. 3720, § 1, 11-2-04; Ord. No. 4044, § 13, 8-21-12)


12.01.130 Public notice – Generally.

The available records of the King County assessor’s office shall be used for determining the property taxpayer of record. Addresses for mailed notice shall be obtained from the county’s real property tax records. All public notices shall be deemed to have been provided or received on the date the notice is deposited in the mail or personally delivered, whichever occurs first. Failure to provide the public notice as described in this chapter shall not be grounds for invalidation of any permit decision. 

(Ord. No. 3424, § 19, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3574, § 3, 9-18-01)


12.01.140 Notice of application.

A. Notice of application. A notice of application shall be issued for Process I and Process II permits requiring SEPA review, short plats, shoreline substantial development permits, and all Process III and Process IV applications within fourteen (14) calendar days following submittal of a complete application; provided, that if any open record hearing is required for the requested project permit(s), the notice of application shall be provided at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the open record hearing. One (1) notice of application will be done for all permit applications related to the same project at the time of the earliest complete permit application.

B. SEPA exempt projects. A notice of application shall not be required for project permits that are categorically exempt under SEPA, unless a public comment period or an open record predecision hearing is required.

C. Contents. The notice of application shall include:

1. The case file number(s), the date of application, and the date of the notice of application;

2. A description of the proposed project action and a list of the project permits included in the application and, if applicable, a list of any studies requested by the review authority pursuant to RCW 36.70B.070 and WAC 173-27-180;

3. The identification of other permits not included in the application, to the extent known by the city;

4. The identification of existing environmental documents that evaluate the proposed project, and, if not otherwise stated on the document providing notice of application, the location where the application and any studies can be reviewed;

5. A statement of the limits of the public comment period, which shall be not less than fourteen (14) nor more than thirty (30) calendar days following the date of notice of application, and statements of the right of any person to comment on the application, receive notice of and participate in any hearings, request a copy of the decision once made, and any appeal rights;

6. The tentative date, time, place, and type of hearing. The tentative hearing date is to be set at the time of the date of notice of the application;

7. A statement of the preliminary determination of consistency, if one has been made at the time of notice, and of those development regulations that will be used for project mitigation and of consistency as provided in KCC 12.01.150;

8. The name of the applicant or applicant’s representative and the name, address, and telephone number of a contact person for the applicant, if any;

9. A description of the site, including current zoning and nearest road intersections, reasonably sufficient to inform the reader of its location; and

10. Any other information determined appropriate by the city, such as a DS, if complete at the time of issuance of the notice of application, or the city’s statement of intent to issue a DNS pursuant to the optional DNS process set forth in WAC 197-11-355.

D. Mailing of notice of application. The city shall mail by hard copy or e-mail a copy of the notice of application to the following:

1. Agencies with jurisdiction; and

2. Any person who requests such notice in writing delivered to the planning services office; and

3. Applicant.

E. Public comment on the notice of application. All public comments received on the notice of application must be received by the planning services office by 4:30 p.m. on the last day of the comment period. Comments may be mailed, personally delivered, or sent electronically. Comments should be as specific as possible.

F. Posted notice of application. In addition to the mailed notice of application, the city will post notice of application at Kent City Hall, and in the register for public review at the planning services office. The applicant shall be responsible for posting the property for site-specific proposals with notice boards provided by the city. Public notice shall be accomplished through the use of a four (4) by four (4) foot plywood face generic notice board to be issued by public works operations following payment of the public notice board fee at the time of application submittal.

1. Posting. Posting of the property for site-specific proposals shall consist of one (1) or more notice boards as follows:

a. A single notice board shall be placed by the applicant in a conspicuous location on a street frontage bordering the subject property.

b. Each notice board shall be visible and accessible for inspection by members of the public.

c. Additional notice boards may be required when:

i. The site does not abut a public road; or

ii. Additional public notice boards are required under other provisions of the Kent City Code; or

iii. The planning director determines that additional notice boards are necessary to provide adequate public notice.

d. Notice boards shall be:

i. Maintained in good condition by the applicant during the notice period;

ii. In place prior to the start of the public comment period; and

iii. Removed by the applicant after expiration of the applicable notice period or the last public meeting or last public hearing on the application, whichever is later.

e. Notice boards that are removed, stolen, or destroyed prior to the end of the notice period may be cause for discontinuance of the departmental review until the notice board is replaced and remains in place for the specified time period. The city shall notify the applicant when it comes to their attention that notice boards have been removed prematurely, stolen, or destroyed.

f. An affidavit of posting shall be submitted by the planning director at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the hearing. If the affidavits are not filed as required, any scheduled hearing or date by which the public may comment on the application may be postponed in order to allow compliance with this notice requirement.

g. Notice boards shall be constructed and installed in accordance with specifications determined by the planning director.

h. SEPA information shall be added by the city to the posted sign within applicable deadlines. An affidavit of posting shall be submitted by the planning director.

G. Published notice of application. Published notice of application in the city’s official newspaper or an appropriate substitute as provided for in Resolution No. 1747 or as subsequently amended is required for Process I and II permits requiring SEPA review, short plats, and Process III, IV, and V permits, except subdivision final plat applications. Published notice shall include at least the following information:

1. Project location;

2. Project description;

3. Type of permit(s) required;

4. Comment period dates; and

5. Location where the complete application and notice of the application may be reviewed.

H. Shoreline master program permits. Notice of the application for a permit under the purview of the city’s shoreline master program shall be given in accordance with the requirements of Ch. 11.04 KCC, the Kent shoreline master program.

(Ord. No. 3424, § 19, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3511, § 2, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3574, § 3, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 4044, § 14, 8-21-12)


12.01.145 Notice of open record hearing.

A. Notice of open record hearing for all types of applications. The notice given of an open record hearing required in this chapter shall contain:

1. The name of the applicant or the applicant’s representative;

2. Description of the affected property, which may be in the form of either a vicinity location sketch or written description, other than a legal description;

3. The date, time, and place of the hearing;

4. The nature of the proposed use or development;

5. A statement that all interested persons may appear and provide testimony;

6. When and where information may be examined, and when and how written comments addressing findings required for a decision by the hearing body may be submitted;

7. The name of a city representative to contact and the telephone number where additional information may be obtained;

8. That a copy of the application, all documents and evidence relied upon by the applicant and applicable criteria are available for inspection at no cost and will be provided at the cost of reproduction; and

9. That a copy of the staff report will be available for inspection at no cost at least five calendar days prior to the hearing and copies will be provided at the cost provided for in the city’s public record disclosure policy.

B. Mailed notice of open record hearing. Mailed notice of the open record hearing shall be provided by the city in hard copy or e-mail as follows:

1. Process I, II, and V actions. No public notice is required because an open record hearing is not held. Notice for short plat meetings is mailed to property owners within 300 feet. Shoreline permit notices shall be in accordance with the requirements of WAC 173-27-110.

2. Process III and IV actions. The notice of open record hearing shall be mailed to:

a. The applicant;

b. All owners of real property as shown by the records of the county assessor’s office within 300 feet of the subject property; and

c. Any person who submits written comments, delivered to the planning services office, regarding the project permit.

3. Process IV preliminary plat actions. In addition to the general notice of open record hearing requirements for Process IV actions above, additional notice shall be provided as follows:

a. Notice of the filing of a preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision located adjacent to the right-of-way of a state highway or within two miles of the boundary of a state or municipal airport shall be given to the Secretary of Transportation, who must respond within 15 calendar days of such notice.

b. Special notice of the hearing shall be given to adjacent land owners by any other reasonable method the city deems necessary. Adjacent land owners are the owners of real property, as shown by the records of the King County assessor, located within 300 feet of any portion of the boundary of the proposed subdivision. If the owner of the real property which is proposed to be subdivided owns another parcel or parcels of real property which lie adjacent to the real property proposed to be subdivided, notice under RCW 58.17.090(1)(b) shall be given to owners of real property located within 300 feet of such adjacently owned parcels.

4. Process VI actions. For Process VI legislative actions, the city shall publish notice as described in subsections (C) and (D) of this section, and use all other methods of notice as required by RCW 35A.12.160. For privately proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan land use map, notice of the open record hearing shall be mailed to:

a. The applicant;

b. All owners of real property as shown by the records of the county assessor’s office within 300 feet of the affected property; and

c. Any person who has requested notice.

For revised geographic scope of the privately proposed land use plan map amendments, notice of the open record hearing shall be given by notification of all property owners within the revised land use plan map amendment area.

C. Procedure for posted or published notice of open record hearing.

1. Posted notice of the open record hearing is required for all Process III and IV actions. The posted notice of hearing shall be added to the sign already posted on the property pursuant to KCC 12.01.140(F).

2. Published notice of the open record hearing is required for all Process III and IV procedures. The published notice shall be published in the city’s official newspaper or appropriate substitute as provided for in Resolution No. 1747 or as subsequently amended and contain the following information:

a. Project location;

b. Project description;

c. Type of permit(s) required;

d. Date, time, and location of the hearing; and

e. Location where the complete application may be reviewed.

3. Published notice of the open record hearing is required for all Process VI procedures. The notice shall be published in the city’s official newspaper or appropriate substitute as provided for in Resolution No. 1747 or as subsequently amended and, in addition to the information required in subsection (C)(2) of this section, shall contain the project description and the location where the complete file may be reviewed.

D. Time of notice of open record hearing. Notice shall be mailed, posted and first published not less than 10 calendar days prior to the hearing date. Any posted notice and notice boards shall be removed by the applicant within seven calendar days following the conclusion of the open record hearing(s).

(Ord. No. 3574, § 3, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 3801, § 3, 6-6-06; Ord. No. 4044, § 15, 8-21-12; Ord. No. 4257, § 2, 11-21-17)


12.01.147 Notice of city council meetings on project permit applications.

The city shall mail notice by hard copy or e-mail of city council meetings on Process IV and VI project permit applications to parties of record.

(Ord. No. 3801, § 4, 6-6-06; Ord. No. 4044, § 16, 8-21-12)


12.01.150 Consistency with development regulations and SEPA.

A. Purpose. When the city receives a project permit application, consistency between the proposed project and the applicable regulations and comprehensive plan should be determined through the process in this chapter and the city’s adopted SEPA ordinance, Ch. 11.03 KCC.

B. Consistency. During project permit application review, the city shall determine whether the items listed in this section are defined in the development regulations applicable to the proposed project. In the absence of applicable development regulations, the city shall determine whether the items listed in this section are defined in the city’s adopted comprehensive plan. This determination of consistency shall include the following: 

1. The type of land use permitted at the site, including uses that may be allowed under certain circumstances, if the criteria for their approval have been satisfied;

2. The level of development, such as units per acre, density of residential development in urban growth areas, or other measures of density;

3. Availability and adequacy of infrastructure, including public facilities and services identified in the comprehensive plan, if the plan or development regulations provide for funding of these facilities as required by Chapter 36.70A RCW; and

4. Characteristics of the development, such as development standards.

5. In deciding whether a project is consistent, the determinations made pursuant to subsection (B) of this section shall be controlling.

6. Nothing in this section limits the city from asking more specific or related questions in subsections (B)(1) through (5) of this section.

C. Initial SEPA analysis. The city shall also review the project permit application under the requirements of the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA), Chapter 43.21C RCW, the SEPA Rules, Chapter 197-11 WAC, and Ch. 11.03 KCC.

1. This SEPA analysis shall:

a. Determine whether the applicable federal, state, and local regulations require studies that adequately analyze all of the project permit application’s specific probable adverse environmental impacts;

b. Determine if the applicable regulations require measures that adequately address such environmental impacts; 

c. Determine whether additional studies are required and/or whether the project permit application should be conditioned with additional mitigation measures; and 

d. Provide prompt and coordinated review by government agencies and the public on compliance with applicable environmental laws and plans, including mitigation for specific project impacts that have not been considered and addressed at the plan or development regulation level. 

2. In its review of a project permit application, the city may determine that the requirements for environmental analysis, protection, and mitigation measures in the applicable development regulations, comprehensive plan, and/or in other applicable local, state, or federal laws provide adequate analysis of and mitigation for the specific adverse environmental impacts of the application.

3. A comprehensive plan, development regulation or other applicable local, state, or federal law provides adequate analysis of and mitigation for the specific adverse environmental impacts of an application when:

a. The impacts have been avoided or otherwise mitigated; or

b. The city has designated as acceptable certain levels of service, land use designations, development standards, or other land use planning required or allowed by Chapter 36.70A RCW.

4. The city’s determination of consistency with the items identified in subsection (B) of this section shall not prohibit the city from denying, conditioning, or mitigating impacts due to other aspects of the project.

5. In its decision whether a specific adverse environmental impact has been addressed by an existing rule or law of another agency with jurisdiction with environmental expertise with regard to a specific environmental impact, the city shall consult orally or in writing with that agency and may expressly defer to that agency. In making this deferral, the city shall base or condition its project approval on compliance with these other existing rules or laws.

6. Nothing in this section limits the authority of the city in its review or mitigation of a project to adopt or otherwise rely on environmental analyses and requirements under other laws, as provided by Chapter 43.21C RCW.

7. The city shall also review the application under Ch. 11.03 KCC, the city’s environmental policy provisions.

D. Categorically exempt actions. Actions categorically exempt under RCW 43.21C.110(1)(a) do not require environmental review or the preparation of an environmental impact statement. An action that is categorically exempt under the rules adopted by the Department of Ecology (Chapter 197-11 WAC) may not be conditioned or denied under SEPA.

E. Planned actions. A planned action does not require a threshold determination or the preparation of an environmental impact statement under SEPA, but is subject to environmental review and mitigation under SEPA.

1. A “planned action” means one (1) or more types of project action that:

a. Are designated planned actions by an ordinance or resolution adopted by the city;

b. Have had the significant impacts adequately addressed in an environmental impact statement prepared in conjunction with:

i. A comprehensive plan or subarea plan adopted under Chapter 36.70A RCW; or

ii. A fully contained community, a master planned resort, a master planned development, or a phased project;

c. Are subsequent or implementing projects for the proposals listed in subsection (E)(1)(b) of this section;

d. Are located within an urban growth area, as defined in RCW 36.70A.030;

e. Are not essential public facilities, as defined in RCW 36.70A.200;

f. Are consistent with the city’s comprehensive plan adopted under Chapter 36.70A RCW.

2. The city shall limit planned actions to certain types of development or to specific geographical areas that are less extensive than the jurisdictional boundaries of the city, and may limit a planned action to a time period identified in the environmental impact statement or in the ordinance or resolution designating the planned action under RCW 36.70A.040.

3. During project review, the city shall not re-examine alternatives or hear appeals on the items identified in subsection (B) of this section except for issues of code interpretation, the process for which is outlined in KCC 15.09.060.

4. Project review shall be used to identify specific project design and conditions relating to the character of development, such as the details of site plans, curb cuts, drainage swales, the payment of impact fees, or other measures to mitigate a proposal’s probable adverse environmental impacts.

(Ord. No. 3424, § 19, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3574, § 3, 9-18-01)


12.01.155 Code of conduct.

A. General. The following shall apply to open record hearings in KCC 12.01.160, open record appeals in KCC 12.01.190, and the closed record appeals in KCC 12.01.195.

B. Conflict of interest. The hearing body shall be subject to the code of ethics and prohibitions on conflict of interest as set forth in RCW 35A.42.020 and Chapter 42.23 RCW, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended.

C. Ex parte communications.

1. No member of the hearing body may communicate, directly or indirectly, regarding any issue in a proceeding before him or her, other than to participate in communications necessary to procedural aspects of maintaining an orderly process, unless he or she provides notice and opportunity for all parties to participate; except as provided in this section:

a. The hearing body may receive advice from legal counsel; or

b. The hearing body may communicate with staff members (except where the proceeding relates to a code enforcement investigation or prosecution).

2. If, before serving as the hearing body in a quasi-judicial proceeding, any member of the hearing body receives an ex parte communication of a type that could not properly be received while serving, the member of the hearing body, promptly after starting to serve, shall disclose the communication as described in KCC 12.01.160(D)(3).

3. If the hearing body receives an ex parte communication in violation of this section, he or she shall place on the record:

a. All written communications received; 

b. All written responses to the communications; 

c. The substance of all oral communications received and all responses made; and

d. The identity of each person from whom the hearing body received any ex parte communication.

The hearing body shall advise all parties that these matters have been placed on the record. Upon request made within ten (10) calendar days after notice of the ex parte communication, any party desiring to rebut the communication shall be allowed to place a rebuttal statement on the record.

D. Disqualification.

1. A member of the hearing body who is disqualified may be counted for purposes of forming a quorum. Any member who is disqualified may be counted only by making full disclosure to the audience, abstaining from voting on the disqualification, vacating the seat on the hearing body, and physically leaving the hearing.

2. If all members of the hearing body are disqualified, all members present after stating their reasons for disqualification shall be re-qualified and shall proceed to resolve the issues.

3. Except for Process VI actions, a member absent during the presentation of evidence in a hearing may not participate in the deliberations or decision unless the member has reviewed the evidence received.

(Ord. No. 3574, § 3, 9-18-01)


12.01.160 Open record hearings.

A. General. Open record hearings shall be conducted in accordance with this section.

B. Responsibility of the planning director for hearing. The planning director shall:

1. Schedule an application for review and public hearing;

2. Give notice (applicant responsible for some of the notice requirements);

3. Prepare the staff report on the application, which shall be a single report stating all of the decisions made as of the date of the report, including recommendations on project permits in the consolidated permit process that do not require an open record predecision hearing. The report shall state any mitigation required or proposed under the development regulations or the city’s authority under SEPA. If the threshold determination other than a determination of significance has not been issued previously by the city, the report shall include or append this determination. In the case of a Process I or II project permit application, this report may be the permit; and

4. Prepare the notice of decision, if required by the hearing body, and/or mail by hard copy or e-mail a copy of the notice of decision to those required by this code to receive such decision.

C. Burden and nature of proof. Except for Process VI actions, the burden of proof is on the proponent. The project permit application must be supported by proof that it conforms to the applicable elements of the city’s development regulations, comprehensive plan and that any significant adverse environmental impacts have been adequately addressed.

D. Order of proceedings. The order of proceedings for a hearing will depend in part on the nature of the hearing. The following shall be supplemented by administrative procedures as appropriate:

1. Before receiving information on the issue, the following shall be determined:

a. Any objections on jurisdictional grounds shall be noted on the record and, if there is objection, the hearing body has the discretion to proceed or terminate; and

b. Any abstentions or disqualifications shall be determined.

2. The presiding officer may take official notice of known information related to the issue, such as:

a. A provision of any ordinance, resolution, rule, officially adopted development standard, or state law; and

b. Other public records and facts judicially noticeable by law.

3. Matters officially noticed need not be established by evidence and may be considered by the hearing body in its determination. Parties requesting that a matter be officially noticed shall do so on the record; however, the hearing body, on its own accord, may take notice of matters listed in subsections (D)(1) and (D)(2) of this section if stated for the record. Any matter given official notice may be rebutted.

4. The hearing body may view the area in dispute with or without notification to the parties, but shall place the time, manner, and circumstances of such view on the record.

5. Information shall be received from the staff and from proponents and opponents. The presiding officer may approve or deny a request from a person attending the hearing to ask a question. Unless the presiding officer specifies otherwise, if the request to ask a question is approved, the presiding officer will direct the question to the person submitting testimony.

6. When the presiding officer has closed the public hearing portion of the hearing, the hearing body shall openly discuss the issue and may further question a person submitting information or the staff if opportunity for rebuttal is provided.

7. When the hearing body is unable to formulate a recommendation on a project permit, the hearing body may decide to forward the project permit to the city council to render a decision without a recommendation.

E. Recommendation/decision. The hearing body shall issue a recommendation or decision, as applicable, within fourteen (14) calendar days of the record being closed.

F. Reconsideration by hearing examiner. Reconsideration is not authorized for Process I and Process II applications. A party of record may ask for a reconsideration of a decision by the hearing examiner for a Process III action or a recommendation by the hearing examiner for a Process IV action. A reconsideration may be requested if either:

1. A specific error of fact or law can be identified; or

2. New evidence is available which was not available at the time of the hearing.

A request for reconsideration shall be filed by a party of record within five (5) working days of the date of the initial decision/recommendation. Any reconsideration request shall cite specific references to the findings and/or criteria contained in the ordinances governing the type of application being reviewed. The hearing examiner shall promptly review the reconsideration request and within five (5) working days issue a written response, either approving or denying the request. For purposes of rights to appeal pursuant to Chapter 36.70C RCW only, if a request for reconsideration is timely filed by a party of record, the decision of the hearing examiner is not final until after a decision on reconsideration is issued. 

(Ord. No. 3424, § 19, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3574, § 3, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 4044, § 17, 8-21-12)


12.01.170 Notice of decision.

A. Following a decision on a project permit by the applicable decision-maker, the city shall provide a notice of decision that also includes a statement of any threshold determination made under SEPA (Chapter 43.21C RCW) and the procedures for appeal.

B. The notice of decision shall be issued within one hundred twenty (120) calendar days, as calculated by KCC 12.01.180, after the city notifies the applicant that the application is complete. 

C. The notice of decision shall be provided to the applicant and to any person who, prior to the rendering of the decision, requested notice of the decision or submitted substantive comments on the application.

D. Notice of the decision shall be provided to the public as set forth in KCC 12.01.145(B)(2)(a) and (c). Affected property owners may request a change in valuation for property tax purposes. The city shall provide notice of the decision to the county assessor’s office in which the property is located.

E. Pursuant to RCW 36.70B.140(1), building permits, grading permits, and civil construction permits are exempt from the requirements in subsection (C) and (D) of this section, except for notice to the applicant.

F. If the city is unable to issue its final decision on a project permit application within the time limits provided for in this chapter, it shall provide written notice of this fact to the parties of record. The notice shall include a statement of reasons why the time limits have not been met and an estimated date for issuance of the notice of decision. 

(Ord. No. 3424, § 19, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3574, § 3, 9-18-01)


12.01.180 Time limitations.

A. Calculation of time periods for issuance of notice of final decision. In determining the number of calendar days that have elapsed after the city has notified the applicant that the application is complete for purposes of calculating the one hundred twenty (120) day time limit in KCC 12.01.170 for issuance of the notice of decision, the following periods shall be excluded:

1. Any period during which the applicant has been requested by the city to correct plans, perform required studies, provide additional required information, or otherwise required to act. The period shall be calculated from the date the city notifies the applicant of the need for additional information until the earlier of the date the local government determines whether the additional information satisfies the request for information or fourteen (14) calendar days after the date the information has been provided to the city;

2. Any period during which the city determines that the information submitted by the applicant under KCC 12.01.100 and 12.01.110 is insufficient or incorrect and has requested the applicant to provide sufficient or correct information;

3. Any period during which an environmental impact statement is being prepared following a determination of significance pursuant to Chapter 43.21C RCW, if the city by ordinance has established time periods for completion of environmental impact statements, or if the city and the applicant in writing agree to a time period for completion of an environmental impact statement;

4. Any period for administrative appeals of project permit applications, if an open record appeal hearing or a closed record appeal, or both, are allowed. The time period for consideration and decision on appeals shall not exceed:

a. Ninety (90) calendar days for an open record appeal hearing; or

b. Sixty (60) calendar days for a closed record appeal.

The parties may agree to extend these time periods; and 

5. Any extension of time mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the city.

B. Time limit exceptions. The time limits established in this section do not apply if a project permit application:

1. Requires an amendment to the comprehensive plan or a development regulation;

2. Requires approval of the siting of an essential public facility as provided in RCW 36.70A.200; or

3. Is substantially revised by the applicant, in which case the time period shall start from the date at which the revised project application is determined to be complete pursuant to KCC 12.01.100.

C. Failure to meet time limit. If the city is unable to issue its final decision within the time limits provided in this chapter, it shall provide written notice of this fact to the project applicant. The notice shall include a statement of reasons why the time limits have not been met and an estimated date for issuance of a final decision. The city is not liable for damages due to the city’s failure to make a final decision within the time limits established in this chapter. 

(Ord. No. 3424, § 19, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3574, § 3, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 4044, § 18, 8-21-12)


12.01.185 Expiration of permits.

A. Absent statute or ordinance provisions to the contrary, Process I and II project permit applications listed in KCC 12.01.050 that are not subject to the notification and procedural requirements of this chapter and for which no substantial steps have been taken to meet approval requirements including permit issuance or final decision for a period of three hundred sixty-five (365) days after submittal of the initial application will expire and become null and void. The application and instruction forms will reference the expiration standards of this section, where applicable. Substantial steps include, but are not limited to, due diligence in submitting complete and correct resubmittals or due diligence in satisfying the requirements for recordation of lot line adjustments. The planning director may grant a one hundred eighty (180) day extension in writing on a one-time basis if the failure to take a substantial step was due to circumstances beyond the control of the applicant. Provisions of this section do not exempt the city from the time periods for actions under RCW 36.70B.080 and KCC 12.01.180.

B. Absent statute or ordinance provisions to the contrary, permits or land use approvals listed in KCC 12.01.040 for which the use is not begun or the work is not completed within three hundred sixty-five (365) days after permit issuance or final decision will expire and become null and void. The issued permit or land use approvals will clearly state this requirement for expiration, where applicable. The planning director may grant a one hundred eighty (180) day extension in writing on a one-time basis if the failure to begin the use or complete the work was due to circumstances beyond the control of the applicant.

C. Site plan review approvals will expire and become null and void one hundred eighty (180) days after approval unless:

1. Project permit applications for development of a substantial portion of the site plan remain valid; or 

2. Project permits for development of a substantial portion of the site plan remain valid.

D. The economic and community development director may authorize additional time extensions in rare or unique circumstances when the delay is outside of the applicant’s control, including but not limited to unusual delay in obtaining permits or approvals from other agencies or jurisdictions.

(Ord. No. 4044, § 19, 8-21-12)


12.01.190 Open record appeal.

A. This section allows for open record appeals as provided in the framework in KCC 12.01.040. Open record appeals are heard by the hearing examiner.

B. Consolidated appeals.

1. All open record appeals on a project permit application decision, other than an appeal of determination of significance (DS), shall be considered together in a consolidated open record appeal. 

2. Appeals of environmental determinations under SEPA, Ch. 11.03 KCC, including administrative appeals of a threshold determination, shall proceed as provided in that chapter.

C. Initiation of appeal. Only parties of record may initiate an appeal on a project permit application.

D. Time to file. An appeal must be filed within fourteen (14) calendar days following issuance of the notice of decision. Appeals must be delivered to the planning services office by mail, personal delivery, or received by fax before 4:30 p.m. on the last business day of the appeal period. 

E. Computation of time. For the purposes of computing the time for filing an appeal, the day the notice of decision is rendered shall not be included. The last day of the appeal period shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, a day designated by RCW 1.16.050, or by the city’s ordinances as a legal holiday, then it also is excluded and the filing must be completed on the next business day (RCW 35A.28.070).

F. Content of appeal. Appeals shall be in writing, be accompanied by an appeal fee as set by the city council, and contain the following information:

1. Appellant’s name, address, and phone number;

2. Appellant’s statement describing his or her standing to appeal;

3. Identification of the application which is the subject of the appeal;

4. Appellant’s statement of grounds for appeal and the facts upon which the appeal is based;

5. The relief sought, including the specific nature and extent; and

6. A statement that the appellant has read the appeal and believes the contents to be true, followed by the appellant’s signature.

G. Effect. The timely filing of an appeal shall stay the effective date of the decision until such time as the appeal is adjudicated by the hearing examiner.

H. Notice of appeal. Public notice of the appeal shall be given as provided in KCC 12.01.145 (B)(2)(a) and (c).

I. Burden of proof. The burden of proof is on the appellant.

(Ord. No. 3424, § 19, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3574, § 3, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 3600 § 1, 5-7-02)


12.01.195 Closed record appeal. 

A. This section shall allow for closed record appeals as provided in the framework of KCC 12.01.040. A closed record appeal hearing shall be on the record before the hearing body and no new evidence may be presented, unless the new evidence is limited to information that could not have been placed on the record previously.

B. Administrative appeals. Only parties of record may initiate an administrative appeal on a project permit application.

C. Time to file. An appeal must be filed within fourteen (14) calendar days following issuance of the notice of decision. Appeals must be delivered to the planning services office by mail, personal delivery, or electronically before 4:30 p.m. on the last business day of the appeal period. 

D. Computation of time. For the purposes of computing the time for filing an appeal, the day the notice of decision is rendered shall not be included. The last day of the appeal period shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or a day designated by RCW 1.16.050 or by the city’s ordinances as a legal holiday; then it also is excluded and the filing must be completed on the next business day (RCW 35A.21.080).

E. Content of appeal. Appeals shall be in writing on forms provided by the city, be accompanied by an appeal fee as set by the city council, and contain the following information:

1. Appellant’s name, address, and phone number;

2. Appellant’s statement describing his or her standing to appeal;

3. Identification of the application which is the subject of the appeal;

4. Appellant’s statement of grounds for appeal and the facts upon which the appeal is based;

5. The relief sought, including the specific nature and extent; and

6. A statement that the appellant has read the appeal and believes the contents to be true, followed by the appellant’s signature.

F. Effect. The timely filing of an appeal shall stay the effective date of the decision until such time as the appeal is adjudicated by the hearing examiner or city council.

G. Order of proceedings. The closed record appeal shall only be open for oral argument by the parties to the appeal.

H. Burden of proof. The burden of proof is on the appellant.

(Ord. No. 3574, § 3, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 3801, § 5, 6-6-06; Ord. No. 4044, § 20, 8-21-12)


12.01.200 Judicial appeals.

A. Appeal. The city’s final decision or appeal decision on a Process I, II, III, IV, or V application may be appealed by a party of record with standing to file a land use petition in King County superior court. 

B. Petition period. A land use petition must be filed within twenty-one (21) calendar days of issuance of the notice of decision or appeal decision.

C. Filing and content of a land use petition. A land use petition shall be filed according to the procedural standards outlined in Chapter 36.70C RCW, Judicial Review of Land Use Decisions, also known as the “Land Use Petition Act.”

(Ord. No. 3424, § 19, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3574, § 3, 9-18-01)


Chapter 12.02 PROCEDURES FOR AMENDMENTS TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS

Sections:

12.02.005    Purpose.

12.02.010    Amendments and exceptions. 

12.02.020    Concurrent review for comprehensive plan amendments. 

12.02.025    Docketing.

12.02.030    Time of filing. 

12.02.035    Process for review. 

12.02.040    SEPA review. 

12.02.045    Annual docket evaluation criteria.

12.02.050    Comprehensive plan amendment standard of review. 

12.02.055    Public participation program – Basic elements.

12.02.060    Process and notice requirements. 

12.02.070    Repealed.

12.02.080    Repealed.

12.02.090    Fees. 

12.02.100    Repealed.


12.02.005 Purpose.

The purposes of this chapter are to establish the procedures and review criteria for amending the city’s comprehensive plan and development regulations and to provide for public participation. Amendments to the comprehensive plan are the means by which the city may modify its twenty (20) year plan for land use, development, or growth policies in response to changing city needs or circumstances. Comprehensive plan and development regulation amendments will be reviewed in accordance with the state Growth Management Act (GMA) and other applicable state laws, the countywide planning policies, and the Kent comprehensive plan. Comprehensive plan and development regulation amendments will be afforded appropriate public review pursuant to this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3847, § 1, 7-17-07)


12.02.010 Amendments and exceptions.

A. The comprehensive plan shall be amended pursuant to this chapter no more than once each calendar year as part of the annual cycle established in this chapter, except that under the following circumstances, amendments may be processed separately and in addition to the annual cycle: 

1. If an emergency exists, which is defined as an issue of community-wide significance that promotes the public health, safety, and general welfare;

2. To resolve an appeal of a comprehensive plan filed with a growth management hearings board or with the court;

3. To adopt or amend a shoreline master program under the procedures set forth in Chapter 90.58 RCW; 

4. The initial adoption of a subarea plan; and

5. The amendment of the capital facilities element of the comprehensive plan that occurs concurrently with the adoption or amendment of the city budget. The city council will hold the public hearing on this matter rather than the land use and planning board.

B. Annual cycle amendments to the comprehensive plan may be made to address technical updates and corrections, and to consider amendments that do not require substantive changes to policy language. This review may be referred to as the annual cycle.

C. Every seven (7) years from December 1, 2004, the city shall complete a comprehensive review of the comprehensive plan in order to update it as appropriate and to ensure continued compliance with the GMA. This review may provide for a cumulative analysis of the twenty (20) year plan based upon official population growth forecasts, benchmarks, and other relevant data in order to consider substantive changes to policy language.

(Ord. No. 3237, § 1, 7-6-95; Ord. No. 3650, § 1, 7‑15-03; Ord. No. 3722, § 1, 11-2-04; Ord. No. 3847, § 1, 7-17-07)


12.02.020 Concurrent review for comprehensive plan amendments.

Unless an exception is identified in KCC 12.02.010(A), city staff, the land use and planning board, and the city council shall consider all proposed comprehensive plan text and land use map amendments concurrently so as to assess their cumulative impact.

(Ord. No. 3237, § 1, 7-6-95; Ord. No. 3650, § 1, 7‑15-03; Ord. No. 3722, § 1, 11-2-04; Ord. No. 3847, § 1, 7-17-07)


12.02.025 Docketing.

A. In accordance with RCW 36.70A.470, a list of suggested changes to the comprehensive plan text, area-wide comprehensive plan land use map, or development regulations shall be coordinated by the planning services office. The list shall be known as the docket and is the means to suggest a change or identify a deficiency in the comprehensive plan or development regulations. Any interested party may submit items to the docket using the docket form prescribed by the planning services office.

B. A property owner or authorized agent of the property owner shall request a site-specific amendment to the land use map of the comprehensive plan by submitting a complete application for comprehensive plan map amendment, an environmental checklist, and applicable fees. The application will be processed in accordance with Process VI as described in Ch. 12.01 KCC and shall be considered concurrently with the annual docket. Separate site-specific zoning district map amendments may be processed under KCC 15.09.050(A)(3).

C. The docket request for comprehensive plan amendments and development regulations shall include the following elements, if applicable:

1. A detailed statement of the proposed amendment and reason for the amendment;

2. A statement of anticipated impacts of the change, including geographic area affected and issues presented;

3. A demonstration of why existing comprehensive plan guidance and development regulations should not continue in effect or why existing criteria no longer apply;

4. A statement of how the amendment complies with the Growth Management Act’s goals and specific requirements;

5. A statement of how the amendment complies with the countywide planning policies; and

6. A statement of how functional plans (e.g., subarea plans, utility plans) and capital improvement programs (e.g., transportation improvement program) support the change.

(Ord. No. 3722, § 1, 11-2-04; Ord. No. 3847, § 1, 7-17-07)


12.02.030 Time of filing.

A. The deadline for submitting an application for amendments to comprehensive plan text, area-wide comprehensive plan land use map, site-specific amendments to the land use plan map in KCC 12.02.025(B), and development regulations for consideration in the annual cycle is September 1, or the first business day in September.

B. Requests received each year after September 1 shall be considered in the following year’s annual docket amendment process.

(Ord. No. 3237, § 1, 7-6-95; Ord. No. 3650, § 1, 7‑15-03; Ord. No. 3722, § 1, 11-2-04; Ord. No. 3847, § 1, 7-17-07)


12.02.035 Process for review.

A. Proposals for amendments to the comprehensive plan land use map that have been filed with the planning services office in accordance with KCC 12.02.025(B) will be forwarded to the city council for action during the comprehensive plan annual cycle. 

B. Proposals for amendments to development regulations that have been filed with the planning services office in accordance with KCC 12.02.025(A) will be considered in an annual docket report which is forwarded to the city council each year.

C. Proposals for amendments to the comprehensive plan text and development regulations filed with the planning services office in accordance with KCC 12.02.025(A) shall be compiled by the planning services office and distributed for review and comment to those city departments responsible for the applicable element of the comprehensive plan or development regulation. The planning services office also shall seek public comment on the comprehensive plan and any proposed comprehensive plan amendments in accordance with KCC 12.02.055.

D. Using the criteria provided in KCC 12.02.045, city staff will review and submit to the planning services office recommendations as to which proposals should have action taken on them during the annual cycle and which should be made part of a city department work program.

E. The planning services office will compile proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan text, area-wide comprehensive plan land use map, and development regulations in an annual docket report along with a list of the proposed site-specific amendments to the comprehensive plan land use map. The report shall identify items appropriate for the current annual cycle, a future annual cycle, or the next seven (7) year cycle. If the docketed items will not be included in the annual cycle, the staff shall indicate the reason(s) why. The docket report also shall indicate the proposed public workshop and hearing dates for land use and planning board or other public meetings when the proposed changes will be considered, if known. The annual docket report shall be presented to the city council at its first meeting in December.

F. Proposed amendments to comprehensive plan text, area-wide comprehensive plan land use map, and development regulations that the docket report determines are not appropriate for the current annual cycle shall be included for consideration in future docket reports for a period of three (3) years.

G. The annual docket report will be posted on the city’s web site and updated annually.

(Ord. No. 3237, § 1, 7-6-95; Ord. No. 3650, § 1, 7‑15-03; Ord. No. 3722, § 1, 11-2-04; Ord. No. 3847, § 1, 7-17-07)


12.02.040 SEPA review.

The city’s responsible official shall review the cumulative anticipated environmental impact of the proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan land use map, comprehensive plan text, and development regulations, pursuant to the Washington State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA). If the responsible official determines that an environmental impact statement (EIS), supplemental EIS, or other appropriate environmental review is warranted, applicants for amendments to the comprehensive plan land use map may be responsible for a full or proportionate share of the costs of preparing the necessary documents as determined by the responsible official.

(Ord. No. 3237, § 1, 7-6-95; Ord. No. 3650, § 1, 7‑15-03; Ord. No. 3722, § 1, 11-2-04; Ord. No. 3847, § 1, 7-17-07)


12.02.045 Annual docket evaluation criteria.

A. Proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan text, area-wide comprehensive plan land use map, and development regulations on the annual docket may be appropriate for action if the following criteria have been met:

1. The proposed comprehensive plan text amendment addresses a matter appropriate for inclusion in the comprehensive plan;

2. The proposal demonstrates a strong potential to serve the public interest by implementing specifically identified goals and policies of the comprehensive plan;

3. The proposal addresses the interests and changed needs of the entire city as identified in its long-range planning and policy documents, including but not limited to the comprehensive plan;

4. The proposal does not raise policy or land use issues that are more appropriately addressed by an ongoing work program approved by city council;

5. The proposal can be reasonably reviewed within the time frame of the current annual work program and existing staff and budget resources; and

6. The proposal has not been voted on by the city council in the last three (3) years. This time limit may be waived by the city council if the proponent establishes that there exists either an obvious technical error or a change in circumstances that justifies the need for the amendment.

B. Staff may propose to expand the geographic scope of an amendment to the comprehensive plan land use map to allow for consideration of adjacent property, similarly situated property, or area-wide impacts. The following criteria shall be used in determining whether to expand the geographic scope of a proposed land use map amendment:

1. The effect of the proposed amendment on the surrounding area or neighborhood or city; 

2. The effect of the proposed amendment on the land use and circulation pattern of the surrounding area or neighborhood or city; and

3. The effect of the proposed amendment on the future development of the surrounding area or neighborhood or city.

(Ord. No. 3722, § 1, 11-2-04; Ord. No. 3847, § 1, 7-17-07)


12.02.050 Comprehensive plan amendment standard of review.

The planning services office may recommend and the city council may approve, approve with modifications, or deny amendments to the comprehensive plan text or land use map designations based upon the following criteria:

1. The amendment will not result in development that will adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare; and

2. The amendment is based upon new information that was not available at the time of adoption of the comprehensive plan, or that circumstances have changed since the adoption of the plan that warrant an amendment to the plan; and

3. The amendment will result in long-term benefits to the community as a whole and is in the best interest of the community; and

4. The amendment is consistent with other goals and policies of the comprehensive plan, and that the amendment will maintain concurrency between the land use, transportation, and capital facilities elements of the plan.

(Ord. No. 3237, § 1, 7-6-95; Ord. No. 3650, § 1, 7‑15-03; Ord. No. 3722, § 1, 11-2-04; Ord. No. 3847, § 1, 7-17-07)


12.02.055 Public participation program – Basic elements.

A. Pursuant to RCW 36.70A.140, the city shall provide for early and continuous public participation in the development and amendment of the comprehensive plan and development regulations.

B. Public participation shall at a minimum include the following elements:

1. Annual dissemination of a schedule for public participation.

2. Issuance of a citizen’s guide to the comprehensive plan process that provides information on citizen participation in the comprehensive plan process, a description of the procedure and schedule for amending the comprehensive plan and development regulations, and a guide on how to use the docket.

3. Provision for broad dissemination of proposed amendments and alternatives, if appropriate. The city shall make available to the public printed and electronic information which clearly defines and visually portrays, when possible, the range of options under consideration by the city. This information shall also include a description of any policy considerations; the schedule for deliberation; opportunities for public participation; information on the proposed amendment review procedures for written comments and the name, address, and telephone number of the responsible official(s). The methods employed may include, but are not limited to, the use of the following: published notice in the official city newspaper and other appropriate publications, news media notification, mailed notice to property owners and to citizens or groups with a known interest in the proposal, government channel, and Internet.

4. Public meetings to obtain comments from the public or other agencies on a proposed comprehensive or subarea plan, or an amendment to the comprehensive plan or development regulation. Public meeting means an informal meeting, hearing, workshop, or other public gathering of people for the purpose of obtaining public comments and providing opportunities for open discussion. All public meetings associated with review of the comprehensive plan or development regulations shall provide a means for the public to submit items for the docket. A public record of each public meeting should be maintained to include documentation of attendance, record of mailed notice, and a summary of public comments not incorporated in the docket.

(Ord. No. 3847, § 1, 7-17-07)


12.02.060 Process and notice requirements.

Proposed amendments shall be classified and public notice shall be given in accordance with Ch. 12.01 KCC.

(Ord. No. 3237, § 1, 7-6-95; Ord. No. 3650, § 1, 7‑15-03; Ord. No. 3722, § 1, 11-2-04; Ord. No. 3847, § 1, 7-17-07)


12.02.070 City council action.

Repealed by Ord. No. 3847.

(Ord. No. 3237, § 1, 7-6-95; Ord. No. 3650, § 1, 7‑15-03; Ord. No. 3722, § 1, 11-2-04)


12.02.080 Standing.

Repealed by Ord. No. 3847.

(Ord. No. 3237, § 1, 7-6-95; Ord. No. 3650, § 1, 7‑15-03; Ord. No. 3722, § 1, 11-2-04)


12.02.090 Fees.

There shall be no fee for docketed proposals to amend the comprehensive plan text or development regulations.

(Ord. No. 3237, § 1, 7-6-95; Ord. No. 3650, § 1, 7‑15-03; Ord. No. 3722, § 1, 11-2-04; Ord. No. 3847, § 1, 7-17-07)


12.02.100 Appeals.

Repealed by Ord. No. 3847.

(Ord. No. 3237, § 1, 7-6-95; Ord. No. 3650, § 1, 7‑15-03; Ord. No. 3722, § 1, 11-2-04)


Chapter 12.04 SUBDIVISIONS, BINDING SITE PLANS, AND LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS* Revised 8/19

Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

12.04.010    Title.

12.04.015    Purpose.

12.04.020    Scope.

12.04.025    Definitions.

12.04.030    Conformance to state law.

12.04.035    City functions.

12.04.040    Penalties.

12.04.045    Liability.

12.04.050    Planned unit developments.

12.04.055    Mobile home park design.

12.04.060    Onsite recreation and open space requirements.

12.04.065    Fee in lieu of recreation space.

12.04.070    Onsite recreation – Maintenance of recreation space or dedication.

Article II. Short Subdivisions and Subdivisions

12.04.100    Purpose of Type I and Type II short subdivisions.

12.04.103    Purpose of subdivisions.

12.04.105    Scope of short subdivisions.

12.04.107    Scope of subdivisions.

12.04.115    Application procedures.

12.04.117    Pre-application review.

12.04.119    Subdivision in phases.

12.04.120    Preliminary subdivision or short subdivision application.

12.04.135    Vesting.

12.04.140    Notice of application. Revised 8/19

12.04.145    Referral of preliminary subdivision and short subdivision applications.

12.04.150    Notification of agencies.

12.04.155    Public meeting/hearing notice. Revised 8/19

12.04.160    Public comment.

12.04.165    Agency recommendations.

12.04.170    Short subdivision committee.

12.04.175    Short subdivision preliminary plat meeting.

12.04.177    Public hearing.

12.04.180    Approval criteria.

12.04.185    Decision on preliminary short subdivisions.

12.04.190    Appeal of short subdivision committee decision.

12.04.192    Decision on preliminary subdivision.

12.04.193    Repealed.

12.04.195    Appeal to superior court.

12.04.200    Property annexed to city with preliminary plat approval from King County.

12.04.205    Installation of improvements or bonding in lieu of improvements.

12.04.210    Filing the final plat.

12.04.215    Short subdivision preliminary plat expiration.

12.04.220    Limitations on further subdivision of short subdivisions.

12.04.221    Subdivision preliminary plat expiration.

12.04.223    Decision on subdivision final plat.

12.04.225    Subdivision final plat expiration.

12.04.227    Procedure for alteration of a subdivision or short subdivision.

12.04.230    Procedure for vacation of a subdivision or short subdivision.

12.04.235    Standards for the subdivision of land and any dedications.

12.04.240    Connectivity.

12.04.243    Traffic calming.

12.04.245    Exterior street buffering.

12.04.250    Lots.

12.04.260    Zero lot line subdivisions and short subdivisions.

12.04.263    Clustering in urban separators.

12.04.264    Clustering in residential zones outside urban separators.

Article III. Binding Site Plans

12.04.800    Purpose.

12.04.805    Binding site plan committee.

12.04.810    Appeal.

12.04.815    Applicability for commercial and industrial sites.

12.04.820    Application requirements for commercial and industrial sites.

12.04.825    Approval criteria for commercial and industrial sites.

12.04.830    Final binding site plan for commercial and industrial sites.

12.04.835    Improvements for commercial and industrial sites.

12.04.840    Modifications for commercial and industrial sites.

12.04.845    Vacation for commercial and industrial sites.

12.04.850    Vesting for commercial and industrial sites.

12.04.855    Applicability for condominium sites.

12.04.860    Application requirements for condominium sites.

12.04.865    Approval criteria for condominium sites.

12.04.870    Enforcement.

12.04.875    Final binding site plan for condominium sites.

12.04.877    Filing the binding site plan for condominiums.

12.04.880    Expiration period for condominium sites.

12.04.885    Modifications for condominium sites.

Article IV. Lot Line Adjustments

12.04.900    Purpose of lot line adjustments.

12.04.905    Scope.

12.04.910    Preliminary consultation with staff.

12.04.915    Application procedures.

12.04.920    Principles of acceptability.

12.04.930    Vesting.

12.04.935    Referral of application.

12.04.940    Approval criteria.

12.04.945    Decision on lot line adjustments.

12.04.950    Appeal of decision on lot line adjustments.

12.04.955    Appeal to superior court.

12.04.960    Recording lot line adjustments.

*Cross reference(s) – Public works department, ch. 2.28; planning office, ch. 2.30; duties and responsibilities of the planning office, § 2.30.070; required public improvements, ch. 6.02; street and curb cuts, ch. 6.06; street use permits, ch. 6.07; environmental policy, ch. 11.03; administration of development regulations, ch. 12.01.

State law reference(s) – Subdivisions, Chapter 58.17 RCW; land development act, RCW 59.19.010 et seq.; binding site plan, alternative, RCW 58.17.035, 64.32.010 et seq.; local project review, Chapter 36.70B RCW.

Prior legislation – Ord. Nos. 3206 and 3752.

Article I. General Provisions


12.04.010 Title.

This code shall be hereinafter known as the city of Kent subdivision code.

(Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.04.010)


12.04.015 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules, regulations, requirements, standards, and procedures for subdividing land, for obtaining binding site plans, and for adjustments of lot lines in the city, ensuring:

A. That the highest feasible quality in subdivisions will be attained;

B. That the public health, safety, general welfare, and aesthetics of the city shall be promoted and protected;

C. That orderly growth, development, and the conservation, protection, and proper use of land shall be promoted;

D. That proper provisions for all public facilities, including connectivity, circulation, utilities, and services, shall be made;

E. That maximum advantage of site characteristics shall be taken into consideration; and

F. That the process shall be in conformance with provisions set forth in KCC Title 15, Zoning, and the comprehensive plan.

(Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 2849, § 1, 6-6-89; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3561, § 1, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09. Formerly § 12.04.020)


12.04.020 Scope.

This chapter shall apply to the division of land for sale or lease into two (2) or more parcels and to the modification of lot lines between adjoining parcels. Where this chapter imposes greater restrictions or higher standards upon the development of land than other laws, ordinances, or restrictive covenants, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.

Unless otherwise indicated and as provided by RCW 58.17.040, the provisions of this chapter do not apply to:

A. Cemeteries and burial plots while used for that purpose;

B. Divisions made by testamentary provisions, or the laws of descent;

C. Division of land due to condemnation or sale under threat thereof, by an agency or division of government vested with the power of condemnation;

D. Divisions of land into lots or tracts classified for industrial or commercial use when the city has approved a binding site plan for the use of the land;

E. Condominium developments, pursuant to either Chapter 64.32 or 64.34 RCW, that are subject to an approved binding site plan;

F. Divisions of land into lots or tracts each of which is five (5) acres or larger if the land is not capable of description as a fraction of a section of land;

G. A division for the purpose of lease when no residential structures other than mobile homes or travel trailers are permitted to be placed upon the land when the city has approved a binding site plan;

H. A division for the purpose of leasing land for facilities providing personal wireless services while used for that purpose; and

I. A division of land into lots or tracts of less than three (3) acres that is recorded in accordance with Chapter 58.09 RCW and is used or to be used for the purpose of establishing a site for construction and operation of consumer-owned or investor-owned electric utility facilities.

(Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 2849, § 2, 6-6-89; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09. Formerly § 12.04.040)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 58.17.040.


12.04.025 Definitions.

The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

A. Active recreation activities shall mean all outdoor recreational activities which involve field and court games.

B. Alley shall mean a public or private way not more than twenty (20) feet wide at the rear or side of property affording only secondary means of vehicular or pedestrian access to abutting property.

C. Binding site plan shall mean a scaled drawing which: (1) identifies and shows the areas and locations of all streets, improvements, utilities, open space, and any other matters specified in this chapter; (2) contains inscriptions or attachments setting forth such appropriate limitations and conditions for the use of the land as established by the city through the approval process; and (3) contains provisions which require any development to be in conformity with the binding site plan.

D. Binding site plan committee shall be a committee consisting of the planning manager, who shall be the chairperson, one (1) member of the land use and planning board, the building official, public works director, parks and community services director, and the fire chief, or their designated representatives.

E. Block shall mean a group of lots, tracts, or parcels within well-defined and fixed boundaries.

F. Circulation shall mean any of a number of quantitative measures that characterize the frequency of transportation mode trips, the duration of a mode trip, and path choices made between two (2) or more activity spaces. Traffic counts usually indicate a measure of circulation.

G. Clustering or cluster subdivision shall mean a development or division of land in which residential building lots are reduced in size and concentrated in specified portion(s) of the original lot, tract, or parcel.

H. Common open space shall mean a parcel or parcels of land or an area of water or a combination of land and water within the site designated for a subdivision or a planned unit development, and designed and intended primarily for the use or enjoyment of residents of a subdivision. Common open space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of residents of the subdivision.

I. Community park shall mean a park that serves the entire city of Kent and can be located throughout the city. Community parks may have facilities or amenities that are not offered elsewhere in the city, and which can include boating, swimming, fishing, athletic fields, group picnic shelters, play equipment, hard courts, skateparks, and trails, and will vary at each park. Access to the park is by car, public transit, foot, or bicycle. Off-street parking is provided.

J. Comprehensive plan shall mean the document, including maps, adopted by the city council, which outlines the city’s goals and policies relating to management of growth, and prepared in accordance with Chapter 36.70A RCW. The term also includes adopted subarea plans prepared in accordance with Chapter 36.70A RCW.

K. Connectivity shall mean the connection of neighborhoods by through streets, easements, or other rights-of-way to activity centers including other subdivisions, neighborhood centers, shopping centers, transit stops, recreational spaces, and other public facilities. Such connections shall have a character that is pedestrian-friendly and that provides a sense of location.

L. Cul-de-sac shall mean a short street having one (1) end open to traffic and being terminated at the other end by a vehicular turnaround.

M. Dedication shall mean a deliberate conveyance of land by its owner for any general and public uses, reserving to the owner no other rights than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the property has been devoted. The intention to dedicate shall be evidenced by the owner by the presentment for filing of a final plat or a final short plat showing the dedication thereof; and the acceptance by the public shall be evidenced by the approval of such plat for filing by the city.

N. Division of land shall mean the subdivision of any parcel of land into two (2) or more parcels.

O. Final plat or final short plat shall mean the final drawing of the subdivision or short subdivision and dedication prepared for filing for record with the King County recorder’s office and containing all elements and requirements set forth in this chapter.

P. Hearing examiner shall mean the person appointed by the mayor, or his or her designee, to conduct public hearings on applications outlined in Ch. 2.32 KCC which creates the hearing examiner, and who prepares a record, findings of fact, and conclusions on such applications.

Q. Homeowners’ association shall mean an incorporated nonprofit organization operating under recorded land agreements through which:

1. Each lot owner is automatically a member;

2. Each lot is automatically subject to a proportionate share of the expenses for the organization’s activities, such as maintaining common property; and

3. A charge if unpaid becomes a lien against the property.

R. Land use and planning board shall mean that body as defined in Ch. 2.57 KCC.

S. Lot shall mean a fractional part of divided lands having fixed boundaries, being of sufficient area and dimension to meet minimum zoning requirements for width and area. The term shall include tracts or parcels.

T. Lot, corner shall mean a lot abutting upon two (2) or more public or private streets at their intersection or upon two (2) parts of the same street, such streets or parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees within the lot lines.

U. Lot frontage shall mean the front of a lot which shall be that portion nearest a public or private street or, if the lot does not abut a street, the portion nearest an ingress/egress tract or easement. On a corner lot, the front yard shall be considered the narrowest part of the lot that fronts on a street, except in industrial and commercial zones, in which case the city has the authority of determining which part of the lot fronting on a street shall become the lot frontage.

V. Lot line adjustment shall mean the adjusting of common property lines or boundaries between adjacent lots, tracts, or parcels for the purpose of rectifying a disputed property line location, freeing such a boundary from any differences or discrepancies or accommodating a minor transfer of land. The resulting adjustment shall not create any additional lots, tracts, or parcels and all reconfigured lots, tracts, or parcels shall contain sufficient area and dimension to meet minimum requirements for zoning and building purposes.

W. Lot lines shall mean the property lines bounding the lot.

X. Lot measurements shall mean:

1. The depth of a lot which shall be considered to be the distance between the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.

2. The width of a lot which shall be considered to be the distance between the side lines connecting front and rear lot lines; provided, however, that width between side lot lines at their foremost points where they intersect with the street right-of-way line shall not be less than eighty (80) percent of the required lot width except in the case of lots fronting on cul-de-sacs or curves, where eighty (80) percent requirements shall not apply. However, the provisions of KCC 15.04.180(37) apply to lot widths within the SR-4.5, SR-6 and SR-8 zoning districts.

Y. Lot of record shall mean a parcel of land that has been considered a lot in accordance with the subdivision, short subdivision, or other land segregation laws in existence at the time the lot was created, or a parcel described as a fractional portion of a section as described in the Public Land Survey System.

Z. Lot, through shall mean a lot that has both ends fronting on a street. Either end may be considered the front as determined by the city.

AA. Meander line shall mean a line along a body of water intended to be used solely as a reference for surveying as defined in the Manual of Instructions for Surveying the Public Lands (1973) or its successor.

BB. Neighborhood park shall mean a park that serves a neighborhood (not a subdivision) defined by arterial streets. These parks are generally located centrally in the neighborhood so that the park is easily accessible and neighborhood residents do not have to cross a major arterial to reach the park. Access is primarily by foot or bicycle, so the park is usually no further than one-half (1/2) mile from any point in the neighborhood. Parking spaces are typically not provided, unless on-street parking is not available, accessible, or safe. Neighborhood parks have amenities for casual activities that are not programmed or organized, or for which a fee is charged. Amenities may include play equipment, picnic tables, shelters, hard courts (basketball, tennis), walking trails, and open grassy areas.

CC. Official plans shall mean those maps, development plans, or portions thereof adopted by the city council as provided in Chapter 44, Section 6, Laws of 1935, as amended. Such plans or maps shall be deemed to be conclusive with respect to the location and width of streets, public parks, playgrounds, and drainage rights-of-way or easements as may be shown thereon.

DD. Park open space shall mean those areas that are environmentally sensitive, wildlife habitat, or wetlands, that remain in a relatively natural state with minimal improvements for public access, interpretation, study, or enjoyment.

EE. Park service area shall mean those areas defined by arterial streets or geographic features, and which are identified in the comprehensive park and recreation plan, that a neighborhood park or community park is intended to serve.

FF. Performance bond or guarantee shall mean that security which may be accepted in lieu of a requirement that certain improvements be made before the final plat is approved and signed, including performance bonds, escrow agreements, and other similar collateral or surety agreements. See the Construction Standards for detailed requirements.

GG. Piggyback or accumulative short subdivision shall mean multiple short subdivision of contiguous land under common ownership. Ownership for purposes of this section shall mean ownership as established at the application submittal date of the initial short subdivision approval.

HH. Plat shall mean a map or representation of a subdivision, showing thereon the division of a tract or parcel of land into lots, tracts, streets, and alleys, or other divisions and dedications.

II. Preliminary approval shall mean the official favorable action taken on the preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision by the hearing examiner following a duly advertised public hearing or on a preliminary plat of a short subdivision following a duly advertised meeting of the short subdivision committee.

JJ. Preliminary plat shall mean a precise scale drawing of a proposed subdivision showing the general layout of streets and alleys, lots, tracts, and other elements of a plat or subdivision which shall furnish a basis for the approval or disapproval of the general layout of a subdivision.

KK. Short plat shall mean the map or representation of a short subdivision.

LL. Short subdivision shall mean the division or redivision of land into nine (9) or fewer lots, tracts, parcels, sites, or divisions for the purpose of sale, lease, or transfer of ownership. Tracts identified for or with the potential for future development shall be included within the number of lots created, but tracts which are not buildable and/or are intended for public dedication, environmental protection, or stormwater facilities are not included in the number of lots created.

MM. Short subdivision, type I shall mean the division of land into four (4) or less lots, tracts, parcels, sites, or divisions for the purpose of sale, lease, or transfer of ownership. Tracts identified for or with the potential for future development shall be included within the number of lots created, but tracts which are not buildable and/or are intended for public dedication, environmental protection, or stormwater facilities are not included in the number of lots created.

NN. Short subdivision, type II shall mean the division of land into more than four (4) and less than ten (10) lots, tracts, parcels, sites, or divisions for the purpose of sale, lease, or transfer of ownership. Tracts identified for or with the potential for future development shall be included within the number of lots created, but tracts which are not buildable and/or are intended for public dedication, environmental protection, or stormwater facilities are not included in the number of lots created.

OO. Short subdivision committee shall be a committee consisting of the planning manager, who shall be the chairperson, one (1) member of the land use and planning board, public works director, parks and community services director, and the fire chief, or their designated representatives.

PP. Street shall mean a public or private way which affords a primary means of access to property.

QQ. Subdivision shall mean the division or redivision of land into ten (10) or more lots, tracts, parcels, sites, or divisions for the purpose of sale or lease or transfer of ownership. Tracts identified for or with the potential for future development shall be included within the number of lots created, but tracts which are not buildable and/or are intended for public dedication, environmental protection, or stormwater facilities are not included in the number of lots created.

RR. Subdivision, phased shall mean a subdivision which is developed in increments over a period of time.

SS. Tentative plat shall mean a map drawn in accordance with the same requirements as the preliminary plat map, but submitted prior to preliminary plat submittal. The tentative plat is reviewed at a pre-application conference.

TT. Title report shall mean a certified report from a bonded title agency showing recorded title holder and all encumbrances and defects that exist on the land.

UU. Tract shall mean land reserved for specified uses including, but not limited to, future development, recreation, open space, sensitive areas, surface water retention, utility facilities, and access. Tracts are not considered building sites for purposes of residential dwelling unit construction; provided, that future development tracts may be used in the future as building sites for purposes of residential dwelling unit construction upon application, further review, and approval by the city.

VV. Trail system shall mean those pathways that connect points of interest, parks, community facilities, streets, residences, etc., in the community, which are generally not confined within the limits of one (1) park or neighborhood. Trails are intended to be used by bicycles, rollerskaters, pedestrians, and the like. Use by motorized vehicles is prohibited.

WW. Urban separators shall mean low-density lands that define community or municipal identities and boundaries, protect adjacent resource lands, rural areas, and environmentally sensitive areas, and create open space corridors within and between urban areas which provide environmental, visual, recreational, and wildlife benefits.

(Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 2849, § 3(12.04.040 – 12.04.079), 6-6-89; Ord. No. 2975, § 2, 3-20-91; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3551, § 4, 3-20-01; Ord. No. 3561, § 1, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09; Ord. No. 3944, § 1, 2-16-10. Formerly § 12.04.050)


12.04.030 Conformance to state law.

This code is in conformance with RCW 58.17.010 et seq. regulating platting, subdivision, adjusting lot lines, and the dedication of land and further provides for administrative procedures for the adjustment of lot lines.

(Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 2849, § 4, 6-6-89; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09. Formerly § 12.04.060)

Cross reference(s) – Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.01.030.

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 58.17.030.


12.04.035 City functions.

A. Planning services office. The planning services office is responsible for the administration and coordination of this chapter unless another department or division is authorized to administer and enforce a specific section.

B. Department of public works. The department of public works is responsible for reviewing all engineering and technical requirements of this chapter.

C. Fire department. The fire department is responsible for reviewing all fire access and fire safety requirements of this chapter.

D. Department of parks and recreation. The department of parks and recreation is responsible for reviewing all parks and open space dedication requirements of this chapter.

E. Short subdivision committee. The short subdivision committee is authorized to hold a public meeting and make a final decision on all short subdivision plats.

F. Binding site plan committee. The binding site plan committee is authorized to hold a public meeting and make a final decision on all binding site plans.

G. Hearing examiner. The hearing examiner is authorized to hold a public hearing and make a final decision on subdivision preliminary plats.

H. City council. The city council shall conduct any closed record appeal from a hearing examiner’s final decision on a subdivision preliminary plat. The planning director shall have sole authority to approve subdivision final plats. An appeal of a final plat decision shall be in superior court.

(Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3561, § 1, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09; Ord. No. 4252, § 2, 9-19-17. Formerly § 12.04.070)


12.04.040 Penalties.

A. Civil. Any violation of any provision of this chapter, or any violation of any term or condition of plat approval prescribed pursuant to this chapter by any person, firm, corporation, or association, or any agent thereof, shall constitute a civil violation under Ch. 1.04 KCC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required as provided therein.

B. Criminal. Any person, firm, corporation, or association, or any agent thereof, who violates any provision of Chapter 58.17 RCW, or any provision of this chapter, relating to the sale, offer for sale, lease, or transfer of any lot, tract, or parcel of land, shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor and each sale, offer for sale, lease, or transfer of each separate lot, tract, or parcel of land in violation of any provision of Chapter 58.17 RCW, or any provision of this chapter, shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.

(Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.045 Liability.

This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person owning any land or building, constructing or modifying any subdivisions in the city for damages to anyone injured or damaged either in person or property by any defect therein; nor shall the city or any agent thereof be held as assuming such liability by reason of any preliminary or final approval or by issuance of any permits or certificates authorized herein.

(Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09. Formerly § 12.04.550)


12.04.050 Planned unit developments.

In addition to the standard subdivision of land as outlined in this chapter, the city provides for the subdivision of land under the planned unit development regulations of the zoning code, KCC Title 15. The zoning code should be consulted concerning the special procedures for planned unit developments.

(Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09. Formerly § 12.04.030)


12.04.055 Mobile home park design.

The standards of this chapter for residential subdivisions shall apply to mobile home park subdivisions when lots in such subdivisions are to be sold, unless other standards are specifically approved by the city.

(Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09. Formerly § 12.04.520)

Cross reference(s) – Mobile home parks, ch. 12.05; recreational vehicle parks, ch. 12.06; mobile home park combining district, § 15.03.010.


12.04.060 Onsite recreation and open space requirements.

A. Approval of all subdivisions and short subdivisions located in single-family residential zones as defined in KCC Title 15, Zoning, shall be contingent upon the subdivider’s creation and development of onsite recreation space or paying approved fees in lieu of these provisions to the city, as necessary to mitigate the adverse effects of development upon the existing park and recreation service levels. This requirement shall not apply to (1) dwelling units on lots being created that include forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet or more, and (2) planned unit developments.

B. When required, residential subdivisions and short subdivisions shall provide recreation space for leisure, play, and sport activities as follows: four hundred fifty (450) square feet per dwelling unit.

C. Recreation space shall be placed in a designated recreation space tract or tracts. The tract(s) shall be owned by a homeowners’ association or other workable organization acceptable to the planning manager to provide continued maintenance of the recreation space tract.

D. Recreation space located outdoors and not part of a stormwater tract developed in accordance with subsection (F) of this section shall:

1. Be of a grade and surface suitable for recreation improvements and have a maximum grade of five (5) percent or as otherwise approved by the planning manager and parks and community services director;

2. Be on the site of the proposed development unless otherwise approved by the planning manager and parks and community services director;

3. Be located in an area where the topography, soils, hydrology, and other physical characteristics are of such quality as to create a flat, dry, obstacle-free space in a configuration which allows for passive and active recreation;

4. Be centrally located or accessible and convenient to the majority of residents within the development;

5. Have good visibility from streets and sidewalks;

6. Have no dimensions less than thirty (30) feet, except trail segments or as otherwise approved by the planning manager and parks and community services director;

7. Be located in one (1) designated area, unless the planning manager and parks and community services director determine that the residents of a large subdivision, townhouse development, or apartment development would be better served by multiple areas developed with recreation or play facilities; and

8. Be accessible, via trail or walkway, to any existing or planned municipal, county, or regional park; public open space; or trail system adjacent to the subdivision or short subdivision.

E. Recreation space shall be improved with both active and passive areas designed for leisure, play, and sport activities. Play equipment or other age-appropriate facilities, as approved by the city parks and community services director, shall be provided within the recreation space areas. Active recreation improvements shall be included as follows:

1. For developments of twenty-five (25) or less dwelling units, at least one (1) of the following recreation facilities shall be provided in addition to a tot lot or children’s play area:

a. Playground equipment;

b. Sport court;

c. Sport field;

d. Tennis court; or

e. Any other recreation facility proposed by the applicant and approved by the parks and community services director;

2. For developments of twenty-six (26) to fifty (50) dwelling units, at least two (2) or more of the recreation facilities listed in subsection (E)(1) of this section shall be provided; and

3. For developments of more than fifty (50) dwelling units, at least one (1) additional recreation facility listed in subsection (E)(1) of this section shall be provided for every additional twenty-five (25) dwelling units.

F. Recreation areas that are contained within the onsite stormwater tracts, but are located outside of the one hundred (100) year design water surface, may be credited for up to fifty (50) percent of the required square footage of the onsite recreation space requirement on a foot-per-foot basis, subject to the following criteria:

1. The stormwater tract and any onsite recreation tract shall be contiguously located. At final plat recording, contiguous stormwater and recreation tracts shall be recorded as one (1) tract and owned by the homeowners’ association or other organization as approved by the planning manager; and

2. Unless otherwise approved by the public works department, the drainage facility shall be constructed to meet the requirements of the City of Kent Surface Water Design Manual and the following conditions:

a. The side slope of the drainage facility shall not exceed the ratio of three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical unless slopes are existing, natural, and covered with vegetation;

b. A bypass system or an emergency overflow pathway shall be designed to handle flow exceeding the facility design and located so that it does not pass through active recreation areas or present a safety hazard;

c. The drainage facility shall be landscaped and developed for passive recreation opportunities such as trails, picnic areas, and aesthetic viewing; and

d. The drainage facility shall be designed not to require fencing under the city’s adopted surface water design manual.

G. When a tract is a joint use tract for a drainage facility and recreation space, as referenced in subsection (F)(1) of this section, the city shall not be responsible for maintenance of the recreation space.

H. A recreation space plan shall be submitted to the public works department and reviewed and approved with engineering plans.

1. The recreation space plan shall address all portions of the site that will be used to meet recreation space requirements of this section, including the drainage facility. The plans shall show dimensions, finished grade, equipment, landscaping, and improvements, as required by the planning manager and parks and community services director, to demonstrate that the requirements of the onsite recreation space or this chapter have been met.

2. If engineering plans indicate that the onsite drainage facility or stormwater tract must be increased in size from that shown in preliminary approvals, the recreation plans shall show how the required minimum recreation space under this section will be met.

(Ord. No. 3830, § 2, 3-6-07; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.065 Fee in lieu of recreation space.

A. Except in the case of short subdivisions, the creation of onsite recreation space, per KCC 12.04.060, is the preferred method of providing new development with opportunities for leisure, play, and sports activities. For short subdivisions, payment of a fee in lieu of providing onsite recreation space is preferred. In subdivisions, applicants shall to the best of their ability endeavor to provide recreation space on the project site. However, if onsite recreation space is not provided in accordance with this chapter, the applicant shall pay a fee in lieu of providing onsite recreation space if approved by the planning manager. A fee in lieu of onsite recreation space may be approved if the recreation space is provided within a city park in the vicinity and will be of greater benefit to the prospective residents of the development.

B. The dollar amount of the fee-in-lieu shall be determined by multiplying the following two (2) factors:

1. One hundred fifty (150) percent of the average assessed value per unit area of land within the boundaries of the subdivision. The average assessed value shall be that for the year in which the subdivision is deemed complete. Computations shall be based upon King County assessor information; and

2. The gross land area within the subdivision multiplied by five (5) percent.

C. The fee-in-lieu shall be held in a reserve account at the city, and may only be expended to fund a capital improvement that has been agreed upon by the parties to mitigate the identified, direct impact of the development. The payment shall be expended in all cases within five (5) years of collection. Any payment of fees made pursuant to this section that has not been expended within five (5) years of collection shall be refunded with interest at the rate applied to judgments to the property owners of record at the time of the refund. If the payment is not expended within five (5) years due to delay attributable to the developer, the payment shall be refunded without interest.

D. Appeals of fees-in-lieu imposed pursuant to this section shall be governed by the provisions of Ch. 12.01 KCC.

(Ord. No. 3830, § 3, 3-6-07; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.070 Onsite recreation – Maintenance of recreation space or dedication.

A. Recreation space that meets the requirements of this chapter may, at the discretion of the parks and community services director, be dedicated as a public park in lieu of providing the onsite recreation required under KCC 12.04.060 if the following criteria are met:

1. The dedicated area is at least ten (10) acres in size, unless it is adjacent to an existing or planned county or city park;

2. The dedicated land provides one (1) or more of the following:

a. Shoreline access;

b. Regional trail linkages;

c. Habitat linkages;

d. Recreation facilities; or

e. Heritage sites; and

3. The dedicated area is located within one (1) mile of the project site.

B. Unless the recreation space is dedicated to the city in accordance with subsection (A) of this section, maintenance and irrigation of any recreation space shall be, per KCC 12.04.060(C), by the homeowners’ association or other approved organization.

(Ord. No. 3830, § 4, 3-6-07; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)

Article II. Short Subdivisions and Subdivisions


12.04.100 Purpose of Type I and Type II short subdivisions.

The procedures regulating Type I and Type II short subdivisions are established to promote orderly and efficient division of lots on a small scale, promote infill development and meet density requirements while providing an efficient review process, avoiding placing undue burdens on the subdivider and complying with the purpose of this chapter and the provisions of RCW 58.17.060 et seq.

(Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09. Formerly § 12.04.180)


12.04.103 Purpose of subdivisions.

The procedures regulating subdivisions are established to ensure quality development which promotes orderly and efficient growth, and the conservation and proper use of land; protects the public health, safety, general welfare, and aesthetics of the city; makes adequate provisions for public facilities in conformance with provisions set forth in KCC Title 15, Zoning, Title 6, Public Works, Title 7, Utilities, and the Kent comprehensive plan; and complies with the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 58.17 RCW.

(Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.105 Scope of short subdivisions.

A. A Type I short subdivision is defined as any land being divided into four (4) or less parcels, lots, tracts, sites or subdivisions, any one (1) of which is less than twenty (20) acres in size and which has not been divided in a short subdivision within a period of five (5) years.

B. A Type II short subdivision is defined as any land being divided into more than four (4) and less than ten (10) parcels, lots, tracts, sites or subdivisions, any one (1) of which is less than twenty (20) acres in size and which has not been divided in a short subdivision within a period of five (5) years.

C. No application for a short subdivision shall be approved if the land being divided is held in common ownership with a contiguous parcel that has been divided in a short subdivision within the preceding five (5) years. Serial subdivision of contiguous parcels in the same ownership is defined as piggybacking short subdivisions and is prohibited unless the subject property has received master plan approval by the city through a rezone, planned unit development, or other hearing process. Such short subdivisions must be consistent with the approved master plan.

D. Short subdivisions may not be further divided in any manner within a period of five (5) years without following the procedures for subdivisions, except that when the short subdivision contains fewer than nine (9) parcels, nothing in this section shall prevent the owner who filed the short subdivision from filing an alteration within the five (5) year period to create up to a total of nine (9) lots.

(Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09. Formerly § 12.04.120)


12.04.107 Scope of subdivisions.

A. Any land being divided into ten (10) or more parcels, lots, tracts, sites, or subdivisions, any one (1) of which is less than twenty (20) acres in size; or

B. Any land which has been previously divided under the short subdivision procedures within the preceding five (5) years; or

C. Any land which is held in common ownership with a contiguous parcel divided under the short subdivision procedures within the preceding five (5) years shall conform to the subdivision procedures and requirements of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.115 Application procedures.

An application for a subdivision or short subdivision consists of the following steps:

1. Preparation of the tentative plat of the proposed subdivision or Type II short subdivision and submission of an application for a pre-application conference;

2. Review of the tentative plat for pre-application conference by the city and convene a meeting with the city resulting in the issuance of a pre-application conference summary letter;

3. Preparation and submission of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision to the hearing examiner for a public hearing and decision, or preparation and submission of the preliminary plat of the proposed short subdivision to the short subdivision committee for a public meeting and decision;

4. Installation or bonding of improvements according to the approved preliminary subdivision or short subdivision requirements and satisfaction of all plat conditions;

5. Submission of the subdivision final plat to the planning director for approval, or submission of the short subdivision final plat to the short subdivision committee chairman for approval;

6. Recordation of the approved final plat in the office of the King County department of records and elections.

(Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 2849, § 6(12.04.212(B)), 6-6-89; Ord. No. 3424, § 24, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09; Ord. No. 4252, § 3, 9-19-17. Formerly § 12.04.310)


12.04.117 Pre-application review.

Pursuant to KCC 12.01.080, a pre-application conference is encouraged for subdivisions, and Type I and Type II short subdivisions that require SEPA review. The scale and information required for a pre-application conference and the number of copies to be filed shall be in accordance with the requirements of the application checklist.

(Ord. No. 4035, § 1, 4-17-12; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.119 Subdivision in phases.

In a phased subdivision or short subdivision, preliminary approval must be granted for the entire subdivision or short subdivision and must delineate the separate divisions which are to be developed in increments. Preliminary approval shall be conditioned upon completion of the proposed phases in a particular sequence and may specify a completion date for each phase. Final plat approval shall be granted for each separate phase of the preliminary subdivision or short subdivision. All phases shall be recorded with the King County recorder within the timelines stated in KCC 12.04.215 and 12.04.221.

(Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.120 Preliminary subdivision or short subdivision application.

A. Application for a subdivision or short subdivision shall be made to planning services on the forms supplied and in the number of copies prescribed by that division.

B. The preliminary plat or short plat shall be a neat and approximate drawing on reproducible material at a decimal scale. The plat map shall measure eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches, be in accordance with Chapter 332-130 WAC, and shall include:

1. The subdivision or short subdivision name; the name and address of the owner; and, if one has been employed in the preparation of the application, the name, address, and stamp with signature of the licensed land surveyor and professional engineer;

2.  The date of preparation, a north arrow, legal description of the property to be subdivided, and a drawing completed in an appropriate decimal scale;

3. The location of existing and proposed platted property lines, and existing section lines, streets, structures, watercourses, railroads, bridges, wells, and any recorded public or private utility or street easements, both on the land to be subdivided and on the adjoining lands that abut the proposed subdivision, for a distance of one hundred (100) feet from the edge of the subject property;

4. The names, locations, widths, and other dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, stormwater and critical area tracts, easements, traffic calming features and devices, parks and other open spaces, reservations, and utilities;

5. The acreage of land to be subdivided, the number of lots, the area of each lot, and the approximate square footage and approximate percent of total acreage in open space;

6. The approximate dimensions of each lot;

7. How the proposed subdivision will be served by utilities and the location of sanitary sewer, domestic water, and storm drainage lines and facilities;

8. All existing structures and distances from any existing and proposed lot lines within or abutting the short subdivision within a distance of one hundred (100) feet;

9. Sufficient topographic data to accurately locate any critical areas that may affect future development, and show contours not less than two (2) feet;

10. Provisions for sidewalks, placement or construction of traffic calming features and devices, and other features that assure safe walking conditions for students who walk to and from school, users of public transit, and other pedestrians;

11. A statement of soil type, drainage conditions, present landscaping including a description of any natural or manmade land cover, wildlife present, and any other environmental factors which may be prescribed by planning services and applicable city codes; and

12. All of the information requested on the application form by planning services.

(Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3561, § 1, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09. Formerly § 12.04.220)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 58.17.240, 58.17.250.


12.04.135 Vesting.

A proposed division of land shall be considered under the requirements of this chapter and the zoning and other land use regulations in effect on the land at the time that a preliminary application for a subdivision or short subdivision, as defined in this chapter, has been determined to be complete and has been accepted by the city of Kent, pursuant to KCC 12.01.100.

(Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.140 Notice of application. Revised 8/19

The applicant shall place at least one public notice board on the property to be subdivided. The public notice board shall be placed on the property as directed by planning services no later than 14 calendar days after a determination of completeness. If the property to be subdivided is located adjacent to more than one public street or has more than one potential access route, one public notice board shall be placed on the property adjacent to each street or potential access route. A notice of application shall be issued for land segregation applications within 14 calendar days after the city has made a determination of completeness, and at least 15 calendar days prior to the short subdivision committee meeting date for short subdivisions or the public hearing for subdivision applications. The notice of application shall include the tentative date of the public meeting or public hearing and shall be mailed, published, and posted on the same day, in the following manner:

A. The city shall publish the notice of application in a newspaper of general circulation within the city.

B. The city shall post the notice of application on the public notice board(s) placed on the property and shall also post the notice of application at Kent City Hall and in the register for public review at the planning services office.

C. The city shall mail the notice of application listing the date of the short subdivision committee meeting, or the date of public hearing for subdivisions, to the applicant and all owners of real property as shown by the records of the county assessor’s office within 300 feet of any portion of the boundary of the proposed short subdivision and within 300 feet of any portion of the boundary of the proposed subdivision. In addition, if the property to be short subdivided abuts parcels greater than two acres which have other properties abutting them, these additional properties shall also be mailed a notice of application.

D. The city shall mail or send the notice of application to all agencies with jurisdiction, city departments, and to any person who requests such notice in writing.

E. One notice of application shall be prepared for all permit applications related to the same project at the time of the earliest complete project permit application.

(Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09; Ord. No. 4329, § 2, 7-16-19)

Cross reference(s) – Administration of development regulations, § 12.01.140.


12.04.145 Referral of preliminary subdivision and short subdivision applications.

Upon determination of completeness of an application for a subdivision or short subdivision, planning services shall distribute copies of the application materials for review and comment to all city departments with jurisdiction over the application, and to any other department or agency deemed necessary. For short subdivisions, one (1) copy of the application materials shall also be sent to each member of the short subdivision committee. The application shall be distributed at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the short subdivision committee meeting or public hearing.

(Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09. Formerly § 12.04.230)


12.04.150 Notification of agencies.

A. The city shall mail a notice of application to all agencies with jurisdiction over the subdivision or short subdivision application. Such notice shall include the hour and location of the short subdivision committee meeting or subdivision public hearing and a description of the property to be platted. A copy of the plat and the application materials shall be provided to agencies as deemed necessary or if requested by the agency.

B. Notice of application for a preliminary subdivision or short subdivision, adjacent to or within one (1) mile of the city boundaries or which contemplates the use of King County’s or any other city’s or town’s utilities, shall be given to the appropriate county, city, or town authorities.

C. If a proposed subdivision or short subdivision is located adjacent to the right-of-way of a federal or state highway or within two (2) miles of a state or municipal airport, then notice of application shall be given to the State Department of Transportation. Such notice shall include the hour and location of the public meeting or hearing, a legal description of the property being subdivided, and a location map. The Department of Transportation shall, within fourteen (14) calendar days after receiving the notice, submit to planning services a statement of any information that the department deems to be relevant about the effect of the proposed development upon the legal access to the state highway, the traffic-carrying capacity of the state highway, the safety of the users of the state highway, or the airport.

(Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09. Formerly § 12.04.130)

State law reference(s) – Similar provisions, RCW 58.17.155.


12.04.155 Public meeting/hearing notice. Revised 8/19

A. Notice of the short subdivision committee meeting shall be given in the following manner:

1. The date of the short subdivision committee meeting shall be listed on the notice of application, which shall be mailed in accordance with KCC 12.04.140 to the applicant and all owners of real property as shown by the records of the county assessor’s office within 300 feet of any portion of the boundary of the proposed subdivision. In addition, if the property to be short subdivided abuts parcels greater than two acres which have other properties abutting them, these additional properties shall also be mailed a notice of application. Seven calendar days prior to the short subdivision committee meeting, the city shall mail the short subdivision committee agenda and staff report(s) to the applicant, all owners of the real property, and any person who provided written comments on the application.

B. The notice of public hearing for a subdivision shall be given in the following manner:

1. The notice of public hearing shall be mailed, published, and posted on the same day, not less than 10 calendar days prior to the hearing date.

2. The city shall post the notice of public hearing on the public notice board(s) on the property.

3. The city shall publish the notice of public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city.

4. The city shall mail a notice of public hearing to the applicant, any person who submits written comments on an application, and all owners of real property as shown by the records of the county assessor’s office within 300 feet of any portion of the boundary of the proposed subdivision. If the owner of the real property proposed to be subdivided also owns another parcel or parcels of real property which lie adjacent to the real property proposed to be subdivided, the notice shall be mailed to all owners of real property located within 300 feet of such adjacently owned parcels. Seven calendar days prior to the public hearing, the city shall mail the public hearing agenda and staff report(s) to the applicant, all owners of the real property, and any person who provided written comments on the application.

(Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09; Ord. No. 4329, § 3, 7-16-19)

Cross reference(s) – Administration of development regulations, § 12.01.140.


12.04.160 Public comment.

Affected agencies and the public shall have a fourteen (14) calendar day period to comment on a notice of application. An agency and the public are presumed to have no comments if comments are not received within the specified time period. The planning manager may grant an extension of time only if the application involves unusual circumstances. Any extension shall not be granted for a period longer than three (3) additional calendar days.

The fourteen (14) day public comment period begins on the date the notice of application is mailed, posted and published. Planning services must receive all public comments by 4:30 p.m. on the last day of the comment period. Comments may be mailed, personally delivered, or sent by facsimile or e-mail. Comments should be as specific as possible. The short subdivision committee or hearing examiner shall not take action on a short subdivision or subdivision application until after the comment period has passed.

(Ord. No. 3136, § 2, 10-5-93; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09. Formerly § 12.04.235)


12.04.165 Agency recommendations.

At the time of the preliminary short subdivision or subdivision application, written recommendations for approval or denial in the form of a certificate of water or sewer availability must be submitted from the health agencies responsible for approval of the proposed means of sewage disposal and/or water supply, regarding the general adequacy of the proposed means of sewage disposal and/or water supply. The applicant is responsible for submitting the appropriate application forms to the health agency and for paying any review fee.

(Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 2863, § 1(12.04.266), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09. Formerly § 12.04.370)


12.04.170 Short subdivision committee. 

A. The short subdivision committee shall consist of the planning manager, who shall be chairman; the director of parks and recreation; the director of public works; the fire chief; and a land use and planning board member. Each committee member is authorized to designate an alternate to attend in their absence. A designated alternate shall have full voting power in the short subdivision approval process.

B. At least three (3) of the five (5) members of the short subdivision committee must be present in order for the committee to take any action.

(Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.175 Short subdivision preliminary plat meeting.

A public meeting attended by the applicant or representative and the short subdivision committee members shall be held within forty (40) calendar days of the determination of completeness of the application in compliance with, and subject to, the requirements of KCC 12.01.100 and 12.01.110. The meeting shall be open to the public.

(Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.177 Public hearing.

A. The hearing examiner shall hold an open record public hearing in compliance with KCC 12.01.160 on any subdivision preliminary plat within one hundred (100) calendar days of planning services’ determination of a complete application in compliance with, and subject to, the requirements of KCC 12.01.100 and 12.01.110.

B. A record of the public hearing shall be kept by the city and shall be open to public inspection.

(Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.180 Approval criteria.

A. A proposed subdivision or short subdivision and dedication shall not be approved unless the city finds that:

1. Appropriate provisions have been made for:

a. The public health, safety, and general welfare of the community;

b. Protection of environmentally sensitive lands and habitat;

c. Potable water supplies;

d. Sanitary wastes;

e. Other public utilities and services, as deemed necessary;

f. Stormwater facilities and conveyance systems;

g. Open spaces;

h. Community parks and recreation;

i. Neighborhood tot lots and recreation areas;

j. Schools and school grounds;

k. Transit stops;

l. Connectivity of streets, alleyways, and other private and public ways for vehicular and pedestrian circulation and access in and between subdivisions and neighborhoods, where feasible;

m. Connectivity of sidewalks, pedestrian pathways, traffic calming features and devices, and other features that assure safe walking conditions within and between subdivisions and neighborhoods for residents and students who walk to and from school, parks, transit stops and other neighborhood services;

n. In single-family residential zoning districts, building lots and street access configured to support the construction of homes with diminished garage doors such that no less than fifty (50) percent of the new lots will support construction of and access to a garage in the rear portion of the lot accessed via a common driveway between lots; or a side access garage; or a garage accessed via a rear alley; or a garage set back no less than ten (10) feet from the front facade of the home; or other design strategies which similarly diminish the prominence of the garage and are approved by the planning manager. Lots and streets shall be configured such that at least two (2) of these options are supported in each new development;

o. In single-family residential zoning districts, landscape buffering along all frontage streets of the subdivision that do not provide the new lots with direct vehicular access;

2. The city has considered all other relevant facts; and

3. The public use and interest will be served by the platting of such subdivision or short subdivision and dedication; and

4. The city has considered the physical characteristics of a proposed subdivision or short subdivision site and may deny a proposed plat because of flood, inundation, or wetland conditions; slope, or soil stability and/or capabilities. Construction of protective improvements may be required as a condition of approval, and such improvements shall be noted on the final plat.

B. Dedication of land to any public body, provision of public improvements to serve the subdivision, and/or the imposition of impact fees may be required as a condition of subdivision approval. Dedications shall be clearly shown on the final plat.

(Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3561, § 1, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.185 Decision on preliminary short subdivisions.

A. The decision of the short subdivision committee shall be made at the short subdivision committee meeting. The meeting may be continued if no decision is reached at the first meeting and additional information is needed. The continuation of the meeting shall be set for the next scheduled short subdivision committee meeting or a date mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the short subdivision committee.

B. The city shall make written findings on the short subdivision approval criteria. The applicant, owner, and all parties of record shall be notified in writing of the committee’s decision and shall be provided with a copy of the committee’s findings addressing its reasons for approval or denial.

C. The short subdivision committee may approve, approve with modifications and conditions, or deny the application for a short subdivision.

D. If modifications are deemed necessary by the short subdivision committee, they may be added to the original short subdivision plat or a new short subdivision plat may be required.

E. An applicant may request that an application previously denied or approved with conditions be reopened by the committee if it is found by the planning manager and the applicant that new information has come to light that might modify the actions previously taken by the short subdivision committee.

F. In case of a denial by the short subdivision committee, any appeal made shall be to the hearing examiner in accordance with KCC 12.04.190. New information may be presented during hearing examiner consideration of the appeal.

(Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09. Formerly § 12.04.240)


12.04.190 Appeal of short subdivision committee decision.

The decision of the short subdivision committee shall be final, unless an appeal by a party of record is made to the hearing examiner within fourteen (14) calendar days after the short subdivision committee’s decision. The appeal shall be in writing and shall be processed pursuant to Chs. 2.32 and 12.01 KCC. The decision of the hearing examiner shall represent final action of the city and is appealable only to the superior court.

(Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 3169, § 2, 5-17-94; Ord. No. 3424, § 23, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09. Formerly § 12.04.250)


12.04.192 Decision on preliminary subdivision.

A. The hearing examiner may approve, approve with modifications and conditions, or deny the application for a subdivision.

B. The final decision of the hearing examiner shall be rendered within ten (10) working days following the conclusion of all testimony and hearings, unless a longer period is mutually agreed to on the record by the applicant and the hearing examiner.

C. The city shall provide a written notice of decision by the hearing examiner. The notice of decision shall be provided to the parties of record and to any person who requested notice of the decision prior to the decision and shall include findings and conclusions, based on the record and approval criteria, to support the decision.

D. A party of record may make a written request for reconsideration of the decision by the hearing examiner within five (5) working days of the date the decision is rendered, pursuant to KCC 12.01.160(F).

(Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.193 City council closed record appeal.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4044.

(Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.195 Appeal to superior court.

The decision of the hearing examiner is final for short subdivisions and subdivisions unless it is appealed to the superior court. Such appeal must be filed with the superior court within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date the decision was issued.

(Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09; Ord. No. 4044 § 22, 8-21-12)


12.04.200 Property annexed to city with preliminary plat approval from King County.

A. In instances where property annexed to the city has received subdivision or short subdivision preliminary approval from King County prior to annexation, planning services, public works department, fire department, and parks and community services department shall review the plat. City plan check review and inspections shall be subject to fees, which are on file in the city clerk’s office.

B. The density, lot size, and dimensions, and the provisions made for open space, stormwater facilities and conveyance systems, streets, alleys, public ways, water, sanitary wastes, parks, playgrounds, sites for schools and school grounds, and those conditions imposed by King County need not comply with the requirements of KCC Title 15, Zoning, or the design and construction standards. These plats are to be developed in accordance with county standards in effect at the time of vesting of the preliminary plat application in the county.

C. The preliminary plat shall comply with the King County regulations pertaining to expiration of the preliminary plat that were in effect on the date the application vested. The date of approval will be that date on which King County approved the preliminary plat.

D. The procedures for subdivision or short subdivision final plats shall be those county procedures and regulations in effect at the time of vesting of the preliminary application in the county.

(Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09. Formerly § 12.04.400)


12.04.205 Installation of improvements or bonding in lieu of improvements. 

A. The following tangible improvements shall be required before a final plat or final short plat is recorded:

1. Construction and subsequent acceptance by the city of all public and private improvements as required by the conditions of approval;

2. All improvements are to be made pursuant to specifications and standards of city code, approved by the public works department and in accordance with the current edition of the design and construction standards of the city.

B. The public works department shall be responsible for the supervision, inspection, and acceptance of all subdivision improvements and shall charge the subdivider a fee that has been assessed in accordance with KCC 6.03.010 as enacted, subsequently amended, or replaced.

C. Prior to proceeding with subdivision or short subdivision improvements, the subdivider shall make application for such permits from the city as are required. The applicant is also responsible for complying with all permit requirements of other federal, state, and local agencies.

D. No plat or short plat shall be recorded until all improvements are constructed in a satisfactory manner and approved by the responsible departments or a bond approved by the city has been posted for deferred improvements. If a developer wishes to defer certain improvements, written application shall be made to the public works department and planning services stating the reasons why such delay is necessary. If the deferment is approved, the developer shall furnish a bond or assignment of funds to the city in an amount equal to a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) percent of the estimated cost of all required public and private improvements remaining to be constructed. The decision of the public works director and planning manager, or respective designees, as to the amount of such bond shall be final. Such bond shall list the work that shall be performed by the developer and shall specify that all of the deferred improvements be completed within one (1) year after recording of the subdivision or short subdivision. The bond shall be held by the public works department. The developer may substitute a certified or cashier’s check or assignment of funds in lieu of a bond. Such check or assignment shall be made payable to the city of Kent and shall be in the same amount as the bond it is substituting. At the discretion of the public works director, an assignment of funds may be required for all or a portion of the bond amount.

E. The city reserves the right, in addition to all other remedies available to it by law, to proceed against such bond or other payment in lieu thereof. In case of any suit or action to enforce any provisions of this chapter, the developer shall pay the city all costs incidental to such litigation including reasonable attorney’s fees. The applicant shall enter into an agreement with the city requiring payment of such attorney’s fees. The requirement of the posting of any performance bond or other security shall be binding on the applicant, his heirs, successors, and assigns.

F. The public works department shall notify planning services verifying that the developer has completed the required installations and/or bonding in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the specifications and standards of the departments. Planning services shall notify the developer advising him to proceed with recordation of the short plat or final plat when the required improvements have been installed and approved or adequate security has been posted as provided in subsection (D) of this section.

(Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3561, § 1, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09. Formerly § 12.04.410)

State law reference(s) – Improvements, RCW 58.17.130.


12.04.210 Filing the final plat.

A. A final plat or final short plat shall be prepared by a professional land surveyor licensed in the state of Washington, based on the Washington State Plane Coordination System, and be submitted to planning services along with all forms required and with the number of originals and copies requested.

B. The final plat or final short plat submitted for filing shall comply with the conditions of preliminary approval and Chapters 58.09 and 58.17 RCW and Chapter 332-130 WAC. The original drawing shall be in black ink on mylar or photographic mylar.

C. In addition to other requirements as specified in this section, the final plat or final short plat shall contain or be accompanied by the following:

1. Signature of the owner of the property on the face of the final plat or final short plat mylar;

2. A notarized certificate of the owner, contract purchaser, grantor of a deed of trust, or other holder of beneficial title to the property being subdivided indicating that the subdivision or short subdivision is made with free consent and in accordance with their desires, and if the subdivision or short subdivision is subject to deeding of property, the notarized certificate shall be signed by all parties having any ownership interest in the lands subdivided. For purposes of this section, ownership interest shall include legal and equitable property interests, including, but not limited to, present, future, contingent, or whole fee interests, together with a beneficiary’s interest pursuant to a trust and contract interest pursuant to a specifically enforceable contract for the purchase of the real property;

3. Certification by the responsible health agencies that the methods of sewage disposal and water service are acceptable;

4. Certification by the public works department that the subdivider has complied with either of the following alternatives:

a. All improvements have been installed in accordance with the requirements of these regulations; or

b. Certain improvements have been deferred according to KCC 12.04.205(D), deferred improvements;

5. The subdivider shall furnish the city a current plat or short plat certificate or title report from a title insurance company, produced no more than 45 calendar days prior to final plat or final short plat application, that documents the ownership and title of all interested parties in the plat or short plat, subdivision, short subdivision, or dedication and that lists all liens and encumbrances. The legal description in the title report shall be identical to the legal description on the face of the plat or short plat. The city reserves the right to require updates of the certificate or title report at any time prior to signing the final plat or final short plat by the short subdivision committee chairman;

6. Any person signing for a corporation must provide documentation that shows they have the authority to execute on behalf of the said corporation;

7. Copies of any restrictive covenants as may be used in the subdivision or short subdivision;

8. Certification of approval to be signed by the King County assessor;

9. Certification of approval to be signed by the King County recorder;

10. Certificate of approval by the chairman of the short subdivision committee;

11. Copies of any bylaws for a homeowners’ association, if created;

12. Approved printed computer lot closure on all lots, alleys, and boundaries.

D. All subdivisions and short subdivisions shall be surveyed by a land surveyor licensed in the state of Washington. All lot, tract, parcel, and right-of-way corners and angle points shall be set in accordance with Chapter 58.09 RCW. Street monuments shall be in accordance with city of Kent design and construction standards and shall be installed per those same standards. Sufficient intervisible monuments shall be set to ensure that any property within the subdivision or short subdivision can be readily resurveyed at a later time or as may be specified by the public works department. All final plats and final short plats shall be based on at least two city of Kent horizontal control points and reference the North American Datum of 1983/1991 Adjustment (NAD 83/91) or its successor as may be adopted by the public works department survey section.

E. If any utility companies and/or utility districts have existing easements within the proposed plat or short plat, the applicant or its assigns shall have these easements removed or shall have their rights subordinated to the city of Kent if they fall within dedicated right-of-way or tracts for public use.

F. The final plat or final short plat must be submitted to planning services for review as to compliance with all terms of the preliminary approval; terms of bonding or the completion of all improvements; and completeness and accuracy of survey data and platting requirements.

G. Before a final short plat is filed with King County, it shall be signed by the chairman of the short subdivision committee when the plat is determined to be in compliance with all applicable short subdivision requirements.

H. After all final plat conditions for a subdivision have been met, it shall be signed by the city engineer, city finance director, and planning director.

I. An approved final plat or short plat shall be filed for record with King County and shall not be deemed approved until filed.

J. A conformed copy of the recorded plat or short plat shall be filed with planning services and the public works department.

(Ord. No. 4035, § 2, 4-17-12; Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3561, § 1, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09; Ord. No. 4252, § 4, 9-19-17. Formerly § 12.04.260)


12.04.215 Short subdivision preliminary plat expiration.

Short subdivision preliminary plat approval shall lapse four (4) years from the date of preliminary plat approval unless a final plat based on the preliminary plat has been reviewed and approved by the city and recorded with King County. In addition, for those preliminary short subdivision approvals that have not expired as of the passage date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, their expiration period shall be extended two (2) additional years, for a total of a four (4) year expiration period from the time of preliminary approval.

(Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 3443, § 1, 2-16-99; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3898, § 1, 12-9-08; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09. Formerly § 12.04.280)


12.04.220 Limitations on further subdivision of short subdivisions.

Any land subdivided under the requirements for a short subdivision shall not be further divided for a period of five (5) years without following the procedures for subdivisions, except that when the short subdivision contains fewer than nine (9) parcels, nothing in this section shall prevent the owner who filed the short subdivision from filing an alteration within the five (5) year period to create up to a total of nine (9) lots within the original short subdivision boundaries.

(Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09. Formerly § 12.04.290)


12.04.221 Subdivision preliminary plat expiration.

A. Subdivision preliminary plat approval shall remain valid for that period of time specified in Chapter 58.17 RCW, plus one year. During this period, an applicant must submit a final plat based on the preliminary plat, or any phase thereof, and meeting all of the requirements of this chapter and Chapter 58.17 RCW, to the city council for approval, or the preliminary plat shall lapse and become void.

B. For preliminary plats approved between January 1, 2008, and December 31, 2008, one extension of 15 months shall be granted to an applicant who files a written request for extension with the economic and community development department prior to the expiration of the preliminary plat’s validity period, as provided in subsection (A) of this section.

C. In the case of a phased subdivision, final plat approval by the planning director of any phase of the subdivision preliminary plat will constitute an automatic one-year extension for the filing of the final plat for the next phase of the subdivision.

(Ord. No. 4035, § 3, 4-17-12; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09; Ord. No. 4194, § 1, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 4252, § 5, 9-19-17)


12.04.223 Decision on subdivision final plat.

The planning director shall approve, disapprove, or return the final plat to the applicant for modification and/or correction within 30 calendar days of the date of the city’s determination of acceptance of the final plat application, unless the applicant consents to an extension of such time period.

(Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09; Ord. No. 4252, § 6, 9-19-17)


12.04.225 Subdivision final plat expiration.

If a final plat has not been submitted for recording within six months after approval by the planning director, the plat shall expire and be null and void. One extension of no longer than six months may be granted by the planning director. To revitalize a plat that has expired under this section, the plat shall be resubmitted as a preliminary plat.

(Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09; Ord. No. 4252, § 7, 9-19-17)


12.04.227 Procedure for alteration of a subdivision or short subdivision.

A. An applicant requesting to alter a subdivision or short subdivision or any portion thereof, except as provided in KCC 12.04.230, shall submit a plat alteration application to the permit center. The application shall be accompanied by such submittal requirements as described in the application form, and applicable fees, and shall contain the signatures of all persons having an ownership interest in lots, tracts, parcels, sites, or divisions within the subdivision or short subdivision or in that portion to be altered.

B. The planning director shall have the authority to determine whether the proposed alteration constitutes a minor or major alteration. Major alterations are those that are not in response to staff review or public appeal and substantially change the basic design, increase the number of lots, substantially decrease open space, substantially change conditions of subdivision or short subdivision approval, substantially change access points, or other similar requirements or provisions. Minor alterations are those that make minor changes to engineering design or lot dimensions, decrease the number of lots to be created, or increase open space, or other similar minor changes. Major alterations shall not alter the vesting or validity period of the originally approved subdivision or short subdivision.

C. If the subdivision or short subdivision is subject to restrictive covenants which were filed at the time of the approval, and the application for alteration would result in the violation of a covenant, the application shall contain an agreement signed by all parties subject to the covenants providing that the parties agree to terminate or alter the relevant covenants to accomplish the purpose of the alteration of the subdivision or short subdivision or any portion thereof.

D. If the alteration is requested prior to final plat or final short plat review and signature, a minor alteration may be approved with consent of the planning and the public works directors. A major plat or short plat alteration shall require consent of the short subdivision committee for short subdivisions or the hearing examiner for subdivisions after public notice and a public meeting or hearing is held. Planning services shall provide notice of the application for a major plat or short plat alteration to all owners of property within the subdivision or short subdivision, all parties of record, and as was required by the original subdivision or short subdivision application. The planning director shall have the authority to determine whether the proposed alteration constitutes a minor or major alteration pursuant to subsection (B) of this section.

E. If the alteration is requested after final plat or final short plat review and signature, but prior to filing the final plat or final short plat with King County, a plat or short plat alteration may be approved with consent of the short subdivision committee for short subdivisions or the planning director for subdivisions. Upon receipt of an application for alteration, planning services shall provide notice of the application to all owners of property within the subdivision or short subdivision, all parties of record, and as was required by the original application. The notice shall establish a date for a public meeting or hearing.

F. If the alteration is requested after filing the final plat or final short plat with King County, a minor plat or short plat alteration may be approved with consent of the short subdivision committee in the case of short subdivisions or the planning director for subdivisions. If the planning director determines that the proposed alteration is a major alteration, pursuant to subsection (B) of this section, then the planning director may require replatting pursuant to this chapter. Upon receipt of an application for alteration, planning services shall provide notice of the application to all owners of property within the subdivision or short subdivision, all parties of record, and as was required by the subdivision or short subdivision plat application. The notice shall establish a date for a public meeting or hearing.

G. The city shall determine the public use and interest in the proposed alteration and may deny or approve the application for alteration. If any land within the alteration is part of an assessment district, any outstanding assessments shall be equitably divided and levied against the remaining lots, parcels, or tracts, or be levied equitably on the lots resulting from the alteration. If any land within the alteration contains a dedication to the general use of persons residing within the subdivision, such land may be altered and divided equitably between adjacent properties.

H. After approval of the alteration, the city shall order the applicant to produce a revised drawing of the approved alteration of the subdivision or short subdivision, which after signature the final plat or final short plat shall be filed with King County to become the lawful plat or short plat of the property.

I. This section shall not be construed as applying to the alteration or replatting of any plat or short plat of state-granted shore lands.

(Ord. No. 4035, § 4, 4-17-12; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09; Ord. No. 4252, § 8, 9-19-17; Ord. No. 4257, § 3, 11-21-17. Formerly 12.04.225)


12.04.230 Procedure for vacation of a subdivision or short subdivision.

A. Whenever an applicant wishes to vacate a subdivision or short subdivision or any portion thereof, that person shall file an application for vacation with planning services. The application shall set forth the reasons for vacation and shall contain signatures of all parties having an ownership interest in that portion of the subdivision subject to vacation.

B. If the development is subject to restrictive covenants which were filed at the time of the approval, and the application for vacation would result in a violation of a covenant, the application shall contain an agreement signed by all parties subject to the covenants providing that the parties agree to terminate or alter the relevant covenants to accomplish the purpose of the vacation of the subdivision or short subdivision or portion thereof.

C. When the vacation application is specifically for a city street or road, the procedures for street vacation in Ch. 6.09 KCC shall be followed for the street or road vacation. When the application is for the vacation of the plat or short plat together with the streets or roads, the procedure for vacation in this section shall be used but vacations of streets may not be made that are prohibited under state law.

D. Planning services shall give notice to all owners of property within the subdivision or short subdivision, all property owners within two hundred (200) feet of short subdivision boundaries, all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of subdivision boundaries, and to all applicable agencies. The short subdivision committee shall conduct a public meeting in the case of short subdivisions and the hearing examiner shall conduct a public hearing for subdivisions if the requested vacation does not involve a public dedication. The city council shall conduct a public hearing on the application for a vacation if the request involves a public dedication. The application for vacation of a subdivision or short subdivision may be approved or denied after the city has determined the public use and interest to be served by the vacation. If any portion of the land contained in the proposed vacation was dedicated to the public for public use or benefit, such land, if not deeded to the city, shall be deeded to the city unless the city council sets forth findings that the public use would not be served in retaining title to those lands.

E. Title to the vacated property shall vest with the rightful owner as shown in King County records. If the vacated land is land that was dedicated to the public, for public use other than a road or street, and the city council has found that retaining title to the land is not in the public interest, title thereto shall vest with the person or persons owning the property on each side thereof, as determined by the city council. When the road or street that is to be vacated was contained wholly within the subdivision or short subdivision and is part of the boundary of the subdivision or short subdivision, title to the vacated road or street shall vest with the owner or owners of property contained within the vacated subdivision.

F. This section shall not be construed as applying to the vacation of any plat or short plat of state-granted shore lands.

(Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.235 Standards for the subdivision of land and any dedications.

A. Applications for subdivisions, short subdivisions, and binding site plans may be approved, approved with conditions, or denied in accordance with the following adopted city, county, and state rules, regulations, plans, and policies including but not limited to:

1. Chapter 58.17 RCW (subdivisions);

2. Chapter 43.21C RCW (SEPA);

3. KCC Title 6 (Public Works);

4. KCC Title 7 (Utilities);

5. KCC Title 11 (Environmental Management);

6. KCC Title 13 (Fire Prevention and Protection);

7. KCC Title 12 (Planning and Land Development);

8. KCC Title 15 (Zoning);

9. City of Kent comprehensive plan;

10. King County board of health rules and regulations.

B. All improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the city’s design and construction standards as hereinafter amended.

(Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3561, § 1, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 3690, § 9, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3830, § 6, 3-6-07; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09. Formerly § 12.04.430)


12.04.240 Connectivity.

The following goals and criteria listed below shall be considered by the public works department and planning services in evaluating connectivity:

A. Increase through-connections to adjacent subdivisions and activity centers.

1. Subdivision streets should connect through to serve adjacent properties except where impractical.

2. Cul-de-sac streets of the subject subdivision should provide pedestrian/bicycle pathway(s) from bulb-ends to neighboring subdivision(s) streets or other adjacent activity centers.

3. Subdivisions should provide continuous sidewalks on both sides of streets fronting developed lots and connect to other streets.

B. Provide streetscaping improvements.

1. Vehicular traffic calming elements should be included in the subdivision.

2. Planting strips and medians should be included in the subdivision.

3. Neighborhood identity elements such as entry monument signs, medians, and pavement textures should be included in the subdivision.

(Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3561, § 1, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 3690, § 9, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3830, § 6, 3-6-07; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09. Formerly § 12.04.430)


12.04.243 Traffic calming.

A. Traffic calming improvements are required, and are specified according to street classification, site conditions, or other conditions as determined by the public works department, in consultation with the planning services office and fire prevention division.

B. Residential streets with entrances connected to arterial or collector streets shall provide curb bulb-outs at each plat entrance, or shall provide curbs constructed at the return radius standard for residential class streets found in the city design and construction standards. Other traffic calming options may be determined more appropriate to site conditions by the public works department, in consultation with the planning services office and fire prevention division.

C. Mid-block chokers are required on blocks greater than five hundred (500) feet in length, unless otherwise determined by the public works department.

D. Other traffic calming designs and improvements may be determined appropriate as remedial options by the public works department, in consultation with the planning services office and fire prevention division. These options include, but are not limited to:

1. Traffic circles;

2. Chokers;

3. Chicanes; and

4. Speed humps.

(Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3561, § 1, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 3690, § 9, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3830, § 6, 3-6-07; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09. Formerly § 12.04.430)


12.04.245 Exterior street buffering.

A minimum ten (10) foot wide perimeter strip of type II landscaping and associated fencing shall be provided along the subdivision or short subdivision perimeter where it is adjacent to a public or private street that does not provide direct vehicular access to individual lots. The landscaping strip shall include an automatic irrigation system sufficient to ensure survival of the planted materials. Fencing constructed of wood, iron, masonry, or other suitable materials approved by the planning manager shall be located between the landscaping strip and the subdivision or short subdivision lots and shall be constructed of consistent materials and configuration along the length of the street frontage. The fence and landscape strip shall be located in a separate tract and shall be depicted on the final plat or short plat map. Maintenance of the landscape strip and fence shall be the responsibility of a homeowners’ association or other entity approved by the city.

(Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3561, § 1, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 3690, § 9, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3830, § 6, 3-6-07; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09. Formerly § 12.04.430)


12.04.250 Lots.

Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines or radial to curved street and cul-de-sac lines. Each lot must access a street, public or private. The size, shape, and orientation of lots shall meet the minimum area and width requirements of the applicable zoning classification and shall be appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated. Corner lots may be required to be platted with additional width to allow for the additional side yard requirements. Lots which are bordered by two (2) more or less parallel streets shall be permitted access to only one (1) of those streets. All lot corners at intersections of dedicated public rights-of-way and private access tracts or easements shall have minimum radii of fifteen (15) feet.

(Ord. No. 1840; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3561, § 1, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09. Formerly § 12.04.470)


12.04.260 Zero lot line subdivisions and short subdivisions.

A. Zero lot line subdivisions and short subdivisions shall be subject to the development standards outlined in KCC 15.08.320 and 15.08.330. These standards include minimum lot size, width, depth, etc.

B. The regulations of KCC 12.04.235 through 12.04.250 shall apply to zero lot line subdivisions unless specifically modified in the conditions of preliminary approval.

(Ord. No. 2656, § 2, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3561, § 1, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09. Formerly § 12.04.485)

Cross reference(s) – Zero lot line development, § 15.08.300 et seq.


12.04.263 Clustering in urban separators.

A. All subdivisions and short subdivisions in the SR-1 zoning district shall be required to be clustered pursuant to this section when the property is located wholly or partially within an urban separator as designated on the city of Kent comprehensive land use plan map.

B. Except as described in subsection (C) of this section, cluster subdivisions and short subdivisions shall be subject to the SR-8 zoning district development standards outlined in KCC Title 15. These standards include, but are not limited to, minimum lot size, width, yards, setbacks, parking, landscaping, signage, etc.

C. The provisions of KCC 12.04.235 through 12.04.250, as well as other applicable portions of this chapter, shall apply unless specifically exempted. In addition, the following standards shall apply to clustered subdivisions or short subdivisions:

1. Location. The cluster residential development shall be required in the SR-1 zoning district within urban separator areas.

2. Permitted uses. The cluster residential development option shall include only single-family residential uses.

3. Minimum area. No minimum area is established for a cluster residential development.

4. Permitted density. The maximum number of dwelling units permitted in a cluster development shall be no greater than the number of dwelling units allowed for the parcel as a whole for the zoning district in which it is located.

5. Lot size. The minimum lot size of individual building lots within a cluster subdivision or short subdivision is two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. New lots created by any subdivision or short subdivision action shall be clustered in groups not exceeding eight (8) units. There may be more than one (1) cluster per project. Separation between cluster groups shall be a minimum of one hundred twenty (120) feet.

6. Lot width. The minimum lot width for individual building lots in a cluster subdivision or short subdivision shall be thirty (30) feet.

7. Other development standards. Development standards other than lot size, lot width, and density shall be the same as are required within the SR-8 zoning district.

8. Common open space. The common open space in a cluster subdivision or short subdivision shall be a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the nonconstrained area of the parcel. The nonconstrained area of the parcel includes all areas of the parcel, minus critical areas, as defined in RCW 36.70A.030(5) as currently and hereinafter amended, and buffers. The remainder of the nonconstrained area of the parcel shall be the buildable area of the parcel. The common open space tracts created by clustering shall be located and configured in the manner that best connects and increases protective buffers for environmentally sensitive areas, connects and protects area wildlife habitat, creates connectivity between the open space provided by the clustering and other adjacent open spaces as well as existing or planned public parks and trails, and maintains scenic vistas. Critical areas and buffers shall not be used in determining lot size and common open space requirements in a cluster subdivision or short subdivision. All natural features (significant stands of trees and rock outcropping), as well as critical areas (such as streams, steep slopes, and wetlands and their buffers) shall be preserved.

Future development of the common open space shall be prohibited. Except as specified on recorded documents creating the common open space, all common open space resulting from lot clustering shall not be altered or disturbed in a manner that degrades adjacent environmentally sensitive areas, rural areas, agricultural areas, or resource lands; impairs scenic vistas and the connectivity between the open space provided by the clustered development and adjacent open spaces; degrades wildlife habitat; and impairs the recreational benefits enjoyed by the residents of the development. Such common open spaces shall be conveyed to residents of the development, conveyed to a homeowners’ association for the benefit of the residents of the development, or conveyed to the city with the city’s consent and approval.

(Ord. No. 4035, § 5, 4-17-12; Ord. No. 3551, § 5, 3-20-01; Ord. No. 3663, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.264 Clustering in residential zones outside urban separators.

A. When located wholly outside an urban separator, cluster subdivisions or short subdivisions are allowed in SR-1, SR-3, SR-4.5, SR-6, and SR-8 zoning districts subject to the regulations below.

B. The purpose of this cluster development option is as follows: to permit greater flexibility in design and discourage development sprawl; to facilitate the economical and efficient provision of public services; to provide a more efficient use of land in harmony with its natural characteristics; to preserve more usable open space, agricultural land, tree cover, recreation areas, and scenic vistas; and to expand the opportunity for the development of affordable housing without increasing the development’s overall density. Development standards and review criteria are intended to ensure that lots are consistent with the desired character of the zone, allowing lots to vary in size and shape, while still adhering to the planned density of the zone.

C. Cluster subdivisions or short subdivisions shall be subject to the development standards outlined in KCC Title 15, unless otherwise modified by this chapter. These standards include, but are not limited to, minimum lot size, width, yards, setbacks, parking, landscaping, and signage.

D. The provisions of KCC 12.04.235 through 12.04.250, as well as other applicable portions of this chapter, shall apply unless specifically exempted. In addition, the following standards shall apply to clustered Type I subdivisions or short subdivisions:

1. Location. The cluster residential development may be allowed in SR-1, SR-3, SR-4.5, SR-6, and SR-8 zoning districts outside of urban separators.

2. Permitted uses. The cluster residential development option shall include only single-family residential uses, as defined in KCC 15.02.115.

3. Minimum area. No minimum area is established for a cluster residential development.

4. Permitted density. The maximum number of dwelling units permitted in a cluster development shall be no greater than the number of dwelling units allowed for the parcel as a whole for the zoning district in which it is located.

5. Lot size. In the interest of encouraging flexibility in site design and the preservation of open space, the minimum lot size of individual building lots within a cluster subdivision or short subdivision in single-family residential zoning districts may be reduced by twenty-five (25) percent of the minimum lot size for the underlying zoning district.

6. Lot width. The minimum lot width for individual building lots in a cluster subdivision or short subdivision shall be thirty (30) feet. A shared driveway easement may be included in the minimum lot width of irregular lots, provided the total driveway width is no less than sixteen (16) feet and no longer than one hundred fifty (150) feet unless otherwise required by the fire and public works departments.

7. Other development standards. Development standards other than lot size and lot width shall be the same as are required within the zoning district in which the cluster residential development is located. Design review is required for cluster development projects using the review criteria in KCC 15.09.045(D), Multifamily design review.

8. Additional approval criteria for cluster development projects:

a. The proposed cluster development project shall have a beneficial effect upon the community and users of the development that would not normally be achieved by traditional lot-by-lot development, and it shall not be detrimental to existing or potential surrounding land uses as defined by the comprehensive plan.

b. The proposed cluster development project shall be compatible with the existing land use or property that abuts or is across the street from the subject property. Compatibility includes, but is not limited to, apparent size, scale, mass, and architectural design.

c. Unusual and sensitive environmental features of the site shall be preserved, maintained, and incorporated into the design to benefit the development and the community.

d. The proposed cluster development project shall provide open areas by using techniques such as separation of building groups, use of well-designed open space, common or shared space, and landscaping. Open space shall be integrated within the cluster development project rather than be an isolated element of the project.

e. The proposed cluster development project shall promote variety and innovation in site and building design and shall include architectural and site features that promote community interaction and accessibility, such as porches, de-emphasized garages, shared driveways, sidewalks/ walkways, and adjacent common areas. Buildings shall be related by common materials and roof styles, but contrast shall be provided throughout the site by the use of varied materials, architectural detailing, building scale, and orientation.

f. Building design shall be based on a unified design concept, particularly when construction is in phases.

9. Common open space.

a. The common open space in cluster subdivisions or short subdivisions shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the entire parcel, whether or not the parcel is constrained by critical areas and their associated buffers.

b. Parking areas, public rights-of-way, maneuvering areas, streets, storage areas, driveways, and yards within individual lots shall not be included in common open space.

c. The common open space tracts created by clustering shall be located and configured in the manner that best connects and increases protective buffers for environmentally sensitive areas, connects and protects area wildlife habitat, creates connectivity between the open space provided by the clustering and other adjacent open spaces, as well as existing or planned public parks and trails, and maintains scenic vistas.

d. All natural features (such as significant stands of trees and rock outcroppings) as well as critical areas (such as streams, steep slopes, and wetlands and their associated buffers) shall be preserved.

e. Future development of the common open space shall be prohibited. Except as specified on recorded documents creating the common open space, all common open space resulting from lot clustering shall not be altered or disturbed in a manner that degrades adjacent environmentally sensitive areas, rural areas, agricultural areas, or resource lands; impairs scenic vistas and the connectivity between the open space provided by the clustered development and adjacent open spaces; degrades wildlife habitat; and impairs the recreational benefits enjoyed by the residents of the development.

f. Ownership of such common open spaces shall be conveyed to all residents of the development, conveyed to a homeowners’ association for the benefit of the residents of the development, or conveyed to the city with the city’s consent and approval.

(Ord. No. 3663, § 2, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 3770, § 1, 11-15-05; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)

Article III. Binding Site Plans


12.04.800 Purpose.

Consistent with RCW 58.17.035, the purpose of this article is (A) to create an alternative process segregating property zoned industrial or commercial for the purpose of sale or lease without the necessity of completing the procedures for platting; and (B) to allow for the division of multifamily residential zoned land for condominium purposes without the necessity of completing the procedures for platting. A binding site plan process merely creates or alters existing lot lines and does not authorize construction, improvements, or changes to the property or the uses thereon.

(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.805 Binding site plan committee.

A. A binding site plan shall be considered by the city’s binding site plan committee. Planning services shall distribute copies of the application for binding site plan approval to each member of the committee and to other appropriate agencies for review and comment, and provide public notice if required by KCC 12.01.140.

B. A meeting attended by the applicant or his representative and the binding site plan committee members shall be held within forty (40) days of the determination of completeness of the application or receipt of requested additional information, consistent with the timelines established in Ch. 12.01 KCC. The meeting shall be open to the public. Notice of the public meeting shall be circulated consistent with the requirements of KCC 12.01.145. The meeting may be continued if no decision is reached at the first meeting. The second meeting shall be held no later than seven (7) calendar days after the first meeting or on a date mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the committee.

C. Three (3) of the five (5) members of the binding site plan committee must be present in order for the committee to take any action.

D. The binding site plan committee may approve, approve with conditions or modifications, or deny the application. The committee shall not impose any conditions which are inconsistent with prior land use approvals of the development covered by this application. The decision of the committee shall be made at the committee meeting.

E. As a condition of approval of the binding site plan, the binding site plan committee shall have the right and authority to require the deeding of rights-of-way or easements for street and/or utility purposes, when determined necessary as a result of the binding site plan development. Any deeding shall precede the recordation of the binding site plan unless otherwise specified through a development agreement.

(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.810 Appeal. 

The decision of the binding site plan committee shall be final, unless an appeal by any aggrieved party is made to the hearing examiner within fourteen (14) calendar days after the committee’s decision. The appeal shall be in writing to the hearing examiner and filed with planning services. Any appeal shall be consistent with KCC 12.01.190, Open record appeal.

(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.815 Applicability for commercial and industrial sites.

A. The subject site shall consist of one (1) or more legally created lots; and

B. The property must be zoned commercial and/or industrial.

(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.820 Application requirements for commercial and industrial sites.

All of the following information shall be included in any application for binding site plan approval for commercial and industrial lots:

A. At a minimum, the binding site plan application shall include the following information:

1. A map or plan showing the location and size of all new proposed lots;

2. Proposed and existing structures including floor areas and setbacks;

3. Location of existing and proposed public rights-of-way, private and public streets and easements;

4. Location of all existing and proposed open spaces including any required landscaped areas, parking areas and all major manmade or natural features (i.e., streams, creeks, drainage courses, railroad tracks, utility lines, etc.);

5. Layout of an internal vehicular and pedestrian circulation system, including proposed or existing ingress and egress points;

6. Location of existing and proposed fire hydrants to serve the site;

7. Description, location, and size of existing and proposed utilities, storm drainage facilities, and streets to serve each lot;

8. Expected location of new buildings and driveways;

9. Certificate of water and/or sewer availability, if not served by the city of Kent;

10. Parking calculations to demonstrate that the requirements of Ch. 15.05 KCC have been met;

11. The following code data: zoning district; total lot area; total building area; percent of site coverage; total parking and vehicle maneuvering areas;

12. Plans, analysis and calculations verifying building code compliance of all existing structures, to include, but not limited to, identification of all types of construction and occupancy classifications, allowable area calculations, wall and wall opening protection, and provisions for exiting and accessibility for the disabled;

13. Proposed cross-access and maintenance agreements for parking, circulation, utility, and landscaping improvements, if shared;

14. The site plan shall also include the name of proposed development; the legal description of the property for which the binding site plan is sought, the date on which the plans were prepared; the graphic scale and north point of the plans; and

15. The title “Binding Site Plan” shall be at the top of the plan in large print.

B. A current title report produced no more than forty-five (45) calendar days prior to submittal covering all property shown within the boundaries of the binding site plan shall be submitted with the application.

C. A plan showing the layout and size of all existing and proposed utilities to serve each lot.

D. A phasing plan and time schedule, if the site is intended to be developed in phases.

E. A complete environmental checklist, if required by Ch. 11.03 KCC.

F. Copies of all easements, covenants, and other encumbrances restricting the use of the site.

(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.825 Approval criteria for commercial and industrial sites.

A. Criteria. An application for a binding site plan on commercial or industrial lands may be approved if the following criteria are satisfied:

1. Adequate provisions have been made for domestic water supply, sanitary sewer, stormwater facilities and conveyance systems, private and/or public streets, pedestrian access, vehicle access and maneuvering, public and private utilities, and other public needs;

2. Each lot shall provide access to a public street and make provisions for connectivity of alleys, pedestrian access ways, and other public ways;

3. The binding site plan complies with, or makes adequate provisions to comply with, applicable provisions of the building code, fire code, public works design and construction standards, and zoning standards;

4. Potential environmental impacts, together with any practical means of mitigating adverse impacts, have been considered such that the proposal will not have an adverse effect upon the environment;

5. Approving the binding site plan will serve the public use and interest and adequate provisions have been made for the public health, safety, and general welfare.

B. Shared improvements. As a condition of approval, the city may authorize or require the sharing of open space, parking, access, setbacks, landscaping, and other improvements among contiguous properties. Conditions of use, maintenance, and restrictions on redevelopment of shared open space, parking, access, and other improvements shall be identified on the binding site plan and enforced by covenants, easements, or other similar mechanisms. Such agreements or restrictions shall be recorded with King County and run with the land. Such agreements shall be approved as to form by the city attorney prior to filing the final binding site plan. The binding site plan shall contain any applicable irrevocable dedications of property. The binding site plan shall contain a provision requiring that any development of the site shall be in conformity with the approved site plan and any applicable development regulations subject to the vesting requirements of this chapter.

C. Phasing of development. Unless otherwise provided for in a development agreement, development permit applications shall be submitted for all structures and improvements shown on the binding site plan within three (3) years of approval. The planning manager may administratively extend this period by one (1) additional year if requested by the applicant. Permit applications submitted within that period shall be subject to the vesting requirements of this chapter. If the applicant chooses to develop the property in a phased development, the applicant must execute a development agreement with the city pursuant to KCC 15.08.450. 

(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09; Ord. No. 4151, § 5, 5-19-15)


12.04.830 Final binding site plan for commercial and industrial sites.

Filing of the final binding site plan for commercial and industrial sites shall conform to the requirements set forth in KCC 12.04.210, Filing the final plat.

(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.835 Improvements for commercial and industrial sites. 

Prior to the issuance of a building permit for construction within a binding site plan for commercial and industrial sites, all improvements required to adequately serve that portion of the plan for which the permit will be issued shall be installed. Improvements may include, but are not limited to, street construction; water, sewer, and storm utilities; parking; building improvements to meet code; and landscaping. Public improvements may be bonded for, in accord with the process in KCC 12.04.205(D), with approval of the public works director.

(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.840 Modifications for commercial and industrial sites.

A. If an applicant wishes to alter a binding site plan for commercial and industrial sites or any portion thereof, that person shall submit an application to planning services requesting the alteration. The application shall contain the signatures of all persons having an ownership interest in lots, tracts, parcels, sites, or divisions within the binding site plan or in that portion of the binding site plan to be altered. The planning manager shall have the authority to determine whether a proposed alteration is minor or major.

B. If the binding site plan is subject to restrictive covenants which were filed at the time of the approval of the binding site plan, and the application for alteration would result in the violation of a covenant, the application shall contain an agreement signed by all parties subject to the covenants providing that the parties agree to terminate or alter the relevant covenants to accomplish the purpose of the alteration of the binding site plan or portion thereof.

C. If the alteration is requested to a binding site plan prior to recording of the binding site plan with King County, a minor alteration may be approved with consent of the planning manager and the public works director. A major alteration shall require consent of the binding site plan committee, after public notice and a public meeting is held. The planning services office shall provide notice of the application for a major alteration to all owners of property within the binding site plan, parties of record, and as was required by the original application.

D. If the alteration is requested to a binding site plan after recording of the binding site plan with King County and it is determined to be a minor alteration, it may be approved with the consent of the binding site plan committee, after public notice and a public meeting is held. The planning services office shall provide notice of the application for a minor alteration to all owners of property within the binding site plan, all parties of record, and as was required for the original application. If the alternation is requested to a binding site plan after recording of the binding site plan with King County and it is determined to be a major alteration, then the planning manager shall require the binding site plan be vacated per KCC 12.04.230 and 12.04.845 and a new application for a binding site plan shall be submitted.

E. The binding site plan committee shall determine the public use and interest in the proposed alteration and may approve, approve with conditions or modifications, or deny the application for alteration. If any land within the alteration is part of an assessment district, any outstanding assessments shall be equitably divided and levied against the remaining lots, parcels, or tracts, or be levied equitably on the lots resulting from the alteration.

F. After approval of the alteration, the binding site plan committee shall order the applicant to produce a revised drawing of the approved alteration of the binding site plan, which after signature of the chair of the binding site plan committee, shall be filed with King County to become the lawful binding site plan of the property.

(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.845 Vacation for commercial and industrial sites.

A binding site plan may be vacated as a whole only. Vacating a binding site plan releases all conditions and obligations on the parcel associated with such plan. A binding site plan may be vacated by submitting a letter to the planning manager indicating an intention to vacate the binding site plan. The letter shall include signatures of all ownership interests within the binding site plan and shall become binding upon its acceptance by the planning manager.

(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.850 Vesting for commercial and industrial sites. 

A binding site plan application shall be considered under the zoning and other land use codes in effect on the land at the time of submission of the fully complete binding site plan application. Any vacant or redeveloped lot within an approved binding site plan shall comply with the standards in place at such time as a subsequent project permit application is filed on that property unless otherwise provided for in a development agreement.

(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.855 Applicability for condominium sites. 

Multifamily residential condominium developments are eligible for binding site plan approval, when the purpose of such approval is to divide the property so a portion of the parcel or tract can be subjected to either Chapter 64.32 or 64.34 RCW. A binding site plan can only be approved either when the development has already been constructed or when the approval has been obtained and a building permit for an entire development or a portion of a development is issued.

(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.860 Application requirements for condominium sites.

A. An application for a binding site plan for condominium sites may not be submitted until a building permit has been approved.

B. The binding site plan application shall conform to the following requirements and shall:

1. Be on reproducible material and shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet (unless otherwise approved by the planning services office) on sheets eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches.

2. Contain the name of the proposed development; the legal description of the property for which binding site plan approval is sought; the date on which the plans were prepared; the graphic scale and north point of the plans.

3. Show the following:

a. The layout of the site including the location of all existing and proposed structures and their distance from property lines; the location of all existing and proposed utilities, streets, and easements within or abutting subject property; the location of all existing and proposed pedestrian walkways; and existing and proposed open space area.

b. Any areas proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public purposes, and areas to be reserved for private open space and landscaping and areas reserved for the common use of the occupants of the proposed development.

c. All major manmade or natural features, i.e., streams, creeks, storm water facilities, railroad tracks, etc.

d. Building dimensions, height and number of stories, distance between buildings, location and size of parking areas and number of stalls.

e. Following zoning code data:

i. Zoning district;

ii. Total lot area (square feet);

iii. Total building area (square feet);

iv. Percent of site coverage;

v. Number of units proposed;

vi. Total number of parking stalls (include handicapped);

vii. Total parking and maneuvering area (square feet);

viii. Required landscaping (square feet);

ix. Percent of lot in open space;

x. Type of construction;

xi. Sprinklered-nonsprinklered;

xii. Occupancy classification.

4. Contain the name of the proposed development and the title “Binding Site Plan” shall be at the top of the plan, in large print, together with the statement required pursuant to RCW 58.17.040(7)(e), prominently displayed on the face of the site plan map.

5. Contain the statement:

The use and development of the property must be in accordance with the plan as represented herein or as hereafter amended, according to the provisions of the binding site plan regulations of the city and any division of the land subject to this plan shall not take place until the development or the portion thereof to be divided is subject to Chapter 64.32 or 64.34 RCW.

6. Contain the statement:

Any building permit required to develop any portion of the property shall not be issued until the streets and utilities necessary to serve that portion of this property have been constructed and installed or until arrangements acceptable to the city have been made to ensure that the construction and installation of such streets and utilities will be accomplished.

C. The application shall be accompanied by a current title report produced no more than forty-five (45) calendar days prior to submittal.

(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.865 Approval criteria for condominium sites.

Approval of a binding site plan shall take place only after the following are met:

A. Adequate provisions have been made for open space, domestic water supply, sanitary sewer, storm water facilities and conveyance systems, private and/or public streets, pedestrian access, vehicle access and maneuvering, public and private utilities, and other public needs according to the design and construction standards of the public works department;

B. Comply with all building code requirements;

C. Comply with all zoning code requirements and development standards; and

D. Have suitable physical characteristics.

A proposed binding site plan may be denied because of flood, inundation, or critical areas, or construction of protective improvements may be required as a condition of approval.

(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.870 Enforcement. 

Any violation of the conditions of approval, limitations on development, or the requirements of development imposed as part of a binding site plan approval shall be subject to the enforcement proceedings and penalties established for violation of Chapter 58.17 RCW and Ch. 12.04 KCC.

(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.875 Final binding site plan for condominium sites. 

The final binding site plan map which is submitted for filing shall conform to all requirements of the preliminary binding site plan, plus the following:

A. It must be a reproducible map plotted on mylar or photographic mylar drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet. Graphic scale and north point must be on the map;

B. Size eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches;

C. Legal description of the total parcel shall be shown on the final binding site plan;

D. Property subject of the binding site plan shall be surveyed by a land surveyor licensed in the state of Washington. All exterior corners and streets shall be monumented. Surveyor’s certificate must appear on the final binding site plan;

E. Certificate of approval by the chairman of the binding site plan committee shall be provided on the final binding site plan; and

F. The face of the final binding site plan must be signed by all owners of the property.

(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.877 Filing the binding site plan for condominiums.

The binding site plan must be signed by the chairman of the binding site plan committee. An approved binding site plan shall be filed for record with King County and shall not be deemed approved until so filed. Copies of the approved binding site plans shall be filed with planning services, city clerk’s office, and department of public works.

(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.880 Expiration period for condominium sites. 

If the binding site plan is not filed within six (6) months of the date of approval, the binding site plan shall become null and void. Upon written request of the applicant, the planning services office may grant one (1) extension of not more than six (6) months. Such request must be received by planning services prior to the six (6) month expiration date.

(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.885 Modifications for condominium sites.

A. An approved binding site plan may be amended by filing a request for such an amendment with planning services. Planning services shall determine what information shall be submitted with a request for an amendment, based on the type of modification being requested. Any amendment to an approved binding site plan must be reviewed by the binding site plan committee, unless the committee sets forth other guidelines for approval of minor modifications.

B. If approved by the binding site plan committee, the amendment shall be set forth in writing and filed in accordance with the Kent City Code, and recorded with King County.

(Ord. No. 3664, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)

Article IV. Lot Line Adjustments


12.04.900 Purpose of lot line adjustments.

The purpose of a lot line adjustment is to allow for the adjustment of common property lines or boundaries between adjacent lots, tracts, or parcels in order to rectify a disputed property line location, free the boundary from any differences or discrepancies or accommodate a minor transfer of land. The resulting adjustment shall not create any additional lots, tracts, or parcels and all reconfigured lots, tracts, or parcels shall contain sufficient area and dimension to meet minimum requirements for zoning and building code requirements.

(Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.905 Scope.

A lot line adjustment shall allow property owners to alter, eliminate, or relocate lot lines to correct encroachments, improve access, correlate property lines with survey or map lines, or to create better lot design while conforming to all applicable code requirements pertaining to lot design, building location, and development standards. A lot line adjustment shall not allow the creation of additional lots, parcels, or tracts. All lines being adjusted must be between lots that have been legally created under the regulations of the subdivision ordinances in effect at the time of the lots’ creation.

(Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.910 Preliminary consultation with staff.

Any person who desires to change the location of a lot line on land in the city should consult with planning services at an early date on an informal basis in order to become familiar with the requirements of this chapter. The public works department, fire department, and building services division shall also be consulted at this time for advice and assistance in understanding the impact of relocating the lot line in relation to structures and easements and any applicable engineering requirements of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.915 Application procedures.

Lot line adjustment applications shall be submitted on the forms supplied and in the number of copies prescribed by planning services, and shall include the following:

A. A legible map, drawn to an appropriate decimal scale on a minimum eight-and-one-half (8-1/2) inch by eleven (11) inch sheet of paper showing all of the information required by the application form;

B. The signature of all parties having any ownership interest in the lands affected by the lot line adjustment, indicating that the lot line adjustment is made with free consent and in accordance with their desires. For purposes of this section, ownership interest shall include legal and equitable property interests, including, but not limited to, present, future, contingent or whole fee interests, together with a beneficiary’s interest pursuant to a trust and contract interest pursuant to a specifically enforceable contract for the purchase of the real property;

C. A current title report produced no more than forty-five (45) calendar days prior to lot line adjustment application;

D. A copy of the existing legal description for all parcels; and

E.  Legal descriptions of the proposed new lots.

(Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.920 Principles of acceptability.

Lot line adjustments shall be consistent with the following principles of acceptability:

A. Adjust lot lines to eliminate a common lot line between parcels in the same ownership, to relocate a lot line to rectify a property line dispute, correct property line or setback encroachments, or correlate with more accurate survey data; and to allow a minor transfer of land between adjacent parcels;

B. Create better lot design, or improve access;

C. Conform to applicable zoning, subdivision, and other code requirements pertaining to lot design, building location, and development standards;

D. Shall not create an additional lot, parcel, or tract;

E. Lots created or combined for tax purposes do not constitute a legal lot of record;

F. If a lot line adjustment is used to facilitate the development of the remaining property by segregating an existing house, that parcel shall be subject to the same design and construction standards as the development.

(Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.930 Vesting.

A proposed relocation of a lot boundary line shall be considered under the requirements of this chapter and the zoning and other land use regulations in effect on the land at the time that an application for a lot line adjustment, as defined in this chapter, has been determined to be complete and has been accepted by the city of Kent.

(Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.935 Referral of application.

A. Within seven (7) calendar days of accepting a complete application, planning services shall distribute copies of the lot line adjustment map and the application materials for review and comment to city departments with jurisdiction over the lot line adjustment application. The distribution notice shall state the dates of the comment period and deadline for submission of comments to planning services.

B. A copy of the lot line adjustment map and the application materials shall be provided to affected agencies as deemed necessary or if requested by the agency.

C. City departments and affected agencies shall submit comments on the proposed lot line adjustment to planning services within ten (10) calendar days of distribution. The department or agency is presumed to have no comments if comments are not received within the specified time period.

(Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.940 Approval criteria.

A. A proposed lot line adjustment shall not be approved unless the city finds that:

1. Appropriate provisions have been made for:

a. Setbacks from existing buildings to proposed new property lines;

b. Existing and proposed utilities and utility easements;

c. Existing and proposed access to the parcels, adjacent streets, and access easements;

d. Lot dimension and area conforming to city code requirements;

e. Location of onsite parking, landscaping, and other significant site features affected by the proposed new property lines;

f. The public health, safety, and general welfare of the community; and

g. Protection of critical areas and habitat as required by Ch. 11.06 KCC;

2. The city has considered all other relevant facts;

3. The public use and interest will be served by the adjustment of such property lines;

4. The lot line adjustment is consistent with the principles of acceptability per KCC 12.04.920; and

5. New legal descriptions are consistent with the minimum standard requirements specified in WAC 332-130-040.

(Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.945 Decision on lot line adjustments.

A. Planning services will review and approve the proposed lot line adjustment after receiving a complete application and providing an opportunity for comment from other city departments and affected agencies. The planning manager may approve, approve with modifications, or deny the application for a lot line adjustment. If approved, all copies of the lot line adjustment map shall be stamped “approved” and signed and dated by the planning manager. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the decision. Additional copies of the approval notification and map shall be distributed to King County and to the public works department.

B. If modifications are deemed necessary by the planning manager, they may be added to the original lot line adjustment map or a revised map may be required. The applicant will be notified of the requirements for any such modification action. If a modification of the original lot line adjustment map, legal description, or other information is necessary, the projected approval date may be extended.

C. If denied, the lot line adjustment shall be marked “denied” and the applicant shall be notified in writing of the decision, stating the reasons.

(Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.950 Appeal of decision on lot line adjustments.

The decision of the planning manager shall be final, unless an appeal is made by the aggrieved party of record to the hearing examiner within fourteen (14) calendar days after the written decision. The appeal shall be in writing and shall be processed pursuant to Ch. 2.32 and 12.01 KCC. The decision of the hearing examiner shall represent final action of the city and is appealable only to superior court.

(Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


12.04.955 Appeal to superior court.

The decision of the hearing examiner is final, unless appealed to the superior court. Such an appeal must be filed with the superior court within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date the decision was issued.

(Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00)


12.04.960 Recording lot line adjustments.

A lot line adjustment does not become effective until it and the appropriate deeds are recorded with King County. The city shall submit the approved map and new legal descriptions to King County for recording. The city shall return a copy of the recorded documents to the applicant. The recording of a lot line adjustment does not constitute a transfer of title. If the title to an area of land is changing ownership, separate deeds to this effect must be recorded with King County.

(Ord. No. 3511, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 3906, § 1, 1-6-09)


Chapter 12.05 MOBILE HOME PARKS*

Sections:

12.05.010    Title.

12.05.020    Purpose. 

12.05.030    Scope. 

12.05.040    Enforcement. 

12.05.050    Definitions. 

12.05.060    Zoning for mobile home vehicle parks. 

12.05.070    Repealed.

12.05.080    Application for mobile home park. 

12.05.090    Repealed.

12.05.100    Preliminary site plan procedures. 

12.05.110    Installation of improvements or bonding in lieu of improvements. 

12.05.120    Final site plan procedures. 

12.05.130    Environmental considerations. 

12.05.140    Compatibility with existing land use and plans. 

12.05.150    Minimum requirements and standards. 

12.05.160    Structures. 

12.05.170    Lot size. 

12.05.180    Setbacks. 

12.05.190    Lot coverage. 

12.05.200    Density. 

12.05.210    Common open space. 

12.05.220    Landscaping. 

12.05.230    Streets, curbs, and sidewalks. 

12.05.240    Installation of utilities. 

12.05.250    Mobile home park alternate development plan. 

12.05.260    Nonconforming mobile home park standards. 

12.05.270    Minimum nonconforming mobile home park separations. 

12.05.290    Exceptions. 

12.05.300    Penalties. 

12.05.310    Liability. 

12.05.320    Eviction notices for change of use or closure of a mobile home park.

12.05.330    Relocation report and plan.

12.05.340    Certificate of completion of the relocation report and plan.

12.05.350    Notice of provisions.

12.05.360    Administration.

12.05.370    Appeal.

12.05.380    Closure and government sponsorship.

*Cross reference(s) – Planning, ch. 2.30; planning commission, ch. 2.57; environmental policy, ch. 11.03; general requirements and standards for mobile homes park design, § 12.04.055; flood hazard regulations, ch. 14.09; mobile home park combining district, KCC Title 15.


12.05.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as the city of Kent mobile home park code.

(Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.030), 8-20-91. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.08.030)


12.05.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules, regulations, requirements, and standards for the development, closure, and change in use of mobile home parks in the city, insuring that the public health, safety, general welfare, and aesthetics of the city shall be promoted and protected; that orderly growth, development, and the conservation, protection, and proper use of land shall be insured; that property provisions for all public facilities, including circulation, utilities, and services shall be made; that maximum advantage of site characteristics shall be taken into consideration and that conformance with provisions set forth in the city comprehensive plan, zoning code, and subdivision code shall be insured. 

(Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.040), 8-20-91; Ord. No. 3614, § 2, 9-17-02. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.08.040)


12.05.030 Scope.

This chapter applies to any acquisition of land, improvement of land, or the development of land for mobile home park use. This chapter applies to the closure or change in use of mobile home parks. This chapter shall apply to all lands within the corporate boundaries of the city. Where this chapter imposes greater restrictions or higher standards upon the development of land than other laws, ordinances, codes, or restrictive covenants, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Any expansion, reconstruction, or modification of an existing mobile home park shall comply with the standards, specifications, and procedures of this chapter. Any units brought into an existing mobile home park, any mobile home relocated on its own lot or onto any other lot, and any additions to the structure or structures present on any lot, e.g., storage buildings, canopies, decks, patios, fences, etc., must comply with this chapter as well as all other applicable city codes and regulations.

(Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.050), 8-20-91; Ord. No. 3614, § 2, 9-17-02. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.08.050)


12.05.040 Enforcement.

A. Inspection. In regard to the closure or change in use of mobile home parks, it shall be the duty of the manager of housing and human services to enforce the applicable provisions of this chapter. In regard to all of the remaining provisions of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the building official to enforce the applicable provisions of this chapter after a final site plan has been approved. The manager of housing and human services and the building official may inspect any mobile home park in order to verify compliance with this chapter. Each mobile home shall be inspected when it is placed on a mobile home lot to ensure that all setback, separation requirements, etc., are met. Such inspection shall be performed at the time such mobile home is placed on the lot or as soon thereafter as is reasonably practicable. Failure to make such inspection shall not constitute a waiver of any of the provisions of this chapter. For inspection purposes, the manager of housing and human services and the building official or their duly authorized representative shall have the right and is hereby empowered to enter any mobile home park. 

B. Enforcement. The city may require a permit for the placement of a mobile home on a lot and may charge for such permit. If, after due investigation, the building official determines that any provision of this chapter has been violated, the mobile home park owner shall be responsible to remedy the violations. Enforcement of this chapter by the building official shall be in accordance with Chapter 1.04 KCC. Enforcement of this chapter by the manager of housing and human services shall be in accordance with KCC 12.05.360.

(Ord. No. 4050, § 1, 10-16-12; Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.060), 8-20-91; Ord. No. 3614, § 2, 9-17-02. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.08.060)


12.05.050 Definitions.

The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Accessory structure shall mean any structure on an interior mobile home lot or site that is appurtenant to the principally permitted mobile home or nonconforming recreational vehicle. For purposes of nonconforming mobile home parks, carports and porches open on three (3) sides shall not be considered accessory structures.

Combining district shall mean district regulations superimposed on an underlying zone district which impose additional regulations for specific uses, and which are valid for a stipulated time period. Uses permitted by the underlying zone may also be developed.

Common open space shall mean a parcel or parcels of land or an area of water or a combination of land and water within the site designated for a mobile home park which are designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of the park.

Common open space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of residents of the mobile home park. Common open space may also include all landscaped buffer areas.

Comprehensive plan means the document, including maps, adopted by the city council which outlines the city’s goals and policies relating to management of growth, and prepared in accordance with Chapter 36.70A RCW. The term also includes adopted subarea plans prepared in accordance with Chapter 36.70A RCW.

Conditional use and conditional use permit shall mean a use permitted in a zoning district only after review and approval by the hearing examiner. Conditional uses are such that they may be compatible only on certain conditions in specific locations in a zoning district, or if the site is regulated in a certain manner.

County auditor shall be as defined in Chapter 36.22 RCW or the office of the person assigned such duties under the King County Charter.

Cul-de-sac shall mean a short street having one (1) end open to traffic and being terminated at the other end by a vehicular turnaround.

Dedication shall mean a deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for any general and public uses, reserving to himself no other rights than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the property has been devoted. The intention to dedicate shall be evidenced by the owner by the presentment for filing of a final site plan showing the dedication thereon; the acceptance by the public shall be evidenced by the approval of such site plan for filing by the city.

Dependent unit shall mean a mobile home that does not have toilet and bathtub or shower facilities.

Developer shall mean the person, firm or corporation developing a mobile home park.

Hearing examiner shall mean that person appointed by the city administrator to conduct public hearings on applications outlined in Chapter 2.32 KCC creating the hearing examiner, and who prepares a record, findings of fact and conclusions on such applications.

Independent unit shall mean a mobile home that has a toilet and bathtub or shower facilities.

Land use and planning board shall mean the city land use and planning board as defined in this code.

Lot means a parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage, and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are required in this title. A lot shall have frontage on an improved public street, or on an approved private street, and may consist of:

1. A single lot of record;

2. A portion of a lot of record;

3. A combination of complete lots of record and portions of lots of record;

4. A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; 

Provided, that in no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this title. 

Lot, corner shall mean a lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection, or upon two (2) parts of the same street, such streets or parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees within the lot lines.

Lot frontage shall mean the front of a lot and shall be that portion nearest the street or, if the lot does not abut a street, the portion nearest an ingress/egress easement. On a corner lot, the front yard shall be considered the narrowest part of the lot that fronts on a street, except in industrial and commercial zones, in which case the user of a corner lot has the option of determining which part of the lot fronting on a street shall become the lot frontage.

Lot lines shall mean the lines bounding the lot.

Lot measurements shall mean:

1. Depth of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.

2. Width of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between the side lines connecting front and rear lot lines; provided, however, that width between side lot lines at their foremost points (where they intersect with the street line) shall not be less than eighty (80) percent of the required lot width except in the case of lots on the turning circle of cul-de-sacs, where the eighty (80) percent requirement shall not apply.

Lot, through shall mean a lot that has both ends fronting on a street. Either end may be considered front.

Meander line shall mean a line along a body of water intended to be used solely as a reference for surveying.

Mobile home shall mean a factory constructed residential unit with its own independent sanitary facilities, that is intended for year round occupancy, and is composed of one (1) or more major components which are mobile in that they can be supported by wheels attached to their own integral frame or structure and towed by an attachment to that frame or structure over the public highway under trailer license or by special permit.

Mobile home lot or site shall mean a lot or site designed to accommodate a mobile home in a mobile home park.

Mobile home park shall mean an area under one (1) ownership designed to accommodate five (5) or more mobile homes according to the provisions of this chapter.

Nonconforming use or structure shall mean any mobile home park, individual mobile home, recreational vehicle, accessory structure, mobile home lot or site dimension established prior to the effective date of this chapter or subsequent amendment to it which would not be permitted by or is not in full compliance with the regulations of this chapter.

Official plans shall mean those maps, development plans, or portions thereof, adopted by the city council as provided in RCW 35A.63.100, as amended. Such plans or maps shall be deemed to be conclusive with respect to the location and width of streets, public parks and playgrounds, and drainage rights-of-way as may be shown thereon.

Performance bond or guarantee shall mean that security which may be accepted in lieu of a requirement that certain improvements be made before the city council approves the final site plan, including performance bonds, escrow agreements, and other similar collateral or surety agreements.

Recreational vehicle shall mean any vehicle or structure so designed and constructed to permit occupancy thereof, with sleeping quarters for one (1) or more persons, and constructed in such manner as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets or highways and duly licensable as such, propelled, drawn, or transported by its own or other power.

Service building shall mean a building housing separate toilet, lavatory, and bath or shower accommodations for men and women, with separate service sink and laundry facilities.

Setbacks shall mean the minimum allowable horizontal distance from a given point or line of reference, such as a street right-of-way, to the nearest vertical wall or other element of a mobile home or appurtenant structure. All setbacks from a line of reference shall be measured on a line perpendicular to said line of reference.

(Ord. No. 4050, § 2, 10-16-12; Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.070 – 12.08.100), 8-20-91; Ord. No. 3008, § 1, 10-15-91. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 12.08.070 – 12.08.098)

Cross reference(s) – Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.01.030.


12.05.060 Zoning for mobile home vehicle parks.

Mobile home parks shall be developed in existing mobile home park zones or in mobile home park combining districts as they may be designated by the city council. All land zoned for residential uses, except the R1, single-family residential district, may be considered for a mobile home park combining district.

(Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.101), 8-20-91. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.08.100)


12.05.070 Preliminary meeting.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4050. 

(Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.210), 8-20-91. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 12.08.200, 12.08.210)


12.05.080 Application for mobile home park.

The general procedure for submitting and processing applications for a mobile home park are as follows: preparation and submission of a pre-application conference form for subdivision/mobile home park; submission of a preliminary site plan to the permit center using the forms for a preliminary subdivision application; public hearing before the hearing examiner and city council; installation or bonding of improvements according to the approved site plan; and recordation of the approved final site plan with the planning department and city clerk.

(Ord. No. 4050, § 4, 10-16-12; Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.220), 8-20-91. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.08.220)


12.05.090 Tentative site plan procedures.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4050. 

(Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.240 – 12.08.246), 8-20-91. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 12.08.240 – 12.08.246)


12.05.100 Preliminary site plan procedures.

A. Zoning. If the proposed mobile home park lies within an existing mobile home park combining district (MHP), the procedure for processing the mobile home site plan shall be as outlined in the application for preliminary plat/mobile home site plan and shall be processed in accordance with the procedures established for Process IV applications under Chapter 12.01 KCC. If the proposed mobile home park does not lie within an existing MHP zone, an application for the mobile home combining district shall be applied for and considered concurrently with the application for preliminary plat/mobile home site plan. The application shall be processed in accordance with the procedures established for Process IV applications under Chapter 12.01 KCC.

B. Health agency recommendation. The health agencies responsible for approval of the proposed means of sewage disposal and water supply shall file with planning services, prior to the hearing examiner’s public hearing on the preliminary plat/mobile home site plan, written statements as to the general adequacy of the proposed means of sewage disposal and water supply.

C. Expiration date. If the use for which the MHP district site plan was approved is not begun within one (1) year, approval of the MHP district and preliminary site plan shall lapse one (1) year from the date of such approval unless the city council grants an extension of time for a period of not greater than one (1) year.

(Ord. No. 4050, § 6, 10-16-12; Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.250 – 12.08.260), 8-20-91. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 12.08.250 – 12.08.260)


12.05.110 Installation of improvements or bonding in lieu of improvements.

A. Tangible improvements may be required before a final site plan is submitted. Every developer may be required to grade and pave streets and alleys, install curbs and gutters, sidewalks, monuments, sanitary and storm sewers, street lights, water mains, and street name signs, together with all appurtenances thereto in accordance with specifications and standards of this chapter and in accordance with other standards of the city.

B. The department of public works shall be responsible for the supervision, inspection, and acceptance of all required mobile home park improvements.

C. Prior to proceeding with the mobile home park improvements as are necessary, the developer shall make application for such permits from the city. The developer is responsible for complying with all permit requirements of federal, state, and local agencies.

D. No final site plan shall be submitted to the city council until all improvements are constructed in a satisfactory manner and approved by the responsible departments or a bond has been satisfactorily posted for deferred improvements.

E. If a developer wishes to defer certain onsite improvements until construction, written application shall be made to the department of public works and planning services stating the reasons why such delay is necessary. If the deferment is approved, the developer shall furnish a performance bond to the city in the amount equal to a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) percent of the estimated cost of the required improvements. The decision of the city engineer and planning director as to amount of such bond shall be conclusive. Such bond shall list the exact work that shall be performed by the applicant and shall specify that all of the deferred improvements be completed within the time established by the department of public works. If no time is established, then not later than one (1) year after approval of the final map by the city council. The bond shall be held by the city clerk. The developer may substitute an assignment of funds in lieu of a performance bond. Such assignment shall be made payable to the finance director and shall be in the same amount as the bond it is substituting. The city reserves the right, in addition to all other remedies available to it by law, to proceed against such bond or other payment in lieu thereof. In case of any suit or action to enforce any provisions of this chapter, the developer shall pay unto the city all costs incidental to such litigation including reasonable attorney’s fees. The applicant shall enter into an agreement with the city requiring payment of such attorney’s fees. The requirement of the posting of any performance bond or other security shall be binding on the applicant, his heirs, successors and assigns.

F. The department of public works shall notify planning services in writing of the improvements deferred, amount of bond or check deposited, time limit of bond or check, name of bonding company, and any other pertinent information.

G. The department of public works shall submit a certificate in duplicate to planning services verifying that the developer has completed the required installations and/or bonding in accordance with the provisions of this code and the specifications and standards of the departments. One (1) copy of the completed certificate shall be furnished to the developer by planning services together with a notice advising the developer to proceed with preparation of a final site plan for that portion of the area in which minimum improvements have been installed and approved or adequate security has been posted. Certificate originals shall be retained by planning services.

(Ord. No. 4050, § 7, 10-16-12; Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.270 – 12.08.275), 8-20-91. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 12.08.270 – 12.08.275)


12.05.120 Final site plan procedures.

A. Application for the final site plan approval shall be filed with the permit center using the application for final plat/final mobile home site plan.

B. Approval of the final site plan shall be evidenced by the signatures of the director of public works and planning director on the site plan. The approved site plan shall then be filed with the city clerk and planning department.

C. A permit to occupy a mobile home park shall be issued by the building official.

(Ord. No. 4050, § 8, 10-16-12; Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.280), 8-20-91. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.08.280)


12.05.130 Environmental considerations.

A. All mobile home parks shall provide for the protection of valuable, irreplaceable environmental amenities and make the mobile home park development as compatible as possible with the ecological balance of the area. The goals are to preserve drainage patterns, prevent erosion and to preserve trees and natural vegetation. This is beneficial to the city in lessening the costs of the development to the city as a whole, and to the developer in creating an attractive and quality environment. Land which is found to be unsuitable for development includes land with features likely to be harmful to the safety and general health of the future residents (such as lands adversely affected by flooding, bad drainage, steep slopes, and rock formations). Land which the city council considers inappropriate for mobile home park development shall not be so developed unless adequate methods are provided as safeguards against these adverse conditions. If any portion of the land within the mobile home park is subject to flood, or inundation, or is in a flood control zone according to Chapter 86.16 RCW, that portion of the mobile home park shall have written approval of the State Department of Ecology prior to the city council hearing on the preliminary site plan. Every reasonable effort shall be made to preserve existing trees.

B. Every effort shall be made to preserve existing streams, bodies of water, marshes, and bogs. If a stream passes through any of the subject property, a plan shall be presented which indicates how the stream will be preserved; methodology should include an overflow area, and an attempt to minimize the disturbance of the natural channel and stream bed. The piping or tunneling of water shall be discouraged and allowed only when going under streets. Every effort shall be made to keep all streams and bodies of water clear of debris and pollutants.

C. Any mobile home park lying within an area subject to national flood insurance regulations must comply with those regulations when such regulations are more restrictive than this chapter.

(Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.300, 12.08.310), 8-20-91. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 12.08.300, 12.08.310)


12.05.140 Compatibility with existing land use and plans.

A. Mobile home parks shall provide buffer strips along all boundary property lines. All buffer strips shall be at least ten (10) feet in width. No plan for a mobile home park shall be approved by the city council unless the streets shown therein are connected by surfaced road or street according to city specifications to an existing street or highway.

B. The location of all streets shall conform to any adopted plans for streets in the city. If a mobile home park is located in the area of an officially designated trail, provisions may be made for reservation of the right-of-way or for easements to the city for trail purposes. A grading permit shall be required as per the International Building Code, or other applicable building codes, as adopted and amended in Chapter 14.01 KCC, prior to any grading or filling.

(Ord. No. 4050, § 9, 10-16-12; Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.320, 12.08.330), 8-20-91; Ord. No. 3690, § 12, 5-4-04. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 12.08.320, 12.08.330)


12.05.150 Minimum requirements and standards.

Mobile home parks shall comply with the following minimum requirements and standards:

1. A minimum of five (5) mobile home spaces shall be required in a mobile home park.

2. A mobile home park containing more than twenty (20) spaces shall have at least two (2) places of access, at least one (1) of which shall be on a major or secondary street as defined by the city street plan.

3. A fixed, lighted map indicating unit numbers and street names shall be placed at all entrances of the mobile home park.

4. The distance from the entrance or exit of a mobile home park to the street intersection shall conform to the separation requirements outlined in the City of Kent Design and Construction Standards.

5. One (1) access may be for emergency use only.

6. A ten (10) foot minimum width buffer strip will be required on all boundaries of the mobile home park. A wall, one hundred (100) percent sight-obscuring fence, or landscape screen shall be established along all boundaries of the park. The ten (10) foot buffer strip inside this sight-obscuring screen may be part of mobile home lots or may be an area maintained by the mobile home park management.

(Ord. No. 4050, § 10, 10-16-12; Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.340 – 12.08.343), 8-20-91. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 12.08.340 – 12.08.343)


12.05.160 Structures.

A. The only permanent dwelling allowed in the mobile home park may be a single-family dwelling for the owner or manager. Service buildings are optional for mobile home parks serving only independent mobile homes. All service buildings shall be designed to comply with State Health Department requirements. A permanent storage facility may be provided for each lot. One (1) central storage building for the park as a whole is permitted. Separate permits will be required for all permanent structures.

B. Pads for individual mobile homes are optional on a complete development basis. No mobile home placed on such a site shall overhang the edges of the pad. All plans and construction of pads, foundations, and tiedowns for mobile homes are subject to approval of the city building official.

(Ord. No. 4050, § 11, 10-16-12; Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.344), 8-20-91. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.08.344)


12.05.170 Lot size.

Each mobile home lot shall contain a minimum of three thousand (3,000) square feet. Lot widths shall be as follows:

	 	Type of unit	Minimum lot width

	 	Single	40 feet

	 	Double	50 feet

Actual lot dimensions shall be determined by the dimensions of the particular mobile home which the particular lot is designed to accommodate together with the setback and separation requirements.

(Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.345), 8-20-91. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.08.345)


12.05.180 Setbacks.

A standard setback of five (5) feet is required from side and rear lot lines. A ten (10) foot setback is required from the front lot line defined as that lot line facing the access street or the shorter lot line of a corner lot. All setbacks are subject to a minimum separation requirement of fifteen (15) feet between mobile homes and appurtenant structures and other mobile homes or permanent structures. On a corner lot, the side street side yard setback shall be ten (10) feet. For lots abutting the perimeter of the mobile home park, the five (5) foot rear yard setback shall be measured from the inside of the ten (10) foot buffer strip. Each site shall be clearly defined by a permanent marker. This marker must be clearly visible from a vehicle located on the road providing direct access to the lot.

(Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.346), 8-20-91. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.08.346)


12.05.190 Lot coverage.

No more than forty (40) percent of any lot shall be covered by a mobile home and enclosed accessory structures, excluding open carports.

(Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.347), 8-20-91. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.08.347)


12.05.200 Density.

The density of the mobile home park shall not exceed the density of the underlying zone and in any case shall not exceed nine (9) units per gross acre.

(Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.348), 8-20-91. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.08.348)


12.05.210 Common open space.

A ratio of at least five hundred (500) square feet of common open space area exclusive of area contained in individual lots shall be provided for each mobile home lot. Paved and floor areas of enclosed structures devoted exclusively to recreation may be counted as common open space area.

(Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.349), 8-20-91. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.08.349)


12.05.220 Landscaping.

Landscaping shall be provided within the ten (10) foot buffer strip according to a detailed landscape plan approved by the planning department. Completion of such detailed landscape plan and the actual installation of such landscaping or the alternative bonding of same shall be a condition of the preliminary site plan approval for any mobile home park. If the installation of the approved landscaping is to be delayed, a surety bond of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000) per gross acre of the mobile home park subdivision shall be prepared guaranteeing to the city the landscaping of the mobile home park in accordance with the approved plan. The amount of the landscape bond will be determined by the planning department.

(Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.350), 8-20-91. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.08.350)


12.05.230 Streets, curbs and sidewalks.

A. In certain areas due to existing or planned circulation systems it may be necessary for the city to require public rights-of-way to be provided within the mobile home park development. When the provision of such rights-of-way is necessary, the right-of-way width, paving width, and other standards shall be the same as would be required had the mobile home park development not taken place. The mobile home park perimeter buffering requirement shall be applied along these rights-of-way. Public streets will be required, only when absolutely necessary. Ownership of park streets not open to public circulation shall remain with the park ownership and shall be their responsibility to maintain. These streets shall have asphaltic or concrete surfaces and concrete or asphalt curbing shall be provided along both sides of all streets except where curb cuts are necessary for driveways. The minimum paving width for all streets within the mobile home park shall be thirty (30) feet.

B. Each mobile home lot shall have a minimum of two (2) onsite automobile parking spaces. If parking for recreational vehicles will be permitted, the mobile home park shall provide screened, secure parking and storage areas for boats, campers, travel trailers, and related devices on a ratio of one (1) space per ten (10) mobile homes in secluded portions of the park. One (1) additional parking space for every ten (10) mobile home spaces shall be provided for guest parking. No parking for any reasons other than emergencies shall be allowed on any street within the mobile home park.

C. Sufficient illumination shall be provided between sunset and sunrise to illuminate adequately the roadways and walkways within the mobile home park. Plans for illumination must be approved by the engineering department.

(Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.351, 12.08.353), 8-20-91. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 12.08.351, 12.08.353)


12.05.240 Installation of utilities.

A. All utilities designed to serve the mobile home park shall be placed underground. Any utilities located in a planting strip shall be placed in a manner and depth to permit the planting of trees. Those utilities to be located beneath paved surfaces shall be installed, including all service connections, as approved by the department of public works. Such installation shall be completed and approved prior to the application of any surface material. Easements may be required for the maintenance and operation of utilities as specified by the engineering department.

B. Sanitary sewers shall be provided at no cost to the city and designed in accordance with city standards.

C. An adequate drainage system shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. Cross drains shall be provided to accommodate all natural water flow and shall be of sufficient length to permit full-width roadway and required slopes. The size of openings to be provided shall be determined by Talbot’s formula, but in no case shall the size of openings be less than twelve (12) inches. All mobile home parks must comply with city drainage ordinances.

D. The water distribution system including the location of fire hydrants shall be designed and installed in accordance with city standards as defined by engineering and fire department ordinances and requirements.

E. All electrical hookups shall comply with the National Electrical Code. Permits shall be obtained from the state electrical inspection division.

(Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.354), 8-20-91. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.08.354)


12.05.250 Mobile home park alternate development plan.

A. A mobile home alternate development plan may be substituted in its entirety only for KCC 12.05.180, 12.05.190, 12.05.200, 12.05.220 and 12.05.230(C). As an alternative to use of the established pattern of mobile home park development, the developer may adopt a plan which divides the mobile home park into specific areas for mobile homes, for recreation and for service uses.

B. Mobile homes may be located within this area with no regular lot divisions. A plan of site locations clearly showing the maximum dimensions of any mobile home and related structures to be placed at each site shall be substituted for appropriate portions of the preliminary and final site plan requirements. The required fifteen (15) foot separation between mobile homes must be observed as well as setbacks of twenty (20) feet from the perimeter, ten (10) feet from the limits of any recreation and open space area, ten (10) feet from any interior park street and five (5) feet from any walkway. A passage clear of any permanent obstruction must be available to each mobile home site of sufficient clearance to enable the movement of the mobile home to that site. No part of any mobile home shall be located more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from an access road. All sites shall be identified by site numbers in four (4) inch minimum height numerals placed so as to be clearly visible from a vehicle located on the access road. A minimum of two (2) parking places shall be provided for each mobile home site at a distance of no more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from such site. One (1) additional parking space shall be provided every ten (10) mobile home sites for guest parking. One (1) screened secure parking space for every ten (10) mobile home sites shall be provided for recreational vehicle parking in a secluded portion of the park. All areas between mobile home sites shall be seeded or sodded with grass or lawn and shall be maintained by the mobile home park management.

C. A ratio of at least five hundred (500) square feet of common open space shall be provided for each mobile home. Paved and floor areas of enclosed structures devoted exclusively to recreation may be counted as common open space.

D. Service buildings may be placed within or adjacent to a mobile home area. In such case a minimum distance of thirty (30) feet shall be maintained between the service building and adjacent mobile homes.

(Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.360), 8-20-91. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.08.360)


12.05.260 Nonconforming mobile home park standards.

To assure reasonable opportunity for the continued use of mobile home parks existing prior to adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived and therefore not in compliance with all or some of the development standards required herein, the parks shall be considered legal nonconforming uses. The following minimum standards shall apply to the placement or relocation of individual mobile homes and recreational vehicles within nonconforming mobile home parks and to the construction of accessory structures:

1. A site plan drawn to scale that shows the perimeter park boundaries, the dimensions and the location of all existing mobile homes, accessory buildings, carports and porches, utility hookups and internal roadways shall be submitted in conjunction with permit application for placement or relocation of individual mobile homes or construction of accessory buildings.

2. The placement or relocation of individual mobile homes in nonconforming mobile home parks shall be subject to the minimum fire safety separation standards of the National Fire Protection Association, NFPA 501A, 1987 Edition. Lot coverage requirements need not apply. (See diagram in KCC 12.05.270.)

3. Recreational vehicles shall be allowed in a nonconforming mobile home park under the following circumstances:

a. A recreational vehicle may be relocated on an individual mobile home space that is occupied by a similar unit at the time of adoption of the nonconforming standards.

b. The existing mobile home space cannot be used for a mobile home due to the minimum setbacks specified in diagram in KCC 12.05.270. All recreational vehicles in nonconforming mobile home parks shall be placed in a location which complies with the separation requirements specified in the diagram in KCC 12.05.270.

4. No nonconforming mobile home park boundaries shall be expanded nor shall any additional mobile home lots be created as a result of these provisions. Any new expansion shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.

5. Appeals of any building official decision with regard to placement or relocation of a mobile home, recreational vehicle and/or accessory structure are subject to the appeal procedures specified in Chapter 14.01 KCC.

(Ord. No. 4050, § 12, 10-16-12; Ord. No. 3008, § 2(12.08.380), 10-15-91)


12.05.270 Minimum nonconforming mobile home park separations.

The following example illustrates the minimum fire safety separation standards required by KCC 12.05.260 for the placement of mobile homes or manufactured homes in nonconforming mobile home parks:


[IMAGE]


Any portion of a mobile home or manufactured home shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet side to side, eight (8) feet end to side, six (6) feet end to end horizontally or six (6) feet diagonally from any other mobile home or manufactured home, recreational vehicle or community building. No portion of a mobile home or manufactured home can encroach on an internal driveway. The site plan must reflect adjacent park spaces and separations between units and accessory structures and roads. Additional permits and review may be required by other agencies or city departments as a result of the placement of a mobile home or manufactured home. Upon approval of the building official, construction of an approved two (2) hour fire resistive wall may decrease required separation distances.

(Ord. No. 4050, § 13, 10-16-12; Ord. No. 3008, § 2(12.08.380-2), 10-15-91)


12.05.290 Exceptions.

A. The hearing examiner may recommend to the city council an exception from the requirements of this chapter when undue hardship may be created as a result of strict compliance with the provisions of this chapter. In recommending any exception, the hearing examiner may prescribe conditions that he deems necessary to or desirable for the public interest. No exceptions shall be recommended unless the hearing examiner finds that:

1. There are special physical circumstances or conditions affecting the property such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use or development of his land;

2. The exception is necessary to insure such property the rights and privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under similar circumstances;

3. The granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare or injurious to the property in the vicinity.

B. Application for any exception shall be submitted in writing by the applicant at the time the preliminary site plan is submitted to the planning department. The application shall state fully all substantiating facts and evidence pertinent to the request.

(Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.410), 8-20-91. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 12.08.400, 12.08.410)


12.05.300 Penalties.

Violations of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided in KCC 1.04.030 and 1.04.200. 

(Ord. No. 4050, § 14, 10-16-12; Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.420), 8-20-91. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.08.420)


12.05.310 Liability.

This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person owning any land or building, constructing or modifying any mobile home park in the city for damages to anyone injured or damaged either in person or property by any defect therein; nor shall the city or any agent thereof be held as assuming such liability by reason of any preliminary or final approval or by issuance of any permits or certificates authorized herein.

(Ord. No. 2990, § 1(12.08.430), 8-20-91. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.08.430)


12.05.320 Eviction notices for change of use or closure of a mobile home park.

A. Before a mobile home park owner may issue eviction notices pursuant to a closure or change of use under Chapter 59.21 RCW, the mobile home park owner must first submit to the housing and human services office a relocation report and plan that meets the requirements of KCC 12.05.330. If applying for a change of use, the mobile home park owner shall submit the relocation report and plan together with all other necessary applications. Once the manager of housing and human services determines that the relocation report and plan meets the requirements of KCC 12.05.330, the manager of housing and human services shall stamp his or her approval on the relocation report and plan and return a copy of the approved plan to the mobile home park owner. If the manager of housing and human services determines that the relocation report and plan does not meet the requirements of KCC 12.05.330, the manager of housing and human services may require the mobile home park owner to amend or supplement the relocation report and plan as necessary to comply with this chapter before approving it.

B. No sooner than upon approval of the relocation report and plan, the owner of the mobile home park may issue the twelve (12) month eviction notice to the mobile home park tenants. The eviction notice shall comply with RCW 59.20.080 and 59.21.030, as amended. No mobile home owner who rents a mobile home lot may be evicted until the twelve (12) month notice period expires, except pursuant to the State Mobile Home Landlord-Tenant Act, Chapter 59.20 RCW.

(Ord. No. 3614, § 2, 9-17-02)


12.05.330 Relocation report and plan.

A. The relocation report and plan shall describe how the mobile home park owner intends to comply with Chapters 59.20 and 59.21 RCW, relating to mobile home relocation assistance, and with KCC 12.05.320 through 12.05.370. The relocation report and plan must provide that the mobile home park owner will assist each mobile home park tenant household to relocate, in addition to making any state or federal required relocation payments. Such assistance must include providing tenants an inventory of relocation resources, referring tenants to alternative public and private subsidized housing resources, helping tenants obtain and complete the necessary application forms for state-required relocation assistance, and helping tenants to move the mobile homes from the mobile home park. Further, the relocation report and plan shall contain the following information:

1. The name, address, and family composition for each mobile home park tenant household, and the expiration date of the lease for each household; 

2. The condition, size, ownership status, HUD and State Department of Labor and Industries certification status, and probable mobility of each mobile home occupying a mobile home lot;

3. Copies of all lease or rental agreement forms the mobile home park owner currently has in place with mobile home park tenants;

4. To the extent mobile home park tenants voluntarily make such information available, a confidential listing of current monthly housing costs, including rent or mortgage payments and utilities, for each mobile home park tenant household;

5. To the extent mobile home park tenants voluntarily make such information available, a confidential listing of gross annual income for each mobile home park tenant household; 

6. An inventory of relocation resources, including available mobile home spaces in King, Snohomish, Kitsap, and Pierce Counties;

7. Actions the mobile home park owner will take to refer mobile home park tenants to alternative public and private subsidized housing resources;

8. Actions the mobile home park owner will take to assist mobile home park tenants to move the mobile homes from the mobile home park;

9. Other actions the owner will take to minimize the hardship mobile home park tenant households suffer as a result of the closure or conversion of the mobile home park; and 

10. A statement of the anticipated timing for park closure.

B. The manager of housing and human services may require the mobile home park owner to designate a relocation coordinator to administer the provisions of the relocation report and plan and work with the mobile home park tenants, the housing and human services office, and other city and state offices to ensure compliance with the relocation report and plan and with state laws governing mobile home park relocation assistance, eviction notification, and landlord/tenant responsibilities.

C. The owner shall make available to any mobile home park tenant residing in the mobile home park copies of the proposed relocation report and plan, with confidential information deleted. Within fourteen (14) days of the manager of housing and human service’s approval of the relocation report and plan, a copy of the approved relocation report and plan shall be mailed by the owner to each mobile home park tenant.

D. The mobile home park owner shall update with the housing and human services office the information required under this section to include any change of circumstances occurring after submission of the relocation report and plan that affects the relocation report and plan’s implementation. 

(Ord. No. 3614, § 2, 9-17-02)


12.05.340 Certificate of completion of the relocation report and plan.

No mobile home park owner may close a mobile home park, or obtain final approval of a comprehensive plan or zoning redesignation until the mobile home park owner obtains a certificate of completion from the housing and human services office. The manager of housing and human services shall issue a certificate of completion only if satisfied that the owner has complied with the provisions of an approved relocation report and plan, the eviction notice requirements of RCW 59.20.080 and 59.21.030, the relocation assistance requirements of RCW 59.21.021, and any additional requirements imposed in connection with required city applications.

(Ord. No. 3614, § 2, 9-17-02)


12.05.350 Notice of provisions. 

It is unlawful for any party to sell, lease, or rent any mobile home or mobile home park rental space without providing a copy of any relocation report and plan to the prospective purchaser, lessee, or renter, and advising the same, in writing, of the provisions of KCC 12.05.320 through 12.05.370 and the status of any relocation report and plan.

(Ord. No. 3614, § 2, 9-17-02)


12.05.360 Administration.

The manager of housing and human services shall administer and enforce KCC 12.05.320 through 12.05.370. Whenever an owner or an owner’s agent fails to comply with the provisions of KCC 12.05.320 through 12.05.370, the following may occur: 

A. The manager of housing and human services may deny, revoke, or condition a certificate of completion, a permit, or another approval; 

B. Any other appropriate city official may condition any permit or other approval upon the owner’s successful completion of remedial actions deemed necessary by the manager of housing and human services to carry out the purposes of KCC 12.05.320 through 12.05.370. 

(Ord. No. 3614, § 2, 9-17-02)


12.05.370 Appeal.

Any appeal from a determination of the manager of housing and human services under KCC 12.05.320(A), 12.05.340, and 12.05.360(A) shall be an open record hearing filed within fourteen (14) days of the determination in accordance with the procedures established for Process I applications under Chapter 12.01 KCC.

(Ord. No. 4050, § 15, 10-16-12; Ord. No. 3614, § 2, 9-17-02)


12.05.380 Closure and government sponsorship.

A. If an eminent domain action by a federal, state, or local agency causes closure of a mobile home park and the procedures set forth in the Federal Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act, 42 U.S.C. 4601 et seq., and the regulations of 49 CFR Part 24 or the Relocation Assistance – Real Property Acquisition Policy Act of Chapter 8.26 RCW and the regulations of Chapter 468-100 WAC are followed, the requirements of those acts and regulations will supersede the requirements of KCC 12.05.320 through 12.05.370.

B. If a condemnation action of the city causes closure of a mobile home park, the city will be responsible for fulfilling the requirements of the standards contained herein. If the city chooses to follow portions of the state act and regulations and the manager of housing and human services and the director of public works determine that there is a conflict or redundancy between the portions of the state act and regulations being followed by the city, and the standards contained herein, the state act shall take precedence in such areas of conflict or redundancy. If the state act is followed in all respects, such act will supersede the requirements of this section and the standards contained herein.

(Ord. No. 3614, § 2, 9-17-02)


Chapter 12.06 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK*

Sections:

12.06.010    Title. 

12.06.020    Purpose. 

12.06.030    Scope. 

12.06.040    Definitions. 

12.06.050    Administration. 

12.06.060    Variances. 

12.06.070    Application procedures. 

12.06.080    Recreational vehicle park preliminary development plan. 

12.06.090    Recreational vehicle park final development plan. 

12.06.100    Substitution of final development plan for preliminary development plan. 

12.06.110    Technical information. 

12.06.120    Structures. 

12.06.130    Spaces. 

12.06.140    Landscaping. 

12.06.150    Parking. 

12.06.160    Illumination. 

12.06.170    Fire safety equipment. 

12.06.180    Utility systems. 

12.06.190    Completion certification. 

12.06.200    Deferred improvements. 

12.06.210    Park operation – Licenses. 

12.06.220    Same – Registration of occupants. 

12.06.230    Inspections. 

12.06.240    Occupancy limit. 

12.06.250    Maintenance. 

12.06.260    Penalties. 

12.06.270    Liability. 

*Cross reference(s) – Planning, ch. 2.30; planning commission, ch. 2.57; environmental policy, ch. 11.03; general requirements and standards for mobile home park design, § 12.04.055; flood hazard regulations, ch. 14.09.

State law reference(s) – Recreational vehicles, RCW 43.22.340 et seq.; licenses, RCW 46.16.063, 46.16.505 et seq.


12.06.010 Title.

This chapter shall be hereinafter known as the city of Kent recreational vehicle park code.

(Formerly Code 1986, § 12.06.010)


12.06.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations, requirements, and standards for development of recreational vehicle parks in the city, insuring that the highest feasible quality in such parks will be obtained; that the public health, safety, general welfare, and aesthetics of the city shall be promoted and protected; that orderly growth and development together with the conservation, protection, and proper use of land shall be insured; that proper provisions for all public facilities, including circulation, utilities, and services, shall be made; and that conformance with provisions set forth in KCC Title 15, Zoning, and the comprehensive plan shall be insured.

(Formerly Code 1986, § 12.06.020)


12.06.030 Scope.

This chapter applies to any acquisition of land, improvement of land, or the development of land for recreational vehicle park use. This chapter shall apply to all lands within the corporate boundaries of the city. Where this chapter imposes greater restrictions or higher standards upon the development of land than other laws, ordinances or restrictive covenants, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.

(Formerly Code 1986, § 12.06.030)


12.06.040 Definitions.

The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Developer shall mean the person, firm, or corporation developing a recreational vehicle park.

Hearing examiner shall mean a person appointed by the city administrator to conduct public hearings on applications outlined in the city ordinance creating the hearing examiner, and who prepares a record, findings of fact, and conclusions on such applications.

Independent unit shall mean a recreational vehicle that has a toilet and bathtub or shower.

Recreational area shall mean a parcel or parcels of land or an area of water or a combination of land and water within the site designated for a recreational vehicle park which are designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of the park. The recreational area may contain such complimentary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of residents of the recreational vehicle park.

Recreational vehicle shall mean any vehicle or structure designed and constructed to permit occupancy, with sleeping quarters for one (1) or more persons, and constructed in such manner as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets or highways and duly licensable as such, and propelled, drawn, or transported by its own or other power.

Recreational vehicle park shall mean any site, lot, parcel, or tract of land designed, maintained, or intended for the purpose of supplying a location or accommodations for five (5) or more recreational vehicles and shall include all buildings used or intended for use as a part of the equipment thereof, whether a charge is made for the use of the recreational vehicle park and its facilities or not. Recreational vehicle parks shall not include commercial automobile or recreational vehicle sales areas on which unoccupied recreational vehicles are parked for purposes of inspection and sale only.

Recreational vehicle space or site shall mean a parcel of ground within a recreational vehicle park designated for the accommodation of any recreational vehicle.

Service building shall mean a building housing separate toilet, lavatory, and bath or shower accommodations for men and women, with separate service sink and laundry facilities.

Setbacks shall mean the minimum allowable horizontal distance from a given point or line of reference, such as a street right-of-way, to the nearest vertical wall or other elements of a recreational vehicle or appurtenant structure. All setbacks from a line of reference shall be measured on a line perpendicular to the line of reference.

Tents shall mean an enclosed structure of shelter fabricated entirely or in major part of cloth, canvas, plastic, or similar material which is erected for periods not exceeding thirty (30) days for recreational or vacation purposes. For the purpose of this chapter a tent shall be considered as a dependent camping vehicle.

(Formerly Code 1986, §§ 12.06.042 – 12.06.044, 12.06.046 – 12.06.052)

Cross reference(s) – Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1.01.030.


12.06.050 Administration.

Administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the planning department. Those matters that are defined by city ordinance as the responsibility of any other department shall be administered by that department.

(Ord. No. 1836. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 12.06.220, 12.06.260)


12.06.060 Variances.

A. The hearing examiner may authorize a variance from the requirements of this chapter when, in its opinion, undue hardship may be created as a result of strict compliance with the provisions of this chapter, as per RCW 35A.63.110. When authorizing a variance, the hearing examiner may prescribe conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable for the public interest. No variance shall be recommended unless the hearing examiner finds:

1. The variance shall not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitation upon uses of other properties in the vicinity and zone in which the property on behalf of which the application was filed is located; and

2. That such variance is necessary, because of special circumstances relating to the size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings of the subject property, to provide it with use rights and privileges permitted to other properties in the vicinity and in the zone in which the subject property is located; and

3. That the granting of such variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and zone in which the subject property is situated.

B. Application for any variance shall be submitted in writing on forms prescribed by the planning department by the developer at the time the preliminary plan is submitted to the planning department. The application shall state fully all substantiating facts and evidence pertinent to the request.

(Formerly Code 1986, § 12.06.510)


12.06.070 Application procedures.

A. Existing mobile home park zones.

1. The first step in preparing an application for a recreational vehicle park involves early informal discussions with appropriate city departments to allow the developer to obtain details of city requirements and some idea of the feasibility of the proposal prior to the actual submission of development plans.

2. The second step involves the preparation and submission to the planning department of a preliminary development plan of the proposed recreational vehicle park. The plan shall be reviewed by the applicable responsible departments and any comments and required corrections resulting from this review shall be provided to the developer.

3. The third step involves the preparation and submission to the planning department of a final development plan. This plan shall be reviewed by the responsible departments for compliance with their requirements and if approved shall serve as a basis for the issuance of all permits and licenses.

4. Residential zoned property not presently zoned for mobile home park use. Recreational vehicle parks may be located in any residential district when recreational vehicle park combining district regulations and development plans are approved for that location. The procedure for approval of a recreational vehicle park combining district requires a public hearing before the hearing examiner and a second public hearing before the city council together with city council approval.

B. The application for a recreational vehicle park involves early informal discussions with appropriate city departments to allow a developer to obtain details of city requirements and some idea of the feasibility of the proposal prior to the actual submission of development plans.

C. The preliminary development plan of the proposed recreational vehicle park together with an application for a combining district shall be submitted to the planning department. Application forms for a combining district are available in the planning department office. The preliminary development plan and application for a combining district must be submitted to the planning department at least 25 days prior to the date the developer intends to be heard before the hearing examiner. A fee of $1,616 shall be paid at the time of application. Within two days of receipt of the application the planning department shall set a time and date for a preliminary plan meeting between the developer and the responsible departments. The comments resulting from the preliminary plan meeting, as well as any written comments received by the planning department, shall be considered in preparing the staff recommendation to be presented to the hearing examiner.

D. The planning department shall give written notice of the hearing examiner public hearing to all property owners within a radius of 200 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property being subject of the application. Public notice shall also be posted in three conspicuous places on or adjacent to the property which is the subject of the application at least 10 days prior to the date of the public hearing. Following the public hearing, the hearing examiner shall make a report of findings and recommendations with respect to the proposed combining district and shall forward such to the city council. The city council shall hold a public hearing within 30 days of the date of the public hearing. If the application for a recreational vehicle combining district is denied by the city council, the application shall not be eligible for resubmittal for one year from date of denial, unless specifically stated to be without prejudice. A new application affecting the same property may be submitted, if in the opinion of the hearing examiner circumstances affecting the application have changed substantially.

E. The final development plan shall then be submitted to the planning department. This plan shall be reviewed by the responsible departments for compliance with their requirements and if approved shall serve as a basis for issuance of all permits and licenses.

F. Any combining district shall remain effective only for one year unless the use is begun within that time or construction has commenced.

G. General commercial zone. Recreational vehicle parks shall be permitted as a conditional use in general commercial zoned districts, pursuant to KCC 15.04.110, and shall be subject to the development standards and procedural requirements of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 1836; Ord. No. 3094, § 2, 2-16-93; Ord. No. 3231, § 2, 6-6-95; Ord. No. 3819, § 6, 11-21-06; Ord. No. 4166, § 1, 9-1-15. Formerly Code 1986, § 12.06.220(B))


12.06.080 Recreational vehicle park preliminary development plan.

A. Seven (7) copies of the preliminary development plan shall be submitted to the planning department. The planning department shall transmit one (1) copy of the plans to the appropriate health agency, two (2) copies to the fire and building departments, and three (3) copies to the department of public works.

B. The preliminary development plan shall include a vicinity map of the area, dimensions, acres, and zoning of the adjacent property, at a scale of not less than one (1) inch representing two hundred (200) feet. The site map shall be at a scale of not less than one (1) inch representing one hundred (100) feet showing:

1. An accurate legal description of the property involved.

2. Location and square footage of lots. Notation as to average lot size will suffice for square footage.

3. Street layout and sizes.

4. Recreational area location and square footage.

5. Number of parking spaces and location.

6. The location of service buildings and other existing and proposed structures.

7. Location and type of landscaping to be used.

(Formerly Code 1986, § 12.06.230)


12.06.090 Recreational vehicle park final development plan.

A. Seven (7) copies of the final development plan shall be submitted to the planning department. The planning department shall then transmit one (1) copy of the plan to the appropriate health agency, two (2) copies to the fire and building departments, and three (3) copies to the department of public works.

B. The final development plan shall include the following:

1. Site maps at a scale of not less than one (1) inch representing one hundred (100) feet showing:

a. The location of existing and platted property lines, streets, buildings, watercourses, railroads, sewers, bridges, culverts, storm drains, water mains, and any recorded utility or roadway easements and the present zoning classification, both of the land to be used for the recreational vehicle park and of the adjoining lands (land that abuts the subject area).

b. Plans of proposed underground utility layouts (sanitary and storm drainage, water, gas, telephone, fire hydrant system, and electrical power). When such connections are not feasible or required, any proposed private water or sewage disposal system must be approved by the engineering department and health agency.

c. Contour lines at vertical intervals of not more than five (5) feet where the average slope is or exceeds eight (8) percent. On slopes averaging less than eight (8) percent, contour lines at vertical intervals of not more than two (2) feet shall be required. Contour data shall be referenced to National Ocean Survey (1929 mean sea level) datum.

d. The proposed lots, structures, roadways, parking spaces, walkways, screening, recreation areas, landscaping, and any other permanent physical features.

2. A detailed landscape plan.

3. Indication of the acreage of the land to be used for the recreational vehicle park, the number of lots, the amount of square feet and dimensions of each lot.

4. The number, location, and size of all automobile parking spaces.

5. The location and width of streets and sidewalks.

6. The location of service buildings and other existing and proposed structures.

7. Any other pertinent information deemed necessary by the responsible departments.

C. At a time and date set by the planning department, representatives of the responsible departments shall meet to consider the final development plan. The developer shall be encouraged to attend the final plan meeting. Any revisions or corrections required by the responsible departments shall be applied to the final plans which shall then be used as the basis for any construction permits related to the development of the recreational vehicle park site.

(Formerly Code 1986, § 12.06.240)


12.06.100 Substitution of final development plan for preliminary development plan.

In certain instances, the applicant may choose to submit a completed final development plan in place of the preliminary development plan. An example of a situation where this alternative procedure might be in order would be the conversion of a number of spaces within an existing mobile home park to a recreational vehicle park use. Informal discussions with the responsible departments prior to the actual preparation of plans might clear up any problems that exist and might make the submission of plans in two (2) stages unnecessary. Although the applicant may choose to initiate this simplified procedure, actual acceptance of the submitted plans as suitable final development plans shall require the unanimous agreement of everyone present at the development plan meeting.

(Formerly Code 1986, § 12.06.250)


12.06.110 Technical information.

Recreational vehicle parks shall comply with the following minimum standards:

1. A minimum of five (5) recreational vehicle spaces shall be required in a recreational vehicle park.

2. A recreational vehicle park having more than seventy-five (75) spaces shall have two (2) or more places of access at least one (1) of which shall be on a major or secondary street as defined by the city street plan. No entrance or exit from the recreational vehicle park shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to a street intersection measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street. The developer shall not create or maintain, or allow to be created or maintained within the boundaries of the recreational vehicle park any material impediment to visibility which obscures the view of an approaching driver in the right lane of the street within:

a. One hundred (100) feet where the speed limit is less than forty-five (45) miles per hour; or

b. One hundred and fifty (150) feet where the speed limit is forty-five (45) miles per hour or more, of any portion of the approach lane of the accessway within twenty-five (25) feet of its intersection with the right hand lane of the street.

3. All traffic lanes and streets within the recreational park shall have a minimum width of thirty (30) feet and shall be paved and drained in a manner approved by the engineering department. No parking for other than emergency purposes shall be allowed in the streets and traffic lanes of a recreational vehicle park.

4. Means of protected pedestrian access shall be provided between the parking spaces, recreational and service facilities, and public ways outside the limits of the park. Curbing shall be used to separate pedestrian and vehicular traffic and crosswalks shall be provided and maintained by the management.

5. All recreational vehicle parks shall be surrounded by a five (5) foot high, fifty (50) to one hundred (100) percent view obscuring wall, fence, or planting strip, as permitted by subsection (2)(a) of this section and the yard requirements of the surrounding zone.

(Formerly Code 1986, §§ 12.06.300, 12.06.310 – 12.06.313)


12.06.120 Structures.

The only permanent dwelling allowed in the recreational vehicle park shall be the single-family dwelling of the owner or manager. The following service buildings are permitted:

1. Laundry facilities which shall be provided by the management in the ratio of one (1) dryer and two (2) washers for every thirty (30) spaces within the park.

2. If dependent units of any type are to be allowed to occupy space within the recreational vehicle park, restroom and shower facilities shall be provided in the following minimum ratio:

 

	MALE

	Number camping vehicle spaces	Drinking

fountains	Water closets	Urinals	Hand basins	Showers

	2 – 20	1	1	1	2	1

	21 – 30	1	2	1	3	2

	31 – 40	1	3	1	4	2

	41 – 50	1	4	2	5	4

	51 – 60	2	5	2	6	4

	61 – 70	2	6	2	7	5

	FEMALE

	Number camping vehicle spaces	Drinking fountains	Water closets	Hand basins	Showers

	 2 – 20	Included in “Male” category above	2	2	1

	21 – 30	 	3	3	2

	31 – 40	 	4	4	2

	41 – 50	 	5	5	4

	51 – 60	 	6	6	4

	61 – 70	 	7	7	5

(Formerly Code 1986, § 12.06.314(A), (B))


12.06.130 Spaces.

A. All recreational vehicle spaces shall have a paved pad of the same minimum dimension as the largest unit to be allowed to occupy that space. The pad shall be located in conformance with the separation requirements of subsection (D) of this section and shall be paved in a manner approved by the engineering department.

B. No specific areas or dimensions are required for individual spaces. The developer should design his spaces around the density and separation requirements listed as subsections (C) and (D) below and the different types and sizes of recreational vehicles for which he intends to provide accommodations. The boundaries of each space shall be clearly marked onsite and each space shall be large enough to accommodate within those limits the entire recreational vehicle package being used by the renter of that space; for example, trailer plus towing vehicle, pickup camper plus pickup when separated, camper and boat on trailer. The only exception to this requirement would be to allow a separate parking area for the vehicle of those persons using an area provided for tents.

C. The number of recreational vehicle spaces shall not exceed twenty-eight (28) per gross acre of the recreational vehicle park.

D. No recreational vehicle shall be positioned closer than ten (10) feet to any other recreational vehicle or tent, closer than eight (8) feet to any permanent building or closer than five (5) feet to any exterior property line of the recreational park. Self propelled vehicles not used for sleeping purposes may be located within the ten (10) foot required separation between recreational vehicles.

E. A recreational area composed of outdoor and/or indoor area totaling not less than one hundred (100) square feet for each space included within the park shall be developed and maintained by the management of the recreational vehicle park.

(Formerly Code 1986, §§ 12.06.314(C) – 12.06.318)


12.06.140 Landscaping.

Landscaping shall be provided in the recreational vehicle park according to a landscaping plan approved by the planning department. A surety bond to cover the approved landscaping shall be posed prior to the issuance of any permit to construct the park.

(Formerly Code 1986, § 12.06.319)


12.06.150 Parking.

One (1) parking space for guest use shall be provided for every twenty-five (25) spaces.

(Formerly Code 1986, § 12.06.320)


12.06.160 Illumination.

Sufficient illumination shall be provided between sunset and sunrise to illuminate adequately the roadways and walkways within the recreational vehicle park. Such illumination shall not be under the control of the tenants.

(Formerly Code 1986, § 12.06.321)


12.06.170 Fire safety equipment.

All fire safety equipment and installation including hydrants, fire extinguishers, etc., shall be in accordance with ordinances of the city.

(Formerly Code 1986, § 12.06.322)


12.06.180 Utility systems.

All installation and maintenance of utility systems shall be in accordance with appropriate engineering and health department requirements. Refuse containers shall be provided by the park operator in number and type sufficient to satisfy health department requirements.

(Formerly Code 1986, § 12.06.323)


12.06.190 Completion certification.

A. A signed completion certificate shall signify that the recreational vehicle park has been satisfactorily completed according to the approved final plan and the requirements of this chapter. The completion certificate shall be submitted to the planning department as a partial requirement for the business license. Completion certificate forms are available from the planning department.

B. The developer shall sign and forward the completion certificate to the planning department when, in his opinion, the recreational vehicle park has been completed. Such certificate shall be signed by all responsible departments within their departmental jurisdiction, when the work has been satisfactorily completed, except for those improvements deferred by KCC 12.06.200.

(Formerly Code 1986, §§ 12.06.331 – 12.06.333)


12.06.200 Deferred improvements.

If a developer wishes to defer certain improvements, written application shall be made to the department responsible for approval of that improvement stating the reasons why such delay is necessary or advisable. Upon approval by the department, the developer shall furnish a performance bond of one hundred fifty (150) percent of the estimated cost of the installation of the required improvements. Such bond shall list the exact work that shall be completed and shall be subject to the condition that the improvement shall be completed within one (1) year after the approval of the final plan. Bonds for landscaping may exceed a one (1) year time limit. The developer may substitute a certified check in lieu of a performance bond. Such check shall be made payable to the city and shall be in the same amount as the bond for which it is substituting. The city reserves the right, in addition to all other remedies available to it by law, to proceed against such bond or other payment in lieu thereof. In case of any suit or action to enforce any provisions of this chapter, the developer shall pay to the city all costs incidental to such litigation including reasonable attorney’s fees. The applicant shall enter into an agreement with the city requiring payment of such attorney’s fees.

(Formerly Code 1986, § 12.06.334)


12.06.210 Park operation – Licenses.

It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, maintain or permit to be operated or maintained upon any property owned or controlled by him, a recreational vehicle park within the limits of the city without having first secured a license from the city clerk in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Such annual licenses will expire on December 31 of each year, but may be renewed under the provisions of this chapter for additional periods of one (1) year. If the license is for less than half a year, the fee shall be one-half (1/2) the annual rate. No license shall be transferable. The fee for the license is on file in the city clerk’s office.

(Formerly Code 1986, §§ 12.06.400, 12.06.410)

Cross reference(s) – Licenses, ch. 5.01.


12.06.220 Same – Registration of occupants.

In all recreational vehicle parks there shall be located an office of the person in charge of the park. A copy of the recreational vehicle park license and of this chapter shall be posted therein. It is hereby made the duty of the attendant or person in charge, together with the licensee, to keep a register of all tenants which shall be available for inspection by federal, state, county, and city officials. The register shall contain at least the following information:

1. Name and address of occupants.

2. Dates of entrances and departures.

3. License or registration number of all recreational vehicles.

4. State issuing such license or registration.

(Formerly Code 1986, § 12.06.420)


12.06.230 Inspections.

A. Each recreational vehicle park will be inspected by the fire prevention bureau in the course of their normal routine inspections. These inspections will cover recordkeeping, proper location and separation of recreational vehicles, and all other aspects of the park affecting the health, safety and welfare of its inhabitants.

B. In addition to the regular inspections, individual city departments may make special inspections of those items under their jurisdiction at any time.

(Formerly Code 1986, § 12.06.430)


12.06.240 Occupancy limit.

A recreational vehicle park is designed to accommodate only recreational vehicles. While such units are located within a recreational vehicle park, no business shall be conducted from them. A maximum rental period of thirty (30) days shall be enforced for all spaces within a recreational vehicle park.

(Formerly Code 1986, § 12.06.440)


12.06.250 Maintenance.

The recreational vehicle park shall be kept in good repair to insure that the park shall be a pleasant, safe and sanitary living environment for present and future inhabitants.

(Formerly Code 1986, § 12.06.450)


12.06.260 Penalties.

Any person or firm who has neglected or failed to comply with the provisions of this code shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500) for each such violation, or imprisonment for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both such fine and imprisonment.

(Formerly Code 1986, § 12.06.520)


12.06.270 Liability.

This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person owning any land or building, constructing or modifying any recreational vehicle park in the city for damages to anyone injured or damaged either in person or property by any defect therein; nor shall the city or any agent thereof be held as assuming such liability by reason of any preliminary or final approval or by issuance of any permits or certificate authorized herein.

(Formerly Code 1986, § 12.06.530)


Chapter 12.07 BINDING SITE PLAN FOR DIVISION OF CERTAIN LAND FOR CONDOMINIUMS*

(Repealed by Ord. No. 3664)


Chapter 12.11 CONCURRENCY MANAGEMENT

Sections:

12.11.010    Purpose. 

12.11.020    Definitions. 

12.11.030    Administration and application. 

12.11.040    Exemptions. 

12.11.050    Adequate public facility concurrency. 

12.11.060    Application – Transportation level of service standard. 

12.11.070    Development application procedures – Approval/denial. 

12.11.080    Appeal of director’s decision – Hearing. 

12.11.090    Mitigation. 

12.11.100    Mobility management zones and standards. 


12.11.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to set forth specific standards providing for city compliance with the concurrency requirements of the State Growth Management Act (GMA) and for consistency between city and countywide planning policies under the GMA. The GMA requires that adequate street capacity is provided concurrently with development to handle the increased traffic projected to result from growth and development in the city and region. The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that the city’s transportation system shall be adequate to serve the future development at the time the development is available for occupancy, hereinafter referred to as “concurrency,” without decreasing current service levels below established minimum standards. The intent of this chapter is to establish a transportation concurrency management system (TCMS) to ensure that the necessary facilities and/or programs needed to maintain a minimum level of service can be provided simultaneous to, or within a reasonable time of new development as required in the GMA. The GMA requires that a specific set of standards be developed to measure and ensure compliance through the inclusion of:

1. Standards for roadways that balance congestion management with land use objectives.

2. Traffic zones tailored to area characteristics and needs.

3. Level of service standards for each traffic zone which include availability of other mobility options and use of an area-average method of evaluating roadway system adequacy.

(Ord. No. 3284, § 1, 3-19-96)


12.11.020 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

Affected arterial means any street which can be identified as significant to the area in which it serves in terms of the nature and composition of travel and which will be impacted by new development. Arterials serve major centers of activity and carry the major portion of the traffic entering and leaving the city.

Affected intersection means a designated signalized intersection as set forth in KCC 12.11.100 within a traffic zone (mobility management zone) in the city over which the city has operational responsibility and which will be impacted by new development.

Application means any development proposal and accompanying traffic analysis as required in this chapter used to determine the impact on each facility and/or mobility management zone it affects.

Area-average level-of-service means the sum of volumes on critical arterials and at key intersections as defined in Highway Capacity Manual Special Report No. 209 dated December, 1985, divided by the sum of the capacity on critical arterials and at key intersections within a mobility management zone.

Background traffic means the volume of traffic that currently exists on the street system prior to date of occupancy of a proposed development. Background traffic includes all existing traffic and the anticipated traffic from all development proposals which have been approved under this chapter.

Capacity means the maximum traffic volume that can pass through an intersection or arterial during a given peak hour as measured by the sum of critical volumes as defined in the Highway Capacity Manual Special Report 209 dated December, 1985.

Capital facilities plan (CFP) means the six (6) year plan for capital improvements that support the city’s current and future population and employment growth. It contains level of service (LOS) standards for each public facility, a financing plan for necessary facilities, and requires that new development is served by adequate facilities for which concurrency is required under this chapter. The CFP also contains broad goals and specific policies for all public facilities.

Capital improvement means land, improvements to land, structures (including design, permitting, and construction), initial furnishings and selected equipment. Capital improvements have an expected useful life of at least five (5) years and a cost of at least twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000). Other capital costs, such as motor vehicles and motorized equipment, computers and office equipment, office furnishings, and small tools are considered to be non-capacity capital expenses in the city’s annual capital improvement plan budget, and are not capacity capital improvements for the purposes of the comprehensive plan, or the issuance of development permits.

Concurrency means a requirement of the 1990 Growth Management Act (RCW 36.70A.070(6)) requiring that the city may only permit development approval if a development would not cause level of service to fall below the city’s adopted standard, except for transportation facilities where revenues are or may be secured to complete mitigating transportation improvements or strategies within six (6) years. When a development fails to meet the concurrency test, mitigation will require improvements or strategies to accommodate the impacts of the development. Demand management and other non-roadway strategies may be used for transportation mitigation. Concurrency is further defined in KCC 12.11.050.

Degradation means an increase in the volume/capacity ratio (V/C ratio) above the area-wide level of service (LOS) standard for a mobility management zone as established in KCC 12.11.060.

Development means construction and/or substantial modification of structures or improvements to land which will alter, modify and/or expand a use of land in a manner that may cause adverse impacts.

Development permit or approval means any document granting, or granting with conditions, a rezone, plat, planned unit development, conditional use permit, shoreline substantial development permit, building permit, or any other official action of the city having the effect of authorizing the development of land.

1. Final development permit. A building permit or any other development permit which results in an immediate and continuing impact upon public facilities.

2. Preliminary development approval. Including, but not limited to, a rezone, plat, planned unit development, or shoreline substantial development permit.

Director means the public works director for the city of Kent, the director’s authorized representative or any representative authorized by the mayor.

Funded project means a project in the most recently adopted capital facilities plan (CFP) for the city or similar capital program of another jurisdiction which has sufficient revenues secured for construction or which meets the facility concurrency requirements of KCC 12.11.050.

Level of service (LOS) standard means, for the purpose of this chapter, a qualitative estimate of the performance efficiency of the city’s transportation facilities and is tailored for each of the city’s twenty-two (22) mobility management zones (MMZ), reflecting distinct roadway conditions and multiple community objectives. LOS standards for arterials, transit and pedestrian/bicycles within each of the twenty-two (22) zones are set forth in KCC 12.11.100 below.

Mitigation means, for the purposes of this chapter, transportation demand management strategies and/or facility improvements constructed or financed by a developer which return a degraded area-average level of service to the standard established for that area. If an area is already exceeding the standard prior to the development proposal, mitigation shall mean transportation demand management strategies and/or facility improvements constructed or financed by a developer to return the degraded area-average level of service to at least the level-of-service established for that area.

Mobility management zones (MMZ) means distinct transportation areas within the city limits and the city’s potential annexation area with boundaries based on certain criteria as set forth in the city’s comprehensive transportation plan, which is a supporting document to the city’s comprehensive plan. Mobility management zones are set forth in KCC 12.11.100. Some mobility management zones include intersections and arterials outside the city’s jurisdiction.

Peak hour means the consecutive sixty (60) minute period between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. which experiences the highest sum of traffic volumes as determined by the city on a roadway segment or passing through an intersection. This is also referred to in this chapter as the “p.m. peak hour.”

Peak hour trips means total vehicular trips entering and leaving a project during the peak hour on adjacent streets, as defined in the most recent ITE Trip Generation Manual, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. Other trip generation sources subject to approval by the director may be used where ITE data is based on a limited survey sample or where there may be special trip-generating characteristics of the proposal.

Phased development means any development involving multiple buildings or improvements where issuance of development permits would not occur at the same time, but be phased over a period of time.

Public facilities means the capital improvements and systems of the transportation facilities and/or services requiring concurrency.

Site specific improvements means improvements made to transportation systems, the need for which results directly from a development permit or decision made under the Kent Zoning Code or other provisions of the Kent City Code relating to development permits. For transportation facilities, such improvements may include, but are not limited to, site access, turning lanes, traffic signals, changes in traffic signal operation and modification of intersection geometrics. Site specific improvements include right-of-way and related frontage improvements when they are required to be dedicated or constructed at the time of building permit issuance.

Supplemental links and intersections means an intersection or roadway link which contributes to the system function within each mobility management zone. System intersections within the mobility management zones are listed and mapped in KCC 12.11.100 with levels of service for each zone.

Transportation demand management (TDM) means public and/or private programs designed to increase the efficiency of existing capital transportation facilities, including, but not limited to, transit and ride sharing incentives, flexible working hours, parking management, and supporting non-motorized enhancements to decrease single occupancy vehicle trips.

Transportation facilities means streets, roads, highways, sidewalks, street and road lighting systems, traffic signals, non-motorized enhancements, and related systems and site specific improvements.

Under construction means when a construction contract for a project has been awarded or actual physical alteration or improvement has occurred on the site.

Volume/capacity ratio (v/c ratio) means the proportion of available intersection capacity used by vehicles passing through an intersection as defined in the Highway Capacity Manual Special Report 209 dated December, 1985.

(Ord. No. 3284, § 1, 3-19-96)


12.11.030 Administration and application.

A. Administration. The public works director shall be responsible for the administration of all activities relating to this chapter and shall coordinate with other departments, as appropriate, in implementing the provisions of this chapter. The public works director may implement administrative policies deemed necessary and/or appropriate to implement the provisions of this chapter.

B. General application. This chapter applies to all land use development applications as defined in KCC 12.11.020 including, but not limited to, the following types of development activities:

1. Phased development. The requirements of this chapter shall be applied at the time of approval of the initial phase and shall be adjusted for each subsequent phase based on the cumulative impact of all the phases.

2. Chance in occupancy. This chapter will apply to applications for tenant improvements if a proposed new use or an expanded existing use will generate new p.m. peak hour trips.

3. Rezones. The city may approve a proposed rezone only if the full facility impacts of site development are disclosed at the time of application assuming full development of the property under the proposed zoning classification using the highest trip generating permitted uses. Lack of concurrency will not be a basis for denial of a rezone, however, any subsequent development is subject to the concurrency requirements of this chapter. Specific requirements for public facility improvements to mitigate the impacts of a proposed rezone and assure compliance with this chapter may be imposed as a condition of rezone.

4. Concomitant agreements. Unless the agreement specifically provides otherwise, this chapter applies to any development application that is subject to an existing concomitant agreement.

5. Reconstruction of destroyed buildings. If a building to which this chapter did not apply at time of construction is destroyed by fire, explosion or act of God or war, and is reconstructed in accordance with city code, it will not be required to comply with this chapter unless the reconstructed building produces public facility impacts in excess of those produced by the destroyed building.

C. SEPA. This chapter is not intended to limit the application to the State Environmental Policy Act to specific proposals. Each proposal shall be reviewed and may be conditioned or denied under the authority of the State Environmental Policy Act.

D. Traffic impact analysis. As part of the land use development application, the applicant will be required to submit a traffic impact analysis to identify all traffic impacts upon key arterials, intersections and nonmotorized facilities within a particular zone. The traffic impact analysis shall be done consistent with the city of Kent’s Administrative Guidelines for the Requirement of Traffic Impact Analysis of New Development.

(Ord. No. 3284, § 1, 3-19-96)


12.11.040 Exemptions.

The portion of any facility used for any of the following purposes is exempt only from the concurrency requirements and not from the application and processing requirements of this chapter or for the requirement to do site specific improvements:

1. Day-care facility for children, as defined in the Kent Zoning Code, if not operated for profit;

2. Privately operated not for profit social service facilities recognized by the Internal Revenue Service under Internal Revenue Code;

3. Low-income housing, which is defined as housing which is affordable to persons whose income is below fifty (50) percent of the median income for the persons residing in the Seattle Metropolitan Statistical Area. Not more than ten (10) percent of the total number of units in a project shall be exempt under this subsection;

4. Development that is vested by RCW 19.27.095, RCW 58.17.033, RCW 58.17.170, or Ch. 14.11 KCC;

5. Single-family homes on legal lots of record;

6. Any development creating less than ten (10) peak hour trips as defined in this chapter.

Notwithstanding the exemptions provided herein, the traffic impacts on public facilities resulting from an exempt use shall nonetheless be included in computing available capacity.

(Ord. No. 3284, § 1, 3-19-96)


12.11.050 Adequate public facility concurrency.

The issuance of development permits shall be conditioned on a determination that there is concurrency (sufficient capacity remaining on a public facility to meet the level of service standards for the impacts of existing development and impacts of the proposed new development), and shall be determined in accordance with the following:

1. Where adequate capacity exists at the time development permit or approval is issued; or

2. The city has in place binding financial commitments to complete the necessary public facilities or strategies within six (6) years, provided that:

a. The capital facilities plan as defined in the Kent Comprehensive Plan must be financially feasible; and

b. The city uses a realistic, financially feasible funding system based on revenue sources available according to laws adopted at the time the capital facilities plan is adopted; and

c. The capital facilities plan in the Kent Comprehensive Plan must demonstrate that the actual construction of the roads, nonmotorized and transit facilities are scheduled to commence during or before the sixth year of the capital facilities plan; and

d. The capital facilities plan must include facilities necessary to eliminate existing level of service deficiencies as well as those necessary to maintain adopted level of service standards to serve new development.

(Ord. No. 3284, § 1, 3-19-96)


12.11.060 Application – Transportation level of service standard.

A. Degradation limits of mobility management zones. A development proposal will not be approved which causes the congestion to exceed the level of service (LOS) standard in a mobility management zone (MMZ) and not mitigated by: (1) the existing street network; (2) fully funded projects; (3) street improvements under contract as part of other approved development proposals which are fully funded and/or; (4) developer mitigation in accordance with KCC 12.11.090.

B. Area-average level-of-service standards. Level of service standards are tailored for each mobility management zone, reflecting distinct conditions and multiple community objectives, with an area-average approach used to measure system adequacy. The area-average method measures the average level of service on critical arterials and at key intersections within each mobility management zone.

(Ord. No. 3284, § 1, 3-19-96)


12.11.070 Development application procedures – Approval/denial.

A. Application. Any application and accompanying traffic analysis which is subject to this chapter shall be reviewed by the director and used to determine the impact on each mobility management zone it affects. A proposal will not be approved under this chapter if there is no concurrency with public facilities as required in this chapter. Additionally, the director will determine if mitigation is required and appropriate under this chapter due to lack of concurrency and, if so, whether any mitigation proposed by the developer meets the requirements of KCC 12.11.090.

B. Final development permit. No final development permit shall be issued by the city unless there is sufficient capacity of public facilities available to meet the standards for levels of service for existing development and for the proposed development as required in this chapter.

C. Preliminary development approval. Except for rezones, no preliminary development approval shall be issued by the city unless the applicant obtains a determination of the capacity of public facilities as part of the review and approval of the preliminary development approval.

D. Processing of applications, approval/denial. Issuance of final development permits and preliminary development approvals shall be subject to the concurrency requirements set forth in KCC 12.11.050 and further subject to the following:

1. Determination of capacity, expiration. The determination that facility capacity is available shall be based on information provided by the applicant to the satisfaction and approval of the director. The determination of capacity shall be binding on the city at such time as the city determines that adequate capacity is available or the applicant provides mitigation or assurances, as set forth in KCC 12.11.090. The determination of capacity shall be valid for the same period of time as the underlying development permit or approval, including any extensions thereof. If the underlying development permit or approval does not have an expiration date, the capacity shall be valid for a period not to exceed one (1) year.

2. LOS service areas. The standards for levels of service of transportation facilities shall be applied to the issuance of development permits on the following geographical basis:

a. Transportation facilities which serve less than the entire city shall achieve and maintain the standard for levels of service within their assigned mobility management zones. No development permit shall be issued in an assigned mobility management zone if the standard for level of service is not achieved and maintained throughout the assigned mobility management zone and other applicable mobility management zones impacted by the proposed development;

b. No further determination of capacity for the subject property shall be required prior to the expiration of the determination of capacity for the proposed development provided that the capacity has been reserved for the proposed development. Any change in the density, intensity, or land use that requires additional public facilities or capacity is subject to review and approval or denial by the city.

3. Funded projects. The developer may rely on capacity provided by funded projects, including projects in the current capital facilities plan (CFP) and by street improvements under contract as part of other approved development proposals. The approval is subject to the requirements that the applicant must fully fund or mitigate any impacts as required herein. If the list of funded projects is modified after the time the proposal vests, the applicant may elect to rely on the new capacity provided by the modified list of funded projects provided that such election must be made prior to issuance of a development permit.

E. Nonassignability of determination. The determination that facility capacity is available runs with the land and is not personal to the applicant. The determination is not assignable or transferable.

(Ord. No. 3284, § 1, 3-19-96)


12.11.080 Appeal of director’s decision – Hearing.

A. Any person aggrieved by the action of the director based on a determination of capacity issued under this chapter shall have the right to appeal such action to the hearing examiner by filing a notice of appeal with the director within ten (10) days of notice of the refusal to issue or renew. Such appeal shall be processed pursuant to the hearing procedures set forth in Ch. 2.32 KCC. The hearing examiner shall set a date for hearing such appeal. At such hearing the appellant and other interested persons may appear and be heard, subject to rules and regulations of the hearing examiner.

B. Appeal to the hearing examiner shall constitute final administrative review.

C. An appeal of the decision of the hearing examiner must be filed with superior court within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date of issuance of the hearing examiner’s decision as provided in RCW 36.70C.040, or is thereafter barred.

(Ord. No. 3284, § 1, 3-19-96)


12.11.090 Mitigation.

A. General. If mitigation is required to meet the area-average level of service standard, the applicant may instead choose to (1) reduce the size of the development until the standard is met, (2) delay development schedule until city and/or others provide needed improvements, or (3) provide the mitigation as provided for in this chapter. Mitigation must be acceptable to the city in form and amount, to guarantee the applicant’s pro rata share of the financial obligation for capital improvements for the benefit of the subject property.

B. Mitigation approval. If concurrency does not exist as set forth in KCC 12.11.050, to obtain concurrency, the applicant may provide mitigation to the satisfaction and approval of the director as follows:

1. Payment for and timing of improvements.

a. Payment for developer-funded transportation improvements affecting critical arterials and key intersections within the city’s direct operational control necessary to meet the requirements for concurrency must be made prior to issuance of a development permit, final plat approval, or other approval requiring improvements under this chapter. Any such improvements required to be constructed by a developer to meet the requirements for concurrency must be under construction within six (6) months after issuance of a certificate of occupancy, final plat approval, or such other approval for the proposed development. All improvements shall comply with the city’s construction standards, as adopted pursuant to Ordinance 3117, and as thereafter amended. Furthermore, the director shall require an assurance device to guarantee completion of such improvements in accordance with said construction standards. The finance manager shall be responsible for maintaining all mitigation funds received under this chapter.

b. Payment for or the requirement of the developer to construct any transportation improvement necessary to meet the requirements of concurrency which is partially or wholly outside the city’s direct operational control must be submitted for approval by the appropriate agency(ies) which have control. Should the appropriate agency(ies) elect to postpone the proposed improvements, or refuse to accept the proposed mitigation, the director shall collect and hold the amount estimated for mitigation until the improvement is made as required in this chapter. An assurance device satisfactory to the director may substitute for the payment required in this subsection.

c. The project proponent may provide funding in an amount equal to the cost estimate of the director, for necessary traffic improvements. The director may require actual construction rather than provision of funding. Funds, or other commitments, for projects to be constructed by the city must be paid in full by the project proponent to the city prior to issuance of a development permit, final plat approval, or such other approval for the project.

d. Fee deferral. Until December 31, 2013, at the time of issuance of any single-family residential building permit for a dwelling unit that is being constructed for initial sale, the owner of the subject real property may defer payment of the transportation improvement fee in subsections (B)(1)(a) and (c) of this section by executing a first position lien in favor of the city in the amount of the transportation improvement fee. The city shall record the lien against the real property and the lien amount shall be paid by the seller to the city at the time of closing of the sale of the real property and single-family residence. An owner who chooses to defer the transportation improvement fee must combine such deferral with deferral of the water system development charge in KCC 7.02.090, and drainage system development charge in KCC 7.05.165.

2. Transportation demand management. As a mitigation measure, the project proponent may establish transportation demand management (TDM) strategies to reduce single occupant vehicle trips generated by the project. The project proponent shall document the specific measures to be implemented and the number of trips to be reduced by each measure. The TDM program may be denied based on the criteria of subsection (B)(3) of this section. The director must approve the strategies and shall monitor and enforce the performance of agreed upon TDM measures. The director will determine if performance measuring devices shall be imposed and may require annual documentation of the continued effectiveness of such measures. The director may require that additional measures be implemented if the agreed upon measures fail to result in the reduction of the stated number of trips.

3. Decision criteria-acceptable mitigation. Acceptable mitigation requires a finding by the director that:

a. The mitigation is consistent with the comprehensive plan.

b. The mitigation contributes to system performance.

c. Improvements to an intersection or roadway may not shift traffic to a residential area.

d. Improvements to an intersection or roadway may not shift traffic to other intersections for which there is no acceptable mitigation available.

e. Improvements to an intersection or roadway may not shift traffic to intersections within another jurisdiction which would violate that jurisdiction’s policies and regulations.

f. Improvements to an intersection or roadway may not shift traffic to another mobility management zone and violate that zone’s objectives and standards.

g. The effect of the improvement would not result in a reduction or the loss of another transportation objective, including but not limited to maintaining high occupancy vehicle lanes, sidewalks, or bicycle lanes.

h. The adverse environmental impacts of the facilities’ improvement can be reasonably alleviated.

i. The improvement will not violate accepted engineering standards and practices.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, the director has the authority, in the director’s sole discretion, to require correction of a documented safety-related deficiency.

C. Mitigation denial-appeal process. If the director determines that the proposed mitigation does not meet the requirements of this chapter, the director may deny the proposed improvements and determine the project is inconsistent with this chapter. The director’s decision may be appealed by the applicant to the hearing examiner pursuant to the provisions of KCC 12.11.080.

(Ord. No. 3284, § 1, 3-19-96; Ord. No. 3960, § 3, 6-1-10)


12.11.100 Mobility management zones and standards.

Mobility management zones and the system standards are set forth in Table 1 as follows:

Table 1. Mobility Management Zone Standards

	Zone	Land Use

Type	Land Use

Category	Supplemental Links	Supplemental

Intersections	Arterial

Threshold	Transit 

Service (Peak/ 

Midday) Min-

Utes	Ped/bike/eq

Facilities

(Miles)

	(E–W

Street)	(N–S

Street)

	Street	From	To

	1	CBD	Urban Activity 	N 4th Av	S 240th St	Smith St	Smith St	N 4th Av	1	10/15	2–3

	 	 	Center	Titus	S 240th St 	Smith St	Smith St	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	S 240th St	Central	Titus	 	 	 	 	 

	2	Industrial	Urban	S 212th St	Frager Rd	77th Av S	S 212th St	64th Av S	0.8	15/30	4–5

	3	Industrial	Urban	E Valley Hy	S 192nd St	SR 167	S 212th St	E Valley Hy	0.8	15/30	7–8

	 	 	 	S 212th St	77th Av S	SR 167	S 228th St	E Valley Hy	 	 	 

	 	 	 	S 228th St	76th Av S	E Valley Hy	SR 167	E Valley Hy	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	SR 127	E Valley Hy	 	 	 

	4	Industrial	Urban	66th Av S	S 190th St	S 196th St	S 190th St	W Valley Hy	0.8	15/30	1–2

	 	 	 	62nd Av S	S 190th St	S 196th St	S 196th St	W Valley Hy	 	 	 

	 	 	 	S 194th St	66th Av S	S 196th Wy	58th Pl S	Russell Rd	 	 	 

	 	 	 	S 196th St	W Valley Hy	58th Pl S	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	Russel Rd 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	5	Industrial	Urban	64th Av S	S 212th St	S 228th St	S 212th St	64th Av S	0.8	15/30	9–10

	 	 	 	S 228th St	Frager Rd	76th Av S	S 228th St 	64th Av S	 	 	 

	 	 	 	76th Av S	S 212th St	S 228th St	 	 	 	 	 

	6	MDR	Urban	Military Rd	S 229th Pl	S 272nd St	 	 	0.9	15/30	9–10

	 	 	 	S 228th St	Military Rd	41st Av S	 	 	 	 	 

	7	Agric	Rural	S 212th St	42nd Av S	Frager Rd	 	 	0.7	60/60	20

	 	 	 	S 228th St	41st Av S	Frager Rd	 	 	 	 	 

	8	MDR/Comm	Urban	SR 99	KNT–DM Rd	S 272nd St	 	 	0.9	15/30	4–5

	9	Comm/	Urban	S 228th St	Frager Rd	68th Av S	S 228th St 	64th Av S	0.8	15/30	8–9

	 	Rec/HDR	 	Meeker St	Frager Rd	68th Av S	 	 	 	 	 

	10	CBD	Urb. Activity	W Valley Hy	James St 	Willis St	W Valley Hy	James St	1	10/15	1–2

	 	 	Center	 	 	 	W Valley Hy	Meeker St	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	W Valley Hy	Willis St	 	 	 

	11	MDR	Urban	SE 208th St 	SR 167	116th Av SE 	SE 208th St 	108th Av SE	0.8	30/60	7–8

	 	 	 	108th Av SE 	SE 192nd St 	SE 223rd St	 	 	 	 	 

	12	Ind/	Urban	Central Av 	SR 167	S 240th St	SR 167	Cent. Av	0.8	15/30	2–3

	 	Comm/HDR	 	S 240th St	Cent. Av	88th Av S	S 228th St	Cent. Av	 	 	 

	13	MDR	Urban	S 240th St	Titus	Benson Rd	S 240th St	100th Av SE	0.8	15/30	10–12

	 	 	 	100th Av SE 	SE 228th St 	S 240th St	S 240th St	Benson Rd	 	 	 

	 	 	 	SR 516	S 240th St	94th Av S	SR 516 	Titus	 	 	 

	14	Comm/HDR	Urb. Activity	SE 256th St 	94th Av S	116th Av SE 	SE 256th St 	116th Av SE	0.8	15/30	5–6

	 	 	Center	SR 516	SE 256th St 	116th Av SE	 	 	 	 	 

	15	AG/Park/Ind 	Rural	78th Av S	Willis St	S 277th St	 	 	0.8	15/30	6–8

	 	 	 	Cent. Av S	Willis St 	S 266th St	 	 	 	 	 

	16	MDR	Urban	SR 516	Titus	97th Av S	SR 516	Titus	0.7	15/30	4–5

	17	Ag	Rural	E Valley Hy	Green R	S 277th St	E Valley St	S 277th St	0.7	30/60	5–7

	18	Ag/park	Rural	Green River Rd	 	 	 	 	0.7	DAR	3–5

	19	MDR	Urban	 	 	 	SE 256th St 	116th Av S	0.7	15/30	4–5

	 	 	 	 	 	 	SE 272nd St 	132nd Av S	 	 	 

	20	LDR	Rural	SR 516	112th Av SE 	114th Av SE	 	 	0.7	DAR	3–5

	21	LDR	Rural	SE 208th St 	116th Av SE 	132nd Av SE 	SE 208th St 	116th Av SE	0.7	DAR 	5–7

	 	 	 	SE 240th St 	116th Av SE 	132nd Av SE 	SE 240th St 	116th Av SE	 	 	 

	 	 	 	SE 256th St. 	116th Av SE 	132nd Av SE 	SE 256th St 	116th Av SE	 	 	 

	22	LDR	Rural	148th Av SE 	SE 208th St 	SE 256th St	 	 	0.7	30/60	4–5

(Ord. No. 3284, § 1, 3-19-96)


Chapter 12.13 SCHOOL IMPACT FEES Revised 8/19 Revised 1/20

Sections:

12.13.010    Findings and authority. 

12.13.020    Definitions. 

12.13.030    Impact fee – Applicability. 

12.13.040    Exemptions. 

12.13.050    Interlocal agreement between the city and district. 

12.13.060    Submission of district capital facilities plan and data. 

12.13.070    Annual council review. 

12.13.080    Impact fee program elements. 

12.13.090    Fee calculations. 

12.13.100    Assessment of impact fees. 

12.13.110    Collection of impact fees. 

12.13.120    Determination of the fee, adjustments, exceptions, and appeals. 

12.13.130    Impact fee accounts and refunds. 

12.13.140    Formula for determining school impact fees. 

12.13.150    Repealed.

12.13.160    Base fee schedule. Revised 1/20

12.13.170    Maximum allowable fees. Revised 8/19 Revised 1/20


12.13.010 Findings and authority.

The city council of the city of Kent hereby finds and determines that continuing growth and development in the city of Kent will create additional demand and need for school facilities, and the council finds that the Washington State Growth Management Act requires that new growth and development should pay a proportionate share of the cost of new facilities needed to serve the new growth and development.

Therefore, pursuant to Chapter 82.02 RCW, the council adopts this chapter to assess school impact fees. The provisions of this title shall be liberally construed in order to carry out the purposes of the council in establishing the school impact fee program.

(Ord. No. 3260, § 1, 12-19-95)


12.13.020 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the indicated meanings:

Capacity means the number of students the district’s facilities can accommodate district-wide, based on the district’s standard of service, as determined by the district.

Capital facilities plan means the district’s facilities plan adopted by the school board consisting of:

1. A forecast of future needs for school facilities based on the district’s enrollment projections;

2. An identification of additional demands placed on existing public facilities by new development;

3. The long-range construction and capital improvement projects of the district;

4. The schools under construction or expansion;

5. The proposed locations and capacities of expanded or new school facilities;

6. An inventory of existing school facilities, including permanent, transitional and relocatable facilities;

7. At least a six (6) year financing component, updated as necessary to maintain at least a six (6) year forecast period, for financing needed for school facilities within projected funding levels, and identifying sources of financing for such purposes, including bond issues authorized by the voters;

8. An identification of deficiencies in school facilities serving the student populations and the means by which existing deficiencies will be eliminated within a reasonable period of time; and

9. Any other long-range projects planned by the district.

City means the city of Kent.

Classrooms means educational facilities of the district required to house students for its basic educational program. The classrooms are those facilities the district determines are necessary to best serve its student population. Specialized facilities as identified by the district, including but not limited to gymnasiums, cafeterias, libraries, administrative offices, and child care centers, shall not be counted as classrooms.

Construction cost per student means the cost of construction of a permanent school facility in the district for the grade span of school to be provided, as a function of the district’s design standard per grade span.

Design standard means the space required, by grade span and taking into account the requirements of students with special needs, which is needed in order to fulfill the educational goals of the district as identified in the district’s capital facilities plan.

Developer means the person or entity who owns or holds purchase options or other development control over property for which development activity is proposed.

Development activity means any residential construction or expansion of a building, structure or use, any change in use of a building or structure, or any change in the use of land that creates additional demand for school facilities.

District means any school district whose boundaries include, in whole or in part, areas of the city of Kent.

Elderly means a person aged sixty-two (62) or older.

Encumbered means impact fees identified by the district as being committed as part of the funding for a school facility for which the publicly funded share has been assured or building permits sought or construction contracts let.

Grade span means the categories into which the district groups its grade of students; i.e., elementary, middle or junior high school, and high school.

Impact fee means a payment of money imposed upon development as a condition of development approval to pay for school facilities needed to serve new growth and development, that is reasonably related to the new development that creates additional demand and need for public facilities, that is a proportionate share of the cost of the public facilities, and that is used for facilities that reasonably benefit the new development. “Impact fee” does not include a reasonable permit or application fee.

Impact fee schedule means the table of impact fees to be charged per unit of development, computed by the formula adopted under this chapter, indicating the standard fee amount per dwelling unit that shall be paid as a condition of residential development within the city.

Interlocal agreement means the agreement between the district and the city, governing the operation of the school impact fee program and describing the relationship, duties, and liabilities of the parties.

Permanent facilities means facilities of the district with a fixed foundation which are not relocatable facilities.

Relocatable facilities means any factory-built structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections that is designed to be used as an education space and is needed to prevent the overbuilding of school facilities, to meet the needs of service areas within the district or to cover the gap between the time that families move into new residential developments and the date that construction is completed on permanent school facilities.

Relocatable facilities cost per student means the estimated cost of purchasing and siting a relocatable facility in the district for the grade span of school to be provided, as a function of the district’s design standard per grade span.

Site cost per student means the estimated cost of a site in the district for the grade span of school to be provided, as a function of the district’s design standard per grade span.

Standard of service means the standard adopted by the district which identifies the program year, the class size by grade span and taking into account the requirements of students with special needs, the number of classrooms, the types of facilities the district believes will best serve its student population, and other factors as identified by the district. The district’s standard of service shall not be adjusted for any portion of the classrooms housed in relocatable facilities which are used as transitional facilities or any other specific facilities housed in relocatable facilities.

Student factor means the number derived by the district to describe how many students of each grade span are expected to be generated by a dwelling unit. Student factors shall be based on district records of average actual student generated rates for new developments constructed over a period of not more than five (5) years prior to the date of the fee calculation; provided that, if such information is not available in the district, data from adjacent districts, or districts with similar demographics or county wide averages may be used. Student factors must be updated on an annual basis, and separately determined for single-family and multifamily dwelling units and for grade spans.

Transitional facilities means those school facilities that are being used pending the construction of permanent facilities; provided; that the necessary financial commitments are in place to construct the permanent facilities.

(Ord. No. 3260, § 1, 12-19-95)


12.13.030 Impact fee – Applicability.

Impact fees, based on the impact fee schedule adopted by the city council, using the district’s capital facilities plan, shall be applied to all forms of development activity requiring city review and approval where such requires the issuance of a residential building permit. The impact fees shall be assessed for each dwelling unit, including manufactured homes, at the time of permit application, and shall be collected when the permit is issued as provided for in this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3260, § 1, 12-19-95)


12.13.040 Exemptions.

A. The following development activities are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:

1. Low-income housing as follows:

a. Low-income housing projects that are constructed by public housing agencies or private nonprofit housing developments.

b. Low-income residential units, rented or purchased, that are dedicated and constructed by private developers.

2. Shelters or dwelling units for temporary placement, which provide housing to persons on a temporary basis for not more than two (2) weeks.

3. Construction or remodeling of transitional housing facilities or dwelling units that provide housing to persons on a temporary basis for not more than twenty-four (24) months, in connection with job training, self-sufficiency training and human services counseling, the purpose of which is to help persons make the transition from homelessness to placement in permanent housing.

4. Any form of housing for the elderly, including nursing homes, retirement centers, and any type of housing units for persons age fifty-five (55) and over, which have recorded covenants or recorded declaration of restrictions precluding school-aged children as residents in those units.

5. Rebuilding of legally established dwelling unit(s) destroyed or damaged by fire, flood, explosion, act of God or other accident or catastrophe, or remodeling of existing legally established dwelling unit(s), provided that such rebuilding takes place within a period of one (1) year after destruction, and so long as no additional dwelling units are created.

6. Condominium projects in which existing dwelling units are converted into condominium ownership and where no new dwelling units are created.

7. Any development activity that is exempt from the payment of an impact fee pursuant to RCW 82.02.100, due to mitigation of the same system improvement under the State Environmental Policy Act.

8. Any development activity for which school impacts have been mitigated pursuant to a condition of plat or PUD approval to pay fees, dedicate land or construct or improve school facilities, unless the condition of the plat or PUD approval provides otherwise: provided that the condition of the plat or PUD approval predates the effective date of fee imposition.

9. Any development activity for which school impacts have been mitigated pursuant to a voluntary agreement entered into with the district to pay fees, dedicate land or construct or improve school facilities, unless the terms of the voluntary agreement provide otherwise provided that the agreement predates the effective date of fee imposition.

B. For purposes of this section, a low-income housing project unit or a low-income residential rental unit is one that has a maximum rent and a maximum income level for tenants equal to or less than fifty (50) percent of the countywide median household income, adjusted for household size. A low-income residential purchased unit is one that has a sales price of one hundred thirty thousand dollars ($130,000) or less for single-family houses, and ninety-five thousand dollars ($95,000) or less for multifamily units. These maximum sale prices shall be adjusted by the Seattle CPI-U consumer price index each year, with 1992 being the base year. The purchaser’s family income cannot exceed eighty (80) percent of the countywide median household income, adjusted for household size.

C. When a low-income purchased unit has received a building permit, the director of the finance department shall record a notice of the exemption and the income qualification requirements for such unit with the King County auditor.

D. When a low-income purchased unit is sold or rented to a person who does not qualify as a low-income purchaser or tenant, an amount equal to the impact fee on the date of the sale or rental shall be paid by the seller or the property owner to the city.

E. The director of the planning department shall review requests for exemptions from impact fees under subsection (A) of this section pursuant to criteria and procedures adopted by administrative rule, and shall advise the developer in writing of the granted or denial of the request. In addition, the director shall notify the school district of all applications for exemption when they are received and shall notify the school district when such requests are granted or denied.

F. Impact fees for low-income housing and other development activities with broad public purposes pursuant to RCW 82.02.060(2) shall be paid from public funds. The impact fees for these units shall be considered paid for by the school district through its other funding sources, without the district actually transferring funds from its other funding sources into the impact fee account.

(Ord. No. 3260, § 1, 12-19-95)


12.13.050 Interlocal agreement between the city and district.

As a condition of the city’s authorization and adoption of a school impact fee ordinance, the city and district shall enter into an interlocal agreement governing the operation of the school impact fee program, and describing the relationship and liabilities of the parties thereunder.

(Ord. No. 3260, § 1, 12-19-95)


12.13.060 Submission of district capital facilities plan and data.

A. On an annual basis, the district shall submit the following materials to the city council:

1. The district’s capital facilities plan (as defined in KCC 12.13.010 herein) and adopted by the school board;

2. The district’s enrollment projections over the next six (6) years, its current enrollment and the district’s enrollment projections and actual enrollment from the previous year;

3. The district’s standard of service;

4. The district’s overall capacity over the next six (6) years, which shall take into account the available capacity from school facilities planned by the district but not yet built and be a function of the district’s standard of service as measured by the number of students which can be housed in district facilities;

5. An inventory of the district’s existing facilities.

B. To the extent that the district’s standard of service identifies a deficiency in its existing facilities, the district’s capital facilities plan must identify the sources of funding other than impact fees, for building or acquiring the necessary facilities to serve the existing student population in order to eliminate the deficiencies within a reasonable period of time.

C. Facilities to meet future demand shall be designed to meet the adopted standard of service. If sufficient funding is not projected to be available to fully fund a capital facilities plan which meets the adopted standard of service, the district’s capital facilities plan should document the reason for the funding gap, and identify all sources of funding that the district plans to use to meet the adopted standard of service.

D. The district shall also submit an annual report to the city council showing the capital improvements which were serviced in whole or in part by the impact fees.

E. In its development of the financing plan component of the capital facilities plan, the district shall plan on a six (6) year horizon and shall demonstrate its best efforts by taking the following steps:

1. Establish a six (6) year financing plan, and propose the necessary bond issues and levies required by and consistent with that plan and as-approved by the school board consistent with RCW 28A.53.020, 84.52.052 and 84.52.056 as amended; and

2. Apply to the state for funding, and comply with the state requirements for eligibility to the best of the district’s ability.

(Ord. No. 3260, § 1, 12-19-95)


12.13.070 Annual council review.

On at least an annual basis, the city council shall review the information submitted by the district pursuant to KCC 12.13.060(A) herein. The review shall occur in conjunction with any update of the capital facilities plan element of the city’s comprehensive plan.

(Ord. No. 3260, § 1, 12-19-95)


12.13.080 Impact fee program elements.

A. Impact fees will be assessed on every new dwelling unit in the district for which a fee schedule has been established.

B. Impact fees will be imposed on a district by district basis, on behalf of any school district which provides to the city a capital facilities plan, the district’s standards of service for the various grade spans, estimates of the cost of providing needed facilities and other capital improvements, and the data from the district called for by the formula in KCC 12.13.140. Any impact fee imposed shall be reasonably related to the impact caused by the development, and shall not exceed a proportionate share of the cost of system improvements that are reasonably related to the development. The impact fee formula shall account in the fee calculation for future revenue the district will receive from the development. The ordinance adopting the fee schedule shall specify under what circumstances the fee may be adjusted in the interests of fairness.

C. The impact fee shall be based on the capital facilities plan developed by the district and approved by the school board, and adopted by reference by the city as part of the capital facilities element of the comprehensive plan for the purpose of establishing the fee program.

(Ord. No. 3260, § 1, 12-19-95)


12.13.090 Fee calculations.

A. The fee shall be calculated based on the formula set out in KCC 12.13.140.

B. Separate fees shall be calculated for single-family and multifamily types of dwelling units, and separate student generation rates must be determined by the district for each type of dwelling unit. For the purpose of this chapter, mobile homes shall be treated as single-family dwellings and duplexes shall be treated as multifamily dwellings.

C. The fee shall be calculated on a district-wide basis using the appropriate factors and data to be supplied by the district, as indicated in KCC 12.13.140. The fee calculations shall also be made on a district-wide basis to assure maximum utilization of all school facilities in the district used currently or within the last two (2) years for instructional purposes.

D. The formula in KCC 12.13.140 provides a credit for the anticipated tax contributions that would be made by the developments based on historical levels of voter support for bond issues in the district.

E. The formula also provides for a credit for school facilities or sites actually provided by a developer which the district finds acceptable.

F. The city may also impose an application fee to cover the reasonable costs of administration of the impact fee program.

(Ord. No. 3260, § 1, 12-19-95)


12.13.100 Assessment of impact fees.

At the time of application for a residential building permit with the city, including an application for a manufactured home, the school impact fee shall be assessed based on the impact fee schedule then in effect using the capital facilities plan of the district adopted by the city council as part of the city’s comprehensive plan. The impact fee and the application fee shall be collected by the city, and maintained in separate accounts. All school impact fees shall be paid to the district from the school impact fee account monthly. The city shall retain all application fees associated with the city’s administration of the impact fee program.

(Ord. No. 3260, § 1, 12-19-95; Ord. No. 4057, § 1, 12-11-12)


12.13.110 Collection of impact fees.

A. For residential developments located in school districts where impact fees have been adopted by city ordinance, the city shall collect impact fees based upon the schedule set forth in KCC 12.13.140, and shall be collected by the city from any applicant where such development activity requires issuance of a residential building permit or a manufactured home permit.

B. For application for single-family and multifamily residential building permits and manufactured home permits, the total amount of the impact fees shall be collected from the applicant when the building permit is issued, using the impact fee schedules in effect at the time of application.

C. The city shall not issue the required building permit or manufactured home permit unless and until the impact fees set forth in the impact fee schedule have been paid.

(Ord. No. 3260, § 1, 12-19-95)


12.13.120 Determination of the fee, adjustments, exceptions, and appeals.

A. The city shall determine a developer’s impact fee, based upon the schedule provided by the district.

B. Arrangement may be made for later payment of the impact fee with the approval of the district only if the district determines that it will be unable to use or will not need the payment until a later time; provided, that sufficient security, as defined by the district, is provided to assure payment. Security shall be made to and held by the district, which will be responsible for tracking and documenting the security interest.

C. The fee amount established in the schedule shall be reduced by the amount of any payment previously made for the lot or development activity in question, either as a condition of approval or pursuant to a voluntary agreement.

D. Whenever a developer is granted approval subject to a condition that the developer actually provide a school facility acceptable to the district, the developer shall be entitled to a credit for the actual cost of providing the facility, against the fee that would be chargeable under the formula provided by this chapter. The cost of construction shall be estimated at the time of approval, but must be documented, and the documentation confirmed after the construction is completed to assure that an accurate credit amount is provided. If construction costs are less than the calculated fee amount, the difference remaining shall be chargeable as a school impact fee.

E. The standard impact fees may be adjusted, if one (1) of the following circumstances exists; provided, that the discount set forth in the fee formula fails to adjust for the error in the calculation or fails to ameliorate for the unfairness of the fee:

1. The developer demonstrates that an impact fee assessment was improperly calculated; or

2. Unusual circumstances identified by the developer demonstrate that if the standard impact fee amount was applied to the development, it would be unfair or unjust.

F. In cases where a developer requests an independent fee calculation, adjustment exception, or a credit pursuant to RCW 82.02.060(3), the city shall consult with the district and the district shall advise the city prior to the city making the final impact fee determination.

G. A developer may provide studies and data to demonstrate that any particular factor used by the district may not be appropriately applied to the development proposal.

H. Any appeal of the decision of the city with regard to fee amounts shall follow the process for the appeal of the underlying development application, as set forth in Kent City Code. Any errors in the formula identified as a result of the appeal should be referred to the council for possible modification.

I. Impact fees may be paid under protest in order to obtain a residential building permit or a mobile home permit.

(Ord. No. 3260, § 1, 12-19-95)


12.13.130 Impact fee accounts and refunds.

A. Impact fee receipts shall be earmarked specifically and retained in a special interest-bearing account established by the district solely for the district’s school impact fees. All interest shall be retained in the account and expended for the purpose or purposes for which impact fees were imposed. Annually, the district, based in part on its report prepared pursuant to KCC 12.13.060, shall prepare a report on the impact fee account showing the source and amount of all monies collected, earned, or received, and capital or system improvements that were financed in whole or in part by impact fees. The district shall submit a copy of this report to the city council. The city shall maintain separate school impact fee and administration fee accounts pursuant to KCC 12.13.110, and shall prepare a report on the source, and amount of all school impact fees collected and transferred to the district.

B. Impact fees for the district’s system improvements shall be expended by the district only in conformance with the capital facilities plan element of the comprehensive plan.

C. Impact fees shall be expended or encumbered by the district for a permissible use within six (6) years of receipt by the district, unless there exists an extraordinary or compelling reason for fees to be held longer than six (6) years. Such extraordinary or compelling reasons shall be identified to the city by the district in a written report. The city council shall identify the district’s extraordinary and compelling reasons for the fees to be held longer than six (6) years in the council’s own written findings.

D. The current owner of property on which an impact fee has been paid may receive a refund of such fees if the impact fees have not been expended or encumbered within six (6) years of receipt of the funds by the district on school facilities intended to benefit the development activity for which the impact fees were paid. In determining whether impact fees have been encumbered, impact fees shall be considered encumbered on a first in, first out basis. The district shall notify potential claimants by first class mail deposited with the United States postal service addressed to the owner of the property as shown in the county tax records.

E. An owner’s request for a refund must be submitted to the district in writing within one (1) year of the date the right to claim the refund arises or the date that notice is given, whichever date is later. Any impact fees that are not expended or encumbered by the district in conformance with the capital facilities plan within these time limitations, and for which no application for a refund has been made within this one (1) year period, shall be retained and expended consistent with the provisions of this section. Refunds of impact fees shall include any interest earned on the impact fees.

F. Should the city seek to terminate any or all school impact fee requirements, all unexpended or unencumbered funds, including interest earned, shall be refunded to the current owner of the property for which a school impact fee was paid. Upon the finding that any or all fee requirements are to be terminated, the city shall place notice of such termination and the availability of the refunds in a newspaper of general circulation at least two (2) times and shall notify all potential claimants by first class mail addressed to the owner of the property as shown in the county tax records. All funds available for refund shall be retained for a period of one (1) year. At the end of one (1) year, any remaining funds shall be retained by the district, but must be expended by the district, consistent with the provisions of this section. The notice requirement set forth above shall not apply if there are no unexpended or unencumbered balances with the account or accounts being terminated.

G. A developer may request and shall receive a refund, including interest earned on the impact fees, when:

1. The developer does not proceed to finalize the development activity as required by statute or city code including the International Building Code, the International Residential Code, or other applicable building codes, as adopted and amended in Ch. 14.01 KCC; and

2. No impact on the district has resulted. “Impact” shall be deemed to include cases where the district has expended or encumbered the impact fees in good faith prior to the application for a refund. In the event that the district has expended or encumbered the fees in good faith, no refund shall be forthcoming. However, if within a period of three (3) years, the same or subsequent owner of the property proceeds with the same or substantially similar development activity, the owner shall be eligible for a credit. The owner must petition the district and provide receipts of impact fees paid by the owner for a development of the same or substantially similar nature on the same property or some portion thereof. The district shall determine whether to grant a credit, and such determinations may be appealed by following the procedures set forth in KCC 12.13.120 above.

H. Interest due upon the refund of impact fees required by this section shall be calculated according to the average amount received by the district on invested funds throughout the period during which the fees were retained.

(Ord. No. 3260, § 1, 12-19-95; Ord. No. 3690, § 13, 5-4-04)


12.13.140 Formula for determining school impact fees.

A. School impact fees shall be determined as follows:

IF:

A = Student factor for dwelling unit type and grade span x site cost per student for sites for facilities in that grade span = Full cost fee for site acquisition cost

B = Student factor for dwelling unit type and grade span x school construction cost per student for facilities in that grade span x ratio of district’s square footage of permanent facilities to total square footage of facilities = Full cost fee for school construction

C = Student factor for dwelling unit type and grade span x relocatable facilities cost per student for facilities in that grade span x ratio of district’s square footage of relocatable facilities to total square footage of facilities = Full cost fee for relocatable facilities

D = Student factor for dwelling unit type and grade span “Boeckh Index” x SPI square ft per student factor x state match % = State match credit, and

A1, B1, C1, D1 = A, B, C, D for elementary grade spans

A2, B2, C2, D2 = A, B, C, D, for middle/junior high grade spans

A3, B3, C3, D3 = A, B, C, D for high school grade spans

TC = Tax payment credit = The net present value of the average assessed value in the district for unit type x current school district capital property tax levy rate, using a ten (10) year discount period and current interest rate (based on the bond buyer twenty (20) bond general obligation bond index)

FC = Facilities credit = the per-dwelling-unit value of any site or facilities provided directly by the development

Then the unfunded need = UN = A1 + . . . + C3 (D1-D2-D3) – TC

And the developer fee obligation = F = U/N2

And the net fee obligation = NF = F – FC

B. Notes to formula.

1. Student factors are to be provided by the district based on district records of average actual student generation rates for new developments constructed over a period of not more than five (5) years prior to the date of the fee calculation; if such information is not available in the district, data from adjacent districts, districts with similar demographics, or countywide averages must be used. Student factors must be separately determined for single-family and multifamily dwelling units, and for grade spans.

2. The “Boeckh index” is a construction trade index of construction costs for various kinds of buildings; it is adjusted annually.

3. The district is to provide its own site and facilities standards and projected costs to be used in the formula, consistent with the requirements of this chapter.

4. The formula can be applied by using the following table:

 

	Table for Calculating School Impact Fee Obligations for Residential Dwelling Units

(to be separately calculated for single-family and multifamily units)

	A1=	Elementary school site cost per student x the student factor	=

	A2=	Middle/junior high site cost per student x the student factor	=

	A3=	High school site cost per student x the student factor	=

	A=	A1 + A2 + A3	=

	B1=	Elementary school construction cost per student x the student factor	=

	B2=	Middle/junior high construction cost per student x the student factor	=

	B3=	High school construction cost per student x the student factor	=

	B=	(B1 + B2 + B3) x square footage of permanent facilities  total square footage of facilities	=

	C1=	Elementary school relocatable facility cost per student x the student factor	=

	C2=	Middle/junior high relocatable facility cost per student x the student factor	=

	C3=	High school relocatable facility cost per student x the student factor	=

	C=	(C1 + C2 + C3) x square footage of permanent facilities  total square footage of facilities	=

	D1=	Boeckh index x SPI square footage per student for elementary school x state match % x student factor	=

	D2=	Boeckh index x SPI square footage per student for middle/junior high school x state match % x student factor	=

	D3=	Boeckh index x SPI square footage per student for high school x state match % x student factor	=

	D=	D1 + D2 + D3	=

	TC=	((1+i)10) - 1 x average assessed value for the dwelling unit type in the school district

 i(1 + i)10

x current school district capital property tax levy rate where i+ the current interest rate as stated in the bond buy twenty (20) bond general obligation bond index	 

	FC=	Value of site of facilities provided directly by the development  number of dwelling units in development	 

	Total unfunded need = A + B + C - D =	 

	    A

    +B

    +C

 

    -D 	Subtotal

    -TC

	Total unfunded need UN = divided by 2 = Developer fee obligation

    Less FC (if applicable)

    Net fee obligation

(Ord. No. 3260, § 1, 12-19-95)


12.13.150 Termination of school impact fees.

Repealed by Ord. No. 3484, § 1, 11-16-99.

(Ord. No. 3260, § 1, 12-19-95; Ord. No. 3339, § 1, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 3393, § 1, 2-17-98)


12.13.160 Base fee schedule. Revised 1/20

The following fees shall be assessed for the indicated types of development:

	School District	Single-Family	Multifamily	Multifamily Studio

	Kent, No. 415	$5,554	$2,345	$0

	Federal Way, No. 210	$5,035	$9,193	$0

	Auburn, No. 408	$6,905	$9,193	$0

	Highline, No. 401	$0	$0	$0

(Ord. No. 3281, § 3, 3-5-96; Ord. No. 3412 § 2, 7-21-98; Ord. No. 3482, § 2, 11-16-99; Ord. No. 3546, § 1, 3-6-01; Ord. No. 3591, § 1, 2-19-02; Ord. No. 3637, § 1, 3-18-03; Ord. No. 3675, § 1, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 3730, § 1, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 3777, § 1, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 3827, § 1, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 3870, § 1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 3904, § 1, 12-9-08; Ord. No. 3941, § 1, 12-8-09; Ord. No. 3987, § 1, 12-14-10; Ord. No. 4024, § 1, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 4057, § 2, 12-11-12; Ord. No. 4101, § 1, 12-10-13; Ord. No. 4138, § 1, 12-16-14; Ord. No. 4179, § 1, 12-8-15; Ord. No. 4228, § 1, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 4265, § 1, 12-12-17; Ord. No. 4290, § 1, 11-20-18; Ord. No. 4348, § 1, 11-19-19) 


12.13.170 Maximum allowable fees. Revised 8/19 Revised 1/20

School impact fees provided by this chapter shall be assessed based on the calculation set forth in KCC 12.13.140, unless they exceed a maximum allowable fee as set forth in this section. There shall be an increase in the maximum allowable fee each year by the same percentage as the percentage change in the previous calendar year’s average monthly Engineering News-Record (ENR) Seattle Area Construction Cost Index values, relative to the corresponding average monthly ENR Construction Cost Index values for the preceding year, as calculated from August 1st through July 31st.

The maximum allowable fee is set at $9,021 for single-family dwelling units and a maximum of $9,193 for multifamily dwelling units for 2020.

(Ord. No. 4278, § 1, 6-5-18; Ord. No. 4290, § 2, 11-20-18; Ord. No. 4329, § 4, 7-16-19; Ord. No. 4348, § 2, 11-19-19)


Chapter 12.14 TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEES

Sections:

12.14.010    Title.

12.14.020    Purpose and intent.

12.14.030    Findings and authority.

12.14.040    Definitions.

12.14.045    Establishment of service area.

12.14.050    Transportation impact fees methodology and applicability.

12.14.060    Collection of impact fees.

12.14.070    Independent fee calculations.

12.14.080    Exemptions.

12.14.090    Credits for dedications, construction of improvements, and past tax payments.

12.14.100    Adjustments for future tax payments and other revenue sources.

12.14.110    Appeals.

12.14.120    Establishment of transportation impact fee accounts.

12.14.130    Administrative guidelines.

12.14.140    Refunds and offsets.

12.14.150    Use of funds.

12.14.160    Review and adjustment of rates.

12.14.170    Administrative fees.

12.14.180    Existing authority unimpaired.

12.14.190    City of Kent transportation impact fee schedule. 


12.14.010 Title. 

This code chapter shall be hereinafter known as the city of Kent transportation impact fees.

(Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 3973, § 1, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 3992, § 1, 3-1-11)


12.14.020 Purpose and intent. 

The purpose and intent of this chapter are for the collection of transportation impact fees for streets and roads, and providing for certain other matters in connection therewith.

(Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 3973, § 1, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 3992, § 1, 3-1-11)


12.14.030 Findings and authority. 

The city council of the city of Kent hereby finds and determines that development activities, including but not limited to new residential, commercial, retail, office, and industrial development in the city of Kent, will create additional demand and need for system improvements in the city, and the council finds that such new growth and development should pay a proportionate share of the cost of system improvements needed to serve the new growth and development. The city of Kent has conducted extensive research documenting the procedures for measuring the impact of new developments on public facilities, has prepared the “Rate Study for Transportation Impact Fees,” city of Kent, dated May 2010 (“rate study”), attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit 1, and incorporates that rate study into this chapter by this reference. In recognition that fewer trips are generated and average trip lengths are reduced to and from downtown Kent, as hereinafter defined, the city has also prepared a memorandum entitled “Impact Fee Rate Adjustment for Downtown Kent,” dated June 28, 2010 (“downtown Kent rate memorandum”), attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit 2, and incorporates that memorandum into this chapter by this reference. The rate study and the downtown Kent rate memorandum utilize a methodology for calculating transportation impact fees that incorporate, among other things, all of the requirements of RCW 82.02.060(1). Copies of the most current versions of the rate study and the downtown Kent rate memorandum shall be kept on file with the city clerk and are available to the public for review. Therefore, pursuant to Chapter 82.02 RCW, the council adopts this chapter to assess transportation impact fees for streets and roads. The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed in order to carry out the purposes of the council in providing for the assessment of transportation impact fees.

(Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 3973, § 1, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 3992, § 1, 3-1-11)


12.14.040 Definitions.

The following words and terms shall have the following meanings for the purposes of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Terms otherwise not defined herein shall be defined pursuant to RCW 82.02.090, or given their usual and customary meaning.

A. Building permit means an official document or certification which is issued by the city and which authorizes the construction, alteration, enlargement, conversion, reconstruction, remodeling, rehabilitation, erection, demolition, moving, or repair of a building or structure or any portions thereof.

B. Capital facilities plan means the capital facilities element of the city’s Comprehensive Plan adopted pursuant to Chapter 36.70A RCW and such plan as amended.

C. City means the city of Kent.

D. Council means the city council of the city of Kent.

E. Department means the city’s department of public works.

F. Development activity means any construction or expansion of a building, structure, or use, any change in use of a building or structure, or any change in the use of land that generates at least one p.m. peak hour trip.

G. Development approval means any written authorization from the city of Kent which authorizes the commencement of a development activity.

H. Director means the public works director or the director’s designee.

I. Downtown Kent means that area shown on the map incorporated into the downtown Kent rate memorandum. A legal description of downtown Kent will be prepared and kept on file with the downtown Kent rate memorandum for further reference.

J. Downtown Kent rate memorandum means the Exhibit 2 memorandum entitled “Impact Fee Rate Adjustment for Downtown Kent,” dated June 28, 2010, or as hereinafter amended.

K. Encumber means to reserve, set aside, or otherwise earmark the transportation impact fees in order to pay for commitments, contractual obligations, or other liabilities incurred for system improvements.

L. Feepayer is a person, corporation, partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity, or department or bureau of any governmental entity or municipal corporation commencing a development activity which creates the demand for additional system improvements and which requires the issuance of a building permit or a permit for a change of use. Feepayer includes an applicant for a transportation impact fee credit.

M. Hearing examiner shall mean that person or persons appointed by the mayor pursuant to Chapter 2.32 KCC.

N. Independent fee calculation means the transportation impact fee calculation and/or economic documentation prepared by a feepayer, to support the assessment of a transportation impact fee other than by the use of the rates published pursuant to KCC 12.14.190, or the calculations prepared by the director where none of the fee categories or fee amounts published pursuant to KCC 12.14.190 accurately describe or capture the impacts of the development activity on public facilities. 

O. KCC means the Kent City Code or, when followed by a numerical designation, a provision of the Kent City Code.

P. Owner means the owner of record of real property, although when real property is being purchased under a real estate contract, the purchaser shall be considered the owner of the real property if the contract is recorded.

Q. Permit for change of use or change of use permit means an official document which is issued by the city which authorizes a change of use of an existing building or structure or land. 

R. P.M. peak hour means the sixty (60) minute period between 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. which experiences the highest volume of traffic on a road or street or passing through a road or street intersection.

S. P.M. peak hour trips means the total vehicular trips entering and leaving a place of new development activity on the adjacent public road or street during the p.m. peak hour.

T. Project improvements means site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide service for a particular development project, are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of the project, and are not system improvements. No improvement or facility included in a capital facilities plan adopted by the council shall be considered a project improvement.

U. Public facilities, for purposes of this chapter, means the following capital facilities owned or operated by the city of Kent or other governmental entities: public streets and roads.

V. Rate study means the Exhibit 1 “Rate Study for Transportation Impact Fees,” city of Kent, dated May 2010, or as hereinafter amended.

W. Single-family residential permit means a permit for a single-family dwelling as that term is defined in KCC 15.02.115.

X. Street or road means a public right-of-way and all related appurtenances, including lawfully required off-site mitigation, which enables motor vehicles, transit vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians to travel between destinations, and affords the principal means of access to abutting property. For purposes of this chapter, public streets and roads are collectively referred to as “transportation.”

Y. System improvements, for purposes of this chapter, means public transportation facilities that are included in the city of Kent’s capital facilities plan, and such plan as amended, and are designed to provide service to the community at large, in contrast to project improvements.

Z. Transportation means public streets and roads and related appurtenances.

AA. Transportation impact fee means a payment of money imposed by the city of Kent on development activity pursuant to this chapter as a condition of granting development approval. Transportation impact fee does not include a reasonable permit fee, an application fee, the administrative fee for collecting and handling impact fees, or the cost of reviewing independent fee calculations.

BB. Transportation impact fee account(s) means the separate accounting structure(s) within the city’s established accounts, which structure(s) shall identify separately earmarked funds and which shall be established for the transportation impact fees that are collected. The account(s) shall be established pursuant to KCC 12.14.100, and shall comply with the requirements of RCW 82.02.070.

(Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 3973, § 1, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 3992, § 1, 3-1-11)


12.14.045 Establishment of service area.

A. The city hereby establishes, as the service area for transportation impact fees, the city of Kent, including all property located within the corporate city limits.

B. The scope of the service area is hereby found to be reasonable and established on the basis of sound planning and engineering principles, and consistent with RCW 82.02.060.

(Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 3973, § 1, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 3992, § 1, 3-1-11)


12.14.050 Transportation impact fees methodology and applicability.

The transportation impact fees published pursuant to KCC 12.14.190 are generated from the formulae for calculating transportation impact fees set forth in the rate study and the downtown Kent rate memorandum. Except as otherwise provided for independent fee calculations in KCC 12.14.070, exemptions in KCC 12.14.080, and credits in KCC 12.14.090, all new development activity in the city will be charged the transportation impact fee applicable to the type of development listed in the fee schedule adopted pursuant to KCC 12.14.190.

(Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 3973, § 1, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 3992, § 1, 3-1-11)


12.14.060 Collection of impact fees.

A. The city shall collect transportation impact fees, based on the rates published pursuant to KCC 12.14.190, from any applicant seeking development approval from the city for any development activity within the city, when such development activity requires the issuance of a building permit or a permit for a change in use, and creates a demand for additional public facilities.

B. Maximum allowable transportation impact fees are established by the rate study and the downtown Kent rate memorandum. The rate shall be thirty (30) percent of the maximum allowable amount.

C. On January 1st of each calendar year, the director shall increase or decrease the fees by the same percentage as the percentage change in the previous calendar year’s average monthly Engineering News Record (ENR) Seattle Area Construction Cost Index values, relative to the corresponding average monthly ENR Construction Cost Index values for the preceding year.

D. When a transportation impact fee, pursuant to subsection (A) of this section, applies to a change of use permit, the transportation impact fee shall be the applicable transportation impact fee for the land use category of the new use, less any transportation impact fee previously paid for the land use category of the prior use. For purposes of this provision, a change of use should be reviewed based on the land use category provided in the rate study that best captures the broader use of the property under development. Changes in use or tenancy, if consistent with the general character of the building or building aggregations (i.e., “industrial park,” or “specialty retail”) should not be considered a change in use that is subject to a transportation impact fee. Further, minor changes in tenancies that are consistent with the general character of the included structure, building, or previous use should not be considered changes in use subject to a transportation impact fee. If no transportation impact fee was paid for the prior use, the transportation impact fee for the new use shall be reduced by an amount equal to the current transportation impact fee rate for the prior use. Vacant buildings shall be assessed as if in the most recent legally established use as shown on a Kent business license, development permit, or other reliable and verifiable evidence acceptable to the director.

E. For mixed use developments, transportation impact fees shall be imposed for the proportionate share of each land use, based on the applicable measurement in the transportation impact fee rates published pursuant to KCC 12.14.190.

F. Transportation impact fees shall be determined at the time the complete application for a building permit or a permit for a change in use is submitted using the transportation impact fees then in effect. Transportation impact fees shall be due and payable before the building permit or permit for a change of use is issued by the city.

G. Until December 31, 2013, at the time of issuance of any single-family residential building permit for a dwelling unit that is being constructed for initial sale, the payment of the transportation impact fee may be deferred if the owner of the underlying real property executes a first position lien in favor of the city in the amount of the transportation impact fee in effect at the time of the deferral. The city shall record the lien against the real property and the lien amount shall be paid by the seller to the city at the time of closing of the sale of the real property and single-family residence.

1. A feepayer who chooses to defer the transportation impact fee must combine the lien with a lien for deferring the water development system charge in KCC 7.02.090, for the transportation improvement fee in KCC 12.11.090 or Chapter 43.21C RCW, and for the drainage development charge in KCC 7.05.165.

2. A deferral fee, in the amount set by city council resolution for city of Kent planning and land use fees, “fee deferral lien,” will be due at the time of the application for deferral. The administrative fee set out in KCC 12.14.170 will not be deferred.

H. Feepayers allowed credits prior to the submittal of the complete building permit application or an application for a permit for a change of use shall submit, along with the complete application, a copy of the letter prepared by the director setting forth the dollar amount of the credit allowed. Transportation impact fees, as determined after the application of any credits, shall be collected from the feepayer no later than the time a building permit or permit for a change of use is issued.

I. The department shall not issue the required building permit or the permit for the change of use until the transportation impact fees have been paid.

(Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 3973, § 1, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 3992, § 1, 3-1-11; Ord. No. 4153, § 1, 6-2-15)


12.14.070 Independent fee calculations.

A. If, in the judgment of the director, none of the fee categories or fee amounts set forth in KCC 12.14.060 accurately describes or captures the impacts of a new development on streets, the department may conduct independent fee calculations and the director may impose alternative fees on a specific development based on those calculations. The alternative fees and the calculations shall be set forth in writing and shall be mailed to the feepayer.

B. A feepayer may opt not to have the transportation impact fees determined according to the fee structure published pursuant to KCC 12.14.190, in which case the feepayer shall prepare and submit to the director an independent fee calculation for the development activity for which a building permit is being sought. The documentation submitted shall show the basis upon which the independent fee calculation was made. An independent fee calculation shall use the same methodology used to establish transportation impact fees adopted pursuant to KCC 12.14.190, shall be limited to adjustments in trip generation rates and lengths used in the rate study or downtown Kent rate memorandum, and shall not include travel demand forecasts, trip distribution, transportation service areas, costs of road projects, or cost allocation procedures.

C. Any feepayer submitting an independent fee calculation will be required to pay the city of Kent a fee to cover the cost of reviewing the independent fee calculation. The fee required by the city for conducting the review of the independent fee calculation shall be five hundred dollars ($500), unless otherwise established by the director, and shall be paid by the feepayer prior to issuance of the director’s determination. 

D. There is a rebuttable presumption that the calculations set forth in the rate study and downtown Kent rate memorandum are valid. The director shall consider the documentation submitted by the feepayer, but is not required to accept such documentation or analysis which the director reasonably deems to be inapplicable, inaccurate, incomplete, or unreliable. The director may require the feepayer to submit additional or different documentation for consideration. The director is authorized to adjust the transportation impact fees on a case-by-case basis based on the independent fee calculation, the specific characteristics of the development, and/or principles of fairness. The fees or alternative fees and the calculations therefor shall be set forth in writing and shall be mailed to the feepayer.

E. Determinations made by the director pursuant to this section may be appealed to the office of the hearing examiner under the procedures set forth in KCC 12.14.110.

(Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 3973, § 1, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 3992, § 1, 3-1-11)


12.14.080 Exemptions.

A. Except as provided for below, the following shall be exempted from the payment of all transportation impact fees:

1. Alteration or replacement of an existing nonresidential structure that does not expand the usable space or change the existing land use.

2. Miscellaneous improvements which do not generate increased p.m. peak trips, including, but not limited to, fences, walls, residential swimming pools, and signs.

3. Demolition or moving of a structure when additional p.m. peak hour trips are not generated.

4. A change of use that does not generate one (1) or more p.m. peak hour trips.

5. Properties that have undergone prior State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) review and have received a final decision that includes transportation mitigation payment requirements through an environmental mitigation agreement or similar document, on the condition that the SEPA mitigation payment obligation has or will be paid by the time the transportation impact fee, if applicable, would be due.

B. The director shall be authorized to determine whether a particular development activity falls within an exemption identified in this chapter, in any other KCC provision, or under other applicable law. Determinations of the director shall be in writing and shall be subject to the appeals procedures set forth in KCC 12.14.110.

(Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 3973, § 1, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 3992, § 1, 3-1-11)


12.14.090 Credits for dedications, construction of improvements, and past tax payments.

A. A feepayer may request that a credit or credits for impact fees be awarded to him/her for the total value of system improvements, including dedications of land and improvements, and/or construction provided by the feepayer. The application for credits shall be presented by the feepayer on forms to be provided by the department and shall include the content designated in such forms. Credits will be given only if the land, improvements, and/or the facility constructed:

1. Are included within the capital facilities plan or would serve the goals and objectives of the capital facilities plan;

2. Are at suitable sites and constructed at acceptable quality as determined by the city;

3. Serve to offset impacts of the feepayer’s development activity; and

4. Are for one (1) or more of the transportation projects listed in the rate study as the basis for calculating the transportation impact fee.

B. For credits for dedications:

1. The director shall determine if requests for credits meet the criteria in subsection (A) of this section or other applicable law. Determinations of the director shall be in writing and shall be subject to the appeals procedure set forth in KCC 12.14.110.

2. For each request for a credit or credits, the director shall select an appraiser or, in the alternative, the feepayer may select an independent appraiser acceptable to the director.

3. Unless approved otherwise by the director, the appraiser must be an MAI (member of the American Institute of Appraisers) and be licensed in good standing pursuant to Chapter 18.40 RCW et seq. in the category for the property to be appraised, and shall not have a fiduciary or personal interest in the property being appraised.

4. The appraisal will be accepted or rejected by the director and may be subject to independent review.

5. The feepayer shall pay the actual costs for the appraisal and an independent review, if required, unless the director determines that payment for independent review should not be at the feepayer’s expense.

6. After considering the appraisal and the review, the director shall provide the applicant with a determination setting forth the dollar amount of any credit, the reason for the credit, the legal description of the real property dedicated where applicable, and the legal description or other adequate description of the project or development to which the credit may be applied. The feepayer must sign and date a duplicate copy of such determination indicating his/her agreement to the terms of the letter or certificate, and return such signed document to the director before the transportation impact fee credit will be awarded. The failure of the feepayer to sign, date, and return such document within sixty (60) calendar days of the date of the determination shall nullify the credit. If credit is denied, the feepayer shall be notified in a letter that includes the reasons for denial. 

7. No credit shall be given for project improvements.

C. A feepayer may request that a credit or credits for transportation impact fees be awarded to him/her for past tax payments. For each request for a credit or credits for past tax payments for transportation impact fees, the feepayer shall submit receipts and a calculation of past tax payments earmarked for or proratable to the particular system improvement. The director shall determine the amount of credits, if any, for past tax payments for system improvements.

D. Any claim for credit must be received by the city no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the submission of an application for a building permit or an application for a permit for a change in use. The failure to timely file such a claim shall constitute a final bar to later request any such credit.

E. Determinations made by the director pursuant to this section shall be subject to the appeals procedures set forth in KCC 12.14.110. 

(Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 3973, § 1, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 3992, § 1, 3-1-11)


12.14.100 Adjustments for future tax payments and other revenue sources. 

Pursuant to and consistent with the requirements of RCW 82.02.060, the rate study and downtown Kent rate memorandum have provided adjustments for future taxes to be paid by the development activity which are earmarked for or proratable to the same new public facilities which will serve the new development. The transportation impact fees published pursuant to KCC 12.14.190 have been reasonably adjusted for taxes and other revenue sources which are anticipated to be available to fund public improvements.

(Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 3973, § 1, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 3992, § 1, 3-1-11)


12.14.110 Appeals.

A. Determinations of the director with respect to the applicability of the transportation impact fees to a given development activity, the availability or value of a credit, the director’s decision concerning the independent fee calculation which is authorized in KCC 12.14.070, or any other determination which the director is authorized to make pursuant to this chapter may be appealed by the feepayer to the hearing examiner. No building or change of use permits will be issued until the transportation impact fee is paid; provided, however, that the feepayer may pay the fee under protest pending appeal to avoid delays in the issuance of building permits or change of use permits.

B. Appeals to the hearing examiner shall be taken in accord with the processes set forth in Chapter 12.01 KCC for open record appeals; provided, however, that appeals are to be delivered to the city’s permit center.

C. At the time of filing of the appeal, the feepayer shall pay the fee set by council resolution for city of Kent planning and land use fees, “appeal of administrative interpretation/decision.”

D. The hearing examiner is authorized to make findings of fact regarding the applicability of the transportation impact fees to a given development activity, the availability or amount of the credit, or the accuracy or applicability of an independent fee calculation. There is a presumption of validity of the director’s determination; feepayer has the burden of proof. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be the final determination of the city unless remanded to the department as provided in subsection (E) of this section.

E. The hearing examiner may, so long as such action is in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, reverse, affirm, modify or remand, in whole or in part, the determinations of the director with respect to the amount of the transportation impact fees imposed or the credit awarded.

(Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 3973, § 1, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 3992, § 1, 3-1-11)


12.14.120 Establishment of transportation impact fee accounts.

A. Transportation impact fee receipts shall be earmarked specifically and deposited in one (1) or more special, interest-bearing accounts.

B. The city shall establish one (1) or more separate transportation impact fee accounts for the fees collected pursuant to this chapter. Funds withdrawn from the account or accounts must be used in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and applicable state law. Interest earned on the fees shall be retained in the account(s) and expended for the purposes for which the transportation impact fees were collected.

C. On an annual basis, the finance director shall provide a report to the council on the transportation impact fee account showing the source and amount of all moneys collected, earned, or received, and the public improvements that were financed in whole or in part by transportation impact fees.

D. Transportation impact fees shall be expended or encumbered within six (6) years of receipt, unless the council identifies in written findings extraordinary and compelling reasons for the city to hold the fees beyond the six (6) year period, pursuant to RCW 82.02.070(3).

(Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 3973, § 1, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 3992, § 1, 3-1-11)


12.14.130 Administrative guidelines. 

The public works director is hereby authorized to adopt internal guidelines for the administration of transportation impact fees, which may include the adoption of procedural rules.

(Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 3973, § 1, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 3992, § 1, 3-1-11)


12.14.140 Refunds and offsets.

A. If the city fails to expend or encumber the transportation impact fees within six (6) years of the date the fees were paid, unless extraordinary or compelling reasons are established pursuant to KCC 12.14.120, the current owner of the property on which transportation impact fees have been paid may receive a refund of such fees. In determining whether transportation impact fees have been expended or encumbered, transportation impact fees shall be considered expended or encumbered on a first in, first out basis.

B. The city shall notify potential claimants by first class mail deposited with the United States Postal Service at the last known address of such claimants. A potential claimant must be the current owner of record of the real property against which the transportation impact fee was assessed.

C. Owners seeking a refund of transportation impact fees must submit a written request for a refund of the fees to the director within one (1) year of the date the right to claim the refund arises or the date that notice is given, whichever is later.

D. Any transportation impact fees for which no application for a refund has been made within this one (1) year period shall be retained by the city and expended on the system improvements for which they were collected.

E. Refunds of transportation impact fees or offsets against subsequent transportation impact fees under this section shall include any interest earned on the transportation impact fees by the city.

F. When the city seeks to terminate any or all components of the transportation impact fee program, all unexpended or unencumbered funds from any terminated component or components, including interest earned, shall be refunded pursuant to this section. Upon the finding that any or all fee requirements are to be terminated, the city shall place notice of such termination and the availability of refunds in a newspaper of general circulation at least two (2) times and shall notify all potential claimants by first class mail at the last known address of the claimants. All funds available for refund shall be retained for a period of one (1) year. At the end of one (1) year, any remaining funds shall be retained by the city, but must be expended for the public facilities for which the transportation impact fees were collected. This notice requirement shall not apply if there are no unexpended or unencumbered balances within the account or accounts being terminated.

G. The city shall also refund to the current owner of property for which transportation impact fees have been paid all transportation impact fees paid, including interest earned on the transportation impact fees, if the development activity for which the transportation impact fees were imposed did not occur; provided, however, that, if the city has expended or encumbered the transportation impact fees in good faith prior to the application for a refund, the director may decline to provide the refund. If, within a period of three (3) years, the same or subsequent owner of the property proceeds with the same or substantially similar development activity, the owner can petition the director for an offset in the amount of the fee originally paid and not refunded. The petitioner must provide receipts of transportation impact fees previously paid for a development activity of the same or substantially similar nature on the same real property or some portion thereof. Determinations of the director shall be in writing and shall be subject to the appeals procedures set forth in KCC 12.14.110.

(Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 3973, § 1, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 3992, § 1, 3-1-11)


12.14.150 Use of funds.

A. Pursuant to this title, transportation impact fees:

1. Shall be used for system improvements that will reasonably benefit the new development activity;

2. Shall not be imposed to make up for deficiencies in public facilities; and

3. Shall not be used for maintenance or operation.

B. Transportation impact fees may be spent for system improvements to streets and roads as herein defined and including, but not limited to, planning, land acquisition, right-of-way acquisition, site improvements, necessary off-site improvements, construction, engineering, architectural, permitting, financing, and administrative expenses, applicable impact fees or mitigation costs, and any other expenses which can be capitalized.

C. Transportation impact fees may also be used to recoup system improvement costs previously incurred by the city to the extent that new growth and development will be served by the previously constructed improvements or incurred costs.

D. In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are or have been issued for the advanced provision of system improvements for which transportation impact fees may be expended, such transportation impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities or improvements provided are consistent with the requirements of this section. 

(Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 3973, § 1, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 3992, § 1, 3-1-11)


12.14.160 Review and adjustment of rates. 

The fees and rates set forth in the rate study and the downtown Kent rate memorandum may be reviewed and adjusted by the council as it deems necessary and appropriate in conjunction with the annual budget process so that adjustments, if any, will be effective at the first of the calendar year.

(Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 3973, § 1, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 3992, § 1, 3-1-11)


12.14.170 Administrative fees.

A. For each transportation impact fee imposed, there shall be charged an administrative fee in an amount of the greater of three hundred dollars ($300) or one (1) percent of the amount of the total transportation impact fee. The administrative fee shall be deposited into an administrative fee account within the transportation impact fee account(s). Administrative fees shall be used to defray the city’s actual costs associated with the assessment and collection and update of the transportation impact fees. An administrative fee is not refundable or creditable.

B. The administrative fee shall be paid by the feepayer at the same time as the transportation impact fee is collected; provided, however, that the administrative fee shall be due at the time of building permit issuance when the director has deferred payment of fees.

(Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 3973, § 1, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 3992, § 1, 3-1-11)


12.14.180 Existing authority unimpaired.

Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the city from requiring the feepayer or the proponent of a development activity to mitigate adverse environmental impacts of a specific development pursuant to the State Environmental Policy Act, Chapter 43.21C RCW, based on the environmental documents accompanying the underlying development approval process, and/or Chapter 58.17 RCW, governing plats and subdivisions. Compliance with this chapter and/or payment of fees under this chapter shall not constitute evidence of a determination of transportation concurrency.

(Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 3973, § 1, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 3992, § 1, 3-1-11)


12.14.190 City of Kent transportation impact fee schedule.

Annually, on or about January 1st of each year, the director shall publish transportation impact fee schedules for downtown Kent and the area outside downtown Kent consistent with the downtown Kent rate memorandum, the rate study and this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3971, § 1, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 3973, § 1, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 3992, § 1, 3-1-11)


Chapter 12.15 FIRE IMPACT FEES

Sections:

12.15.010    Findings and authority.

12.15.020    Definitions.

12.15.030    Impact fee – Applicability.

12.15.040    Exemptions.

12.15.050    Interlocal agreement between the city and the RFA.

12.15.060    Submission of RFA capital facilities and equipment plan and data.

12.15.070    Annual council review.

12.15.080    Impact fee program elements.

12.15.090    Fee calculations.

12.15.100    Assessment and collection of impact fees.

12.15.110    Determination of the fee – Adjustments – Exception – Appeals.

12.15.120    Impact fee accounts and refunds.


12.15.010 Findings and authority.

The city council of the city of Kent hereby finds and determines that continuing growth and development in the city of Kent will create additional demands and need for fire protection facilities. The council further finds that the Washington State Growth Management Act (Chapter 36.70A RCW) authorizes cities to require that new growth and development pay a proportionate share of the cost to partially fund fire protection facilities needed to serve the new growth and development.

Therefore, pursuant to Chapter 82.02 RCW, the council adopts this chapter to assess fire impact fees. The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed in order to carry out the purposes of the council in establishing the fire impact fee program.

(Ord. No. 4167, § 1, 9-1-15)


12.15.020 Definitions.

The following words and terms shall have the following meanings for the purpose of this chapter:

A. Capital facilities and equipment plan means the RFA’s capital improvement plan adopted by the RFA’s governing board consisting of:

1. An inventory of existing capital facilities and equipment owned by the RFA, their locations, and capacities;

2. An identification of demands expected to be placed on existing fire protection facilities and equipment by the impacts of projected new development over a 20-year period;

3. A forecast of future capital facilities and equipment necessary to meet the RFA’s adopted level of service with the increased service demand of future growth within the RFA;

4. The proposed locations of expanded or new capital facilities and equipment and the associated timeline for construction or expansion;

5. At least a six-year financing component, updated as necessary to maintain at least a six-year forecast period, for financing needed fire protection facilities within projected funding levels, and identifying sources of financing for such purposes, including bond issues; and

6. Any other long range projects planned by the RFA.

B. City means the city of Kent.

C. Developer means the person or entity that owns or holds purchase options or other development control over property for which development activity is proposed.

D. Development activity means any residential or commercial construction or expansion of a building, structure or use, any change in use of a building or structure, or any change in the use of land that creates additional demand for fire protection facilities.

E. Director means the city of Kent economic and community development director or the director’s designee.

F. Encumbered means impact fees identified by the RFA as being committed as part of the funding for a fire protection facility for which the publicly funded share has been assured or building permits sought or construction contracts let.

G. Fire protection facilities means fully equipped fire stations, administrative offices, training grounds and structures, maintenance facilities and other specialized facilities required for the RFA to locate, house or expedite the timely arrival of firefighting and emergency medical equipment, fire suppression equipment, and the staff necessary to deliver emergency response services within the RFA’s service area.

H. Interlocal agreement means the agreement between the RFA and the city, governing the operation of the fire impact fee program and describing the relationship, duties and liabilities of the parties.

I. Impact fee means a payment of money imposed upon development as a condition of development approval to pay for fire protection facilities needed to serve new growth and development that is reasonably related to the new development that creates additional demand and need for fire protection facilities, that is a proportionate share of the cost of the fire protection facilities, and that is used for facilities that reasonably benefit the new development. Impact fee does not include a reasonable permit or application fee.

J. Impact fee schedule means the table of impact fees to be charged per unit of development, computed by the formula adopted under this chapter, indicating the standard fee amount per dwelling unit or per commercial development that shall be paid as a condition of development within the city.

K. Level(s) of service means the standards adopted by the RFA for the delivery of fire and emergency medical response services, as set forth in the RFA’s adopted standard of cover and reflected in the capital facilities and equipment plan.

L. Mitigation and level of service policy means the policy adopted by the RFA and used to guide the mitigation of impacts imposed by new development upon the RFA’s ability to deliver services. The policy supports approval of development through appropriate mitigations that safeguard the community.

M. RFA means the Kent Fire Department Regional Fire Authority, a Washington State municipal corporation established and operating pursuant to Chapter 52.26 RCW.

N. Standard of cover or SOC means the written risk evaluation and standards of service document maintained by the RFA in compliance with international accreditation through the Center for Public Safety Excellence.

(Ord. No. 4167, § 1, 9-1-15)


12.15.030 Impact fee – Applicability.

Impact fees, based on the RFA’s capital facilities and equipment plan adopted by the city council, shall be required for all development activity requiring city review and approval where the activity requires the issuance of a residential or commercial building permit. The impact fees shall be assessed and collected for each type of construction when the permit is issued, as provided for in this chapter.

(Ord. No. 4167, § 1, 9-1-15)


12.15.040 Exemptions.

A. The following development activities are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:

1. Shelters or dwelling units for temporary placement, which provide housing to persons on a temporary basis not exceeding two weeks;

2. Rebuilding or remodeling of a legally established structure destroyed or damaged by fire, flood, explosion, act of nature or other accident or catastrophe; provided, that a building permit for the rebuilding or remodeling is issued within one year after the damage or destruction occurs. The exemption shall not apply to any additional structure or expansion of the original square footage that is proposed to be built on the same tax parcel on which the structure that was damaged or destroyed is being rebuilt or remodeled;

3. Projects in which existing dwelling units are converted into condominium ownership and where no new dwelling units are created;

4. Any development activity that is exempt from the payment of an impact fee pursuant to RCW 82.02.100(1), as amended;

5. Any development activity for which fire impacts have been mitigated pursuant to a voluntary agreement entered into with the RFA to pay fees, dedicate land or construct or improve fire protection facilities; provided, that the agreement predates the effective date of fee imposition;

6. Any development of 200 square feet or less that does not use or store hazardous materials that would create a life safety risk;

7. Alteration of an existing nonresidential structure that does not expand the useable space and that does not involve a change in use;

8. Demolition of or moving an existing structure within the city from one site to another;

9. Miscellaneous improvements that do not create additional demands and need for fire protection facilities, including, but not limited to, construction of accessory structures, as defined in KCC 15.02.005, fences, walls, swimming pools and signs;

10. Alteration, expansion or remodeling of an existing dwelling or accessory residential structure where the use is not changed;

11. Construction of an accessory dwelling unit on a parcel with an existing single-family dwelling unit; provided, however, that this shall only exempt the construction from two-thirds of the normal residential impact fee that would otherwise apply; and

12. A development permit for a city project.

B. Pursuant to RCW 82.02.100(2), where automatic fire sprinklers are installed in single-family residential occupancies, a reduced fee equal to 70 percent of the impact fee shall serve to mitigate the costs of needed EMS and rescue resources.

C. The director shall be authorized to determine whether a particular development activity falls within an exemption identified in this chapter, or is exempt pursuant to other applicable law. Determinations of the director shall be subject to the appeals procedures set forth in KCC 12.15.110.

(Ord. No. 4167, § 1, 9-1-15)


12.15.050 Interlocal agreement between the city and the RFA.

As a condition of the city’s authorization and adoption of a fire impact fee ordinance, the city and the RFA shall enter into an interlocal agreement governing the operation of the fire impact fee program, and describing the relationship and liabilities of the parties thereunder.

(Ord. No. 4167, § 1, 9-1-15)


12.15.060 Submission of RFA capital facilities and equipment plan and data.

A. On an annual basis, the RFA shall submit the following materials to the city council:

1. The RFA’s capital facilities and equipment plan (as defined in KCC 12.15.020(A)) as adopted by the RFA’s governing board. The capital facilities and equipment plan shall contain a six-year financing component as set forth in KCC 12.15.020(A);

2. The RFA’s growth projections over the next six years;

3. The RFA’s standard of service;

4. The RFA’s overall capacity to meet levels of service over the next six years, and the expected service improvements from fire protection facilities planned by the RFA but not yet built or implemented; and

5. An inventory of the RFA’s existing facilities.

B. To the extent that the RFA’s levels of service identify a deficiency in its existing facilities, the RFA’s capital facilities and equipment plan must identify the sources of funding, other than impact fees, for building or acquiring the necessary facilities to serve the existing population in order to eliminate the deficiencies within a reasonable period of time.

C. Facilities to meet future demand shall be designed to meet the RFA’s adopted levels of service. If sufficient funding is not projected to be available to fully fund facilities which meet the adopted levels of service, the RFA’s capital facilities and equipment plan should document the reason for the funding gap, and identify all sources of funding and mitigation that the RFA plans to use to meet the adopted levels of service.

D. The RFA shall also submit an annual report to the city council showing the capital improvements which were serviced in whole or in part by the impact fees.

(Ord. No. 4167, § 1, 9-1-15)


12.15.070 Annual council review.

On an annual basis, the city council shall review the information submitted by the RFA pursuant to KCC 12.15.060(A)(1) and consider whether to adopt the same. The city council’s review and possible adoption shall occur in conjunction with any update of the capital facilities element of the city’s comprehensive plan that occurs concurrently with the adoption or amendment of the city’s budget.

(Ord. No. 4167, § 1, 9-1-15)


12.15.080 Impact fee program elements.

A. Impact fees will be assessed on every new structure in the city for which a fee schedule has been established.

B. Concurrently with the city’s assessment of impact fees, the RFA will assess the proposed development’s total impacts using the guidance of the RFA’s mitigation and level of service policy. If it is determined by this policy that impact fees alone will not address fire service concurrency within a reasonable time, additional mitigations may be required to reduce development impacts. Subsequently, impact fees may or may not be reduced depending upon the mitigations imposed.

C. Consistent with RCW 82.02.050 through 82.02.100, any impact fee imposed shall be reasonably related to the impact caused by the development and shall not exceed a proportionate share of the cost of the system improvements that are reasonably related to the development.

D. The impact fee shall be based on the capital facilities and equipment plan developed by the RFA and approved by the RFA governing board, and adopted by reference by the city as part of the capital facilities element of the comprehensive plan for the purpose of establishing the fee program.

(Ord. No. 4167, § 1, 9-1-15)


12.15.090 Fee calculations.

A. The fee shall be calculated based on a RFA-wide basis using the appropriate factors and data to be supplied by the RFA as indicated in Attachment A1 to the ordinance codified in this chapter of the RFA’s mitigation and level of service policy using the formula set out in Appendix A of Attachment A to the ordinance codified in this chapter, adopted herein by reference.

B. Separate fees shall be calculated for single-family, multifamily, commercial/industrial, assisted care and hospital and medical facilities, and other facilities as identified in Attachment A to the ordinance codified in this chapter. For the purpose of this chapter, mobile homes and manufactured homes shall be treated as single-family dwellings and duplexes shall be treated as multifamily dwellings.

C. The formula in Attachment A to the ordinance codified in this chapter provides for a credit where creditable mitigations are implemented or where voluntary agreements between the RFA and developer provide for fire protection facilities, fire facility sites, or other related developer contributions that the RFA finds acceptable.

D. The city may also impose an application fee, as established by council resolution, to cover the reasonable costs of administration of the impact fee program.

(Ord. No. 4167, § 1, 9-1-15)


12.15.100 Assessment and collection of impact fees.

A. At the time of issuance of a building permit by the city, including a permit for a manufactured home, the fire impact fee shall be assessed based on the impact fee schedule then in effect as calculated in Attachment A to the ordinance codified in this chapter. The impact fee and the application fee, if any, shall be collected by the city, and maintained in separate accounts. All fire impact fees shall be paid to the RFA from the fire impact fee account monthly. If the city imposes an application fee, the city shall retain the application fees associated with the city’s administration of the impact fee program.

B. Collection of fire impact fees may be deferred upon the city’s adoption of a deferral ordinance pursuant to ESB 5923.

(Ord. No. 4167, § 1, 9-1-15)


12.15.110 Determination of the fee – Adjustments – Exception – Appeals.

A. The director shall determine the amount of the fire impact fee, based upon the schedule provided by the RFA.

B. The developer shall be entitled to a credit for the value of any dedication of land for, improvement to, or new construction of any system improvements provided by the developer to fire protection facilities that are identified in the capital facilities plan that are required by the city as a condition of approving the development.

C. The standard impact fees may be adjusted in one of the following circumstances:

1. The developer demonstrates that an impact fee assessment was improperly calculated; or

2. Where unusual circumstances are identified by the director, developer, or RFA, the fee may be adjusted in specific cases to ensure that impact fees are imposed fairly. Adjustments will be determined jointly by the director and the RFA’s designee.

D. In cases where a developer requests an independent fee calculation, adjustment exception or a credit pursuant to RCW 82.02.060(6), the director shall consult with the RFA and the RFA shall advise the director prior to making the final impact fee determination.

E. A developer may provide studies and data to demonstrate that any particular factor used by the RFA may not be appropriately applied to the development proposal.

F. Any appeal of the decision of the director with regard to fee amounts shall follow the process for the appeal of the underlying development application.

G. Impact fees may be paid under protest in order to obtain a building permit or a manufactured home permit.

(Ord. No. 4167, § 1, 9-1-15)


12.15.120 Impact fee accounts and refunds.

A. Impact fee receipts shall be earmarked specifically and retained in a special interest bearing account established by the RFA solely for the RFA’s fire impact fees. All interest shall be retained in the account and expended for the purpose or purposes for which impact fees were imposed. Annually, the RFA, based in part on its report prepared pursuant to KCC 12.15.060, shall prepare a report on the impact fee account showing the source and amount of all moneys collected, earned or received, and capital or system improvements that were financed in whole or in part by impact fees. The RFA shall submit a copy of this report to the city council annually. The city shall maintain a separate fire impact fee account and, if applicable, an administration fee account pursuant to KCC 12.15.100. The city’s finance department shall, upon request from the RFA, provide a memo to the city council which will include an accounting of the annual amount of all fire impact fees collected and transferred to the RFA.

B. Impact fees for the RFA’s system improvements shall be expended by the RFA only in conformance with the RFA’s adopted capital facilities and equipment plan element of the comprehensive plan.

C. Impact fees shall be expended or encumbered by the RFA for a permissible use within 10 years of when the fees were paid, unless there exists an extraordinary or compelling reason for fees to be held longer than 10 years. Such extraordinary or compelling reasons shall be identified to the city by the RFA in a written report. The city council shall identify the RFA’s extraordinary and compelling reasons for the fees to be held longer than 10 years in the council’s own written findings.

D. The current owner of property on which an impact fee has been paid may receive a refund of such fees if the impact fees have not been expended or encumbered within 10 years of receipt of the funds by the RFA on fire protection facilities intended to benefit the development activity for which the impact fees were paid. In determining whether impact fees have been encumbered, impact fees shall be considered encumbered on a first in, first out basis. The RFA shall notify potential claimants by first class mail deposited with the United States Postal Service addressed to the owner of the property as shown in the county tax records.

E. An owner’s request for a refund must be submitted to the RFA in writing within one year of the date the right to claim the refund arises or the date that notice is given, whichever date is later. Any impact fees that are not expended or encumbered by the RFA in conformance with the capital facilities and equipment plan within these time limitations, and for which no application for a refund has been made within this one-year period, shall be retained and expended consistent with the provisions of this section. Refunds of impact fees shall include any interest earned on the impact fees.

F. Should the city seek to terminate any or all fire impact fee requirements, all unexpended or unencumbered funds, including interest earned, shall be refunded to the current owner of the property for which a fire impact fee was paid. Upon the finding that any or all fee requirements are to be terminated, the city shall place notice of such termination and the availability of the refunds in a newspaper of general circulation at least two times and shall notify all potential claimants by first class mail addressed to the owner of the property as shown in the county tax records. All funds available for refund shall be retained for a period of one year. At the end of one year, any remaining funds shall be retained by the RFA, but must be expended by the RFA, consistent with the provisions of this section. The notice requirement set forth above shall not apply if there are no unexpended or unencumbered balances with the account or accounts being terminated.

G. A developer may request and shall receive a refund, including interest earned on the impact fees paid, when:

1. The developer does not proceed to finalize the development activity as required by statute or city code, including the International Building Code; and

2. No impact on the RFA has resulted.

H. Interest due upon the refund of impact fees required by this section shall be calculated according to the average amount received by the RFA on invested funds throughout the period during which the fees were retained.

(Ord. No. 4167, § 1, 9-1-15)1

Code reviser’s note: Attachment A to Ordinance No. 4167 is available in the office of the city clerk. 


Chapter 12.20 ADOPTION AND ADMINISTRATION OF IMPACT FEES

Sections:

12.20.010    Purpose.

12.20.020    Definitions.

12.20.030    Impact fees for new categories of public facilities – Hearing and public comment.

12.20.035    Impact fee ordinance for new categories of public facilities – Public hearing notice.

12.20.040    Deferred collection of impact fees – Eligibility.

12.20.050    Deferred impact fees – Applicant requirements.

12.20.060    Collection of deferred impact fees.

12.20.070    Payment of deferred impact fees – Release of lien.

12.20.080    Authorization for collection of administrative fees – Reporting requirements.

12.20.090    Conflict with other code provisions – Superseded.


12.20.010 Purpose.

Pursuant to Chapters 36.70A and 82.02 RCW, the council adopts this chapter to establish a framework for the imposition and administration of all city impact fees. The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed in order to carry out the purposes of the council to govern all existing and future impact fee programs.

(Ord. No. 4172, § 1, 10-20-15)


12.20.020 Definitions.

The following words and terms shall have the following meanings for the purpose of this chapter:

A. Applicant means a person or entity who applies for a city permit authorizing development activity, and includes an entity that controls the applicant, is controlled by the applicant, or is under common control with the applicant.

B. City means the city of Kent.

C. Development activity means any construction or expansion of a building, structure, or use, any change in use of a building or structure, or any change in the use of land that creates additional demand and need for public facilities.

D. Director means the city of Kent economic and community development director or the director’s designee.

E. Impact fee means a payment of money imposed upon development activity as a condition of development approval to pay for public facilities needed to serve new growth and development, and that is reasonably related to the new development that creates additional demand and need for public facilities, that is a proportionate share of the cost of the public facilities, and that is used for facilities that reasonably benefit the new development. Impact fee does not include a reasonable permit or application fee, or other administrative fee.

F. Public facilities means the following capital facilities owned or operated by government entities: (1) public streets and roads; (2) publicly owned parks, open space, and recreation facilities; (3) school facilities; and (4) fire protection facilities.

(Ord. No. 4172, § 1, 10-20-15)


12.20.030 Impact fees for new categories of public facilities – Hearing and public comment.

A. The city council will hold a public hearing at least 14 calendar days prior to adoption of any ordinance establishing impact fees for a new category of public facility, as described in KCC 12.20.035. In the alternative, the city council may elect to delegate this authority to any committee.

B. Anyone may provide written comments to the city council or its delegee prior to the public hearing. Any agency, group, or member of the public is presumed to have no written comments if comments are not received by 5:00 p.m. on the last business day prior to the date of the scheduled public hearing. Comments may be mailed, personally delivered to the city clerk, or sent by facsimile or e-mail. Texts, tweets, or comments placed through other social media sites, whether or not the city has a presence on those sites, will not be considered. Written comments should be as specific as possible.

C. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (B) of this section, anyone may provide written or oral testimony, or both, at the public hearing itself.

D. The city council may:

1. Adopt, modify, or otherwise amend the proposed impact fee ordinance after the public hearing;

2. Call for a subsequent public hearing in order to elicit further input from staff or from the public; or

3. Refer the impact fee ordinance back to committee for further review.

E. If the city council chooses to proceed with adoption of the impact fee ordinance for a new category of public facility, whether modified or amended, it must do so within 45 days of the final public hearing held pursuant to this section. If the city council fails to vote to adopt the ordinance within this 45-day period, the council must provide new notice of another public hearing, in accordance with KCC 12.20.035, before the council may adopt the ordinance.

F. This section specifically does not apply to amendments to any chapter of the city code adopted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, which pertains to impact fees for existing categories of public facilities.

(Ord. No. 4172, § 1, 10-20-15)


12.20.035 Impact fee ordinance for new categories of public facilities – Public hearing notice.

A. At least seven calendar days prior to the public hearing, the city will provide notice in the following manner:

1. Post the notice on the city’s website and on the public notice board in the lobby of the Kent City Hall;

2. Publish a notice summarizing the proposed action one time in a manner most likely to reach the persons, agencies, or entities that may be affected by the ordinance. Examples of appropriate publications for notice include, without limitation, publishing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, publishing in a regional, neighborhood, ethnic, or trade journal, or publishing through one or more trade or community websites. At its option, the city may elect to publish under this subsection in more than one publication;

3. Mail or e-mail notice to any person, group or agency who has requested notice at least seven calendar days prior to the hearing, using the contact information provided by the requestor. Unless specifically requested otherwise, the city will provide notice via e-mail.

B. At least three days prior to the public hearing, the city will mail or e-mail the public hearing agenda to any person or group who provided written comments to the city pursuant to KCC 12.20.030.

C. This section specifically does not apply to amendments to any chapter of the city code adopted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, which pertains to impact fees for existing categories of public facilities.

(Ord. No. 4172, § 1, 10-20-15)


12.20.040 Deferred collection of impact fees – Eligibility.

A. Each applicant for a single-family residential building permit, in accordance with his or her contractor registration number or other unique identification number, is entitled to annually receive deferrals of all applicable impact fees that would otherwise be collected for the first 20 single-family residential construction permits issued by the city to the applicant. The applicant must request the deferral of all impact fees in writing, on a form prepared and approved by the director and the city attorney, and eligibility is limited to the first 20 permits actually issued by the city to the applicant each calendar year, beginning on January 1st.

B. At the time of issuance of a single-family residential building permit, all impact fees shall be assessed based on the impact fee schedules then in effect.

(Ord. No. 4172, § 1, 10-20-15)


12.20.050 Deferred impact fees – Applicant requirements.

A. An applicant who receives a deferral under KCC 12.20.040 must grant and record a deferred impact fee lien against the property, at the applicant’s sole expense, in favor of the city, in the amount of all impact fees deferred for the permit authorizing construction on the property. The deferred impact fee lien, which must include the legal description, tax account number, and address of the property, must also be:

1. In a form approved by the city;

2. Signed by all owners of the property, with all signatures acknowledged as required for a deed, and recorded in the county where the property is located;

3. Binding on all successors in title after the recordation; and

4. Junior and subordinate to one mortgage for the purpose of construction upon the same real property granted by the person who applied for the deferral of impact fees.

B. If impact fees are not paid in accordance with the deferral system authorized by KCC 12.20.060 and this section, the city may institute foreclosure proceedings in accordance with Chapter 61.12 RCW.

C. If the city does not institute foreclosure proceedings for unpaid school impact fees within 45 days after receiving notice from a school district requesting that it do so, the school district may institute foreclosure proceedings with respect to the unpaid impact fees.

(Ord. No. 4172, § 1, 10-20-15)


12.20.060 Collection of deferred impact fees.

A. The city authorizes collection of all impact fees deferred pursuant to this chapter until the time of closing of the first sale of the property occurring after the issuance of the building permit for which the impact fees were deferred; provided, however, that in no event may deferral of the collection of the impact fees exceed 18 months from the date on which the building permit for which the impact fees were deferred was issued to the applicant by the city.

1. If closing of the first sale of the property for which impact fees were deferred occurs within 18 months of the granted deferral, payment of all deferred impact fees must take place upon closing, and the seller shall be strictly liable for payment of all deferred impact fees to the city at that time. The city bears no responsibility for determining whether the seller and the buyer have contractually agreed for the buyer to pay the deferred fees, and the city reserves the right to institute legal proceedings against the seller, if necessary, to collect any deferred impact fees that remain unpaid after closing. In addition, the city may withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy, final inspection approval, or equivalent certification required for occupancy of the residence until all impact fees have been paid in full.

2. If closing of the first sale of the property for which impact fees were deferred does not occur within 18 months of the granted deferral, then all deferred impact fees shall become immediately due and owing to the city, and the applicant shall be strictly liable for payment of all deferred impact fees to the city at that time. If the applicant fails, upon request by the city, to immediately pay all deferred impact fees pursuant to this subsection (A)(2), then the city may foreclose on the lien in the manner provided for in KCC 12.20.050.

(Ord. No. 4172, § 1, 10-20-15)


12.20.070 Payment of deferred impact fees – Release of lien.

A. Upon receipt of final payment of all deferred impact fees for a property, the city must execute a release of deferred impact fee lien for the property. The property owner at the time of the release, at his or her expense, is responsible for recording the lien release.

B. The extinguishment of a deferred impact fee lien by the foreclosure of a lien having priority does not affect the obligation to pay the impact fees as a condition of final inspection, certificate of occupancy, or equivalent certification, or at the time of closing of the first sale.

(Ord. No. 4172, § 1, 10-20-15)


12.20.080 Authorization for collection of administrative fees – Reporting requirements.

A. Pursuant to RCW 82.02.050(3)(h), the city may collect a reasonable administrative fee at the time of building permit issuance from any applicant seeking to defer collection of impact fees for the permit, in order to implement and administer the impact fee deferral system created by this chapter. Any administrative fee imposed hereunder shall be as established by council resolution.

B. Pursuant to RCW 82.02.050(3)(i), the city shall cooperate with and provide requested data, materials, and assistance to the State Department of Commerce and the joint legislative audit and review committee established by Sections 3 and 4 of ESB 5923 to determine the effectiveness of the state-mandated impact fee deferral process.

(Ord. No. 4172, § 1, 10-20-15)


12.20.090 Conflict with other code provisions – Superseded.

In the event any provision of this chapter conflicts with other sections of city code pertaining to the assessment and collection of impact fees, the director is authorized to resolve any conflicts or ambiguities in the manner designed to give maximum effect to the deferral process established in this chapter, and its provisions shall supersede any earlier-adopted codes to the contrary.

(Ord. No. 4172, § 1, 10-20-15)


Title 13 FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION

Chapters:

13.01    Fire Codes

13.02    Enforcement of the Fire Codes

13.03    Preventable Activation of Fire Protection Systems

13.04    Novelty Lighters

13.05    Fireworks

13.06    Addressing and Street Names

13.14    Repealed


Chapter 13.01 FIRE CODES

Sections:

13.01.010    Fire code – Adopted.

13.01.020    Code conflicts.

13.01.030    Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 1, Scope and Administration.

13.01.040    Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 2, Definitions.

13.01.050    Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 3, General Requirements.

13.01.060    Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 5, Fire Service Features.

13.01.070    Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 6, Building Services and Systems.

13.01.080    Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 7, Fire and Smoke Prevention Features.

13.01.090    Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 9, Fire Protection Systems.

13.01.100    Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 11, Construction Requirements for Existing Buildings.

13.01.110    Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 80, Referenced Standards.

13.01.120    Amendments to the International Fire Code – Appendix B, Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings.

13.01.130    Fire codes – Fees.

13.01.140    Appeals.


13.01.010 Fire code – Adopted. 

In accordance with Chapter 19.27 RCW, the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., together with any additions, deletions, and exceptions currently enacted or as may be amended from time to time by the state of Washington through its Building Code Council pursuant to Chapter 51-54A WAC, and as further amended in this chapter, is hereby adopted and incorporated by this reference.

One copy of the International Fire Code and the appendices adopted in KCC 13.01.030(A) are on file with the city’s fire code official.

(Ord. No. 3691, § 1, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3840, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 3957, § 1, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4082, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4201, § 1, 5-17-16)


13.01.020 Code conflicts.

To the extent allowed by RCW 19.27.040, if a conflict exists between the provisions of the International Fire Code adopted and amended by the Washington State Building Code Council and the provisions of this chapter, the Kent City Code provisions shall govern.

(Ord. No. 3691, § 1, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3840, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 3957, § 1, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4082, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4201, § 1, 5-17-16)


13.01.030 Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 1, Scope and Administration.

The following local amendments to Chapter 1 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Scope and Administration,” including all amendments enacted by the state of Washington, are hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code as follows:

A. Scope and general requirements – Fire code appendix adopted. Section 101 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Scope and General Requirements,” is amended by adding the following new subsection 101.6:

Sec. 101.6. Fire code appendix adopted. Appendix B of the International Fire Code is hereby adopted.

B. General authority and responsibilities – Retained authority. Section 104 of the International Fire Code, entitled “General Authority and Responsibilities,” is amended by adding the following new subsection 104.1.1:

Sec. 104.1.1. Retained authority – Additional conditions. The fire code official retains the authority to impose additional conditions where the official determines it necessary to mitigate identified fire protection impacts and problematic fire protection systems. These conditions may include, by way of example and without limitation, increased setbacks, use of fire retardant materials, installation or modification of standpipes, automatic fire sprinkler and fire alarm systems.

C. General authority and responsibilities – Lot lines and setback lines. Section 104 of the International Fire Code, entitled “General Authority and Responsibilities,” is amended by adding the following new subsection 104.12:

Sec. 104.12. Lot lines and setback lines. Notwithstanding the authority of the fire code official to administer and enforce the fire code, the fire code official shall have no duty to verify or establish lot lines or setback lines. No such duty is created by this code and none shall be implied. 

D. Permits – Term. Section 105 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Permits,” is amended by adding the following new subsection 105.1.4:

Sec. 105.1.4. Term. Operational permits issued in accordance with this code shall be valid for a 12 month period and are renewable at the end of that 12 month term.

E. Permits – Expiration of project permit application. Section 105 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Permits,” is amended by substituting subsection 105.2.3 with the following:

Sec. 105.2.3. Expiration of project permit application. Project permit applications that are subject to Ch. 12.01 KCC or that require SEPA review are subject to those deadlines. All other project permit applications shall expire by limitation if no permit is issued within 180 days after the determination that a fully complete project permit application has been submitted, unless the fire code official determines, in his or her sole discretion, that the application has been pursued in good faith. The fire code official may extend the time for action on the permit application for one or more periods, each period not exceeding 90 days, upon written request by the applicant if the applicant can demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the fire code official, that circumstances beyond the applicant’s control have prevented action from being taken. If an application has expired, plans and other data previously submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the fire code official. In order to renew action on an expired application, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new review fee.

F. Permits – Electronic image. Section 105 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Permits,” is amended by adding the following new subsection 105.4.7:

Sec. 105.4.7. Electronic Image. Prior to final inspection, the applicant shall provide to the fire code official an electronic image of issued construction documents and corrected documents in accordance with 105.4.6.

G. Permits – Commercial kitchens. Section 105 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Permits,” is amended by adding the following new subsection 105.6.50:

Sec. 105.6.50. Commercial Kitchen. An operational permit is required for all commercial kitchens with type I hood systems.

H. Permits – Emergency and standby power systems. Section 105 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Permits,” is amended by adding the following new subsection 105.6.51:

Sec. 105.6.51. Emergency and standby power systems. An operational permit is required for emergency or standby power systems required by code and identified in NFPA 110.

I. Permits – Emergency and standby power systems. Section 105 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Permits,” is amended by adding the following new subsection 105.7.21:

Sec. 105.7.21. Emergency and standby power systems. A construction permit is required for the installation of an emergency or standby power system required by code and identified in NFPA 110.

J. Board of appeals. Section 108 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Board of appeals,” is amended by substituting Section 108 with the following:

Sec. 108. Board of appeals. The City of Kent hearings examiner is designated as the board of appeals in order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the fire code official relative to the suitability of alternate materials, designs, and methods of construction and appeals of the reasonable application and interpretation of the building and fire codes. Appeals shall be made as set forth in section 13.01.140 of the Kent City Code.

K. Violation – Penalties. Section 109 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Violations,” is amended by substituting subsection 109.3 with the following:

Sec. 109.3. Violation – penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code, or fails to comply with any of its requirements, or who erects, constructs, alters, or repairs a building or structure in violation of (a) the approved construction documents, (b) a directive of the fire code official, or (c) a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as set forth in Ch. 13.02 of the Kent City Code or as otherwise provided by law.

L. Fees. Section 113 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fees,” is amended by substituting subsection 113.1 with the following:

Sec. 113.1. Fees. The fire code official shall collect fees as a condition to issuance or renewal of any permit or certificate.

M. Fees – Schedule of permit fees. Section 113 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fees,” is amended by substituting subsection 113.2 with the following:

Sec. 113.2. Schedule of Permit Fees. The fire code official shall prepare a resolution establishing a schedule of fees for council consideration, which fees shall include the cost involved in the processing, issuance, and renewal of permits and certificates. Any fee schedule adopted by resolution shall govern the fee amount to be assessed for any permit or certificate.

N. Fees – Work commencing before permit issuance. Section 113 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fees,” is amended by substituting subsection 113.3 with the following:

Sec. 113.3. Work commencing before permit issuance. When work for which a permit is required by this code has commenced without a permit, the fees shall be doubled. The payment of such fees shall not relieve any persons from the requirements of this code from any penalties prescribed by this code.

O. Fees – Termination. Section 113 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fees,” is amended by adding the following new subsection 113.6:

Sec. 113.6. Termination. Failure to pay for either an original permit or the required renewal within 60 days of the date notice is given shall result in the City’s termination of the permit or certificate application.

(Ord. No. 3691, § 1, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3840, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 3957, § 1, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4082, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4201, § 1, 5-17-16)


13.01.040 Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 2, Definitions.

The following local amendments to Chapter 2 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Definitions,” including all amendments enacted by the state of Washington, are hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code as follows:

A. Definitions – General. Section 202 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Definitions,” is amended by adding the following definitions to subsection 202:

OUTDOOR STORAGE. The storage of materials on-site which are not in transit.

PROBLEMATIC FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM. A fire protection system that generates repeated preventable.

(Ord. No. 4082, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4201, § 1, 5-17-16)


13.01.050 Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 3, General Requirements.

The following local amendments to Chapter 3 of the International Fire Code, entitled “General Requirements,” including all amendments enacted by the state of Washington, are hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code as follows:

A. Open flames – Sky lanterns. Section 308 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Open Flames,” is amended by substituting subsection 308.1.6.3 with the following:

Sec. 308.1.6.3 Sky Lanterns. The use of sky lanterns is prohibited.

B. General storage – Idle pallets. Section 315 of the International Fire Code, entitled “General Storage,” is amended by adding a new subsection 315.4.3 as follows:

Sec. 315.4.3. Idle Pallets. Idle pallets shall be stored in accordance with Sections 315.4.3.1 through 315.4.3.4.

Sec. 315.4.3.1. Buildings protected with automatic sprinklers. In buildings protected with approved automatic sprinklers, the storage of idle pallets shall be in accordance with NFPA 13 Table A12.12.1.1.

Sec. 315.4.3.2. Buildings without sprinkler protection. In buildings that do not have protection through approved automatic sprinklers, the storage of idle pallets shall be in accordance with Table 315.4.3.2.

Table 315.4.3.2 Clearances 1 Between Storage and Buildings

	Construction Type	Openings	0-50 Pallets	51-200 Pallets	Over 200 Pallets

	Masonry	None	5	5	10

	Masonry	1 hour protected openings	5	10	20

	Masonry	3/4 hour protected openings	10	20	30

	Masonry	Non protected openings	20	30	50

	Other	 	20	30	50

1. All distances measured in feet.

Sec. 315.4.3.3. Separation from other storage. The storage of idle pallets shall be separated from other storage in accordance with Table 315.4.3.3.

Table 315.4.3.3 Clearance to Other Storage 

	Pile Size	Minimum Distance1

	0-50 	20

	51-200	30

	Over 200	50

1. All distances measured in feet.

Sec. 315.4.3.4. Stacks. Pallet stacks shall be arranged to form stable piles. Piles shall be limited to an area not greater than 400 square feet. A distance half the pile height or not less than 8 ft. shall separate stacks. 

(Ord. No. 3691, § 1, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3840, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 3957, § 1, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4082, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4201, § 1, 5-17-16. Formerly 13.01.040)


13.01.060 Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 5, Fire Service Features. 

The following local amendments to Chapter 5 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Service Features,” including all amendments enacted by the state of Washington, are adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code as follows:

A. Fire service features – Fire apparatus access roads. Section 503 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Apparatus Access Roads,” is hereby adopted.

B. Fire apparatus access roads – Dimensions. Section 503 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Apparatus Access Roads,” is amended by substituting subsection 503.2.1 with the following:

Sec. 503.2.1. Dimensions. The following minimum dimensions shall apply for fire apparatus access roads:

1. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet (6,096 mm), except for approved security gates in accordance with section 503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet 6 inches (4,115 mm).

2. Fire apparatus access road routes shall be approved by the fire code official.

C. Fire apparatus access roads – Surface. Section 503 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Apparatus Access Roads,” is amended by substituting subsection 503.2.3 with the following:

Sec. 503.2.3. Surface. Fire apparatus access roads shall be constructed with a surface of asphalt, concrete, or other approved driving surface capable of supporting the imposed load of fire apparatus weighing at least 30 tons (27,240 kg).

D. Fire apparatus access roads – Turning radius. Section 503 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Apparatus Access Roads,” is amended by substituting subsection 503.2.4 with the following:

Sec. 503.2.4. Turning radius. All fire apparatus access roads shall have a 30 foot minimum inside turning radius and a 50 foot minimum outside turning radius. The radius must be measured from the travel lane edge, unless otherwise approved.

E. Fire apparatus access roads – Dead ends. Section 503 of the International Fire Code is amended by substituting subsection 503.2.5 with the following:

Sec. 503.2.5. Dead ends. Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150 feet (45.72 m) in length shall be provided with an approved turnaround designed as illustrated in the Kent Design and Construction Standards, unless otherwise approved.

F. Fire apparatus access roads – Bridges and elevated surfaces. Section 503 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Apparatus Access Roads,” is amended by substituting subsection 503.2.6 with the following:

Sec. 503.2.6. Bridges and elevated surfaces. Where a bridge or an elevated surface is part of a fire apparatus access road, the bridge or elevated surface shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with specifications established by the fire code official and the City’s public works director, or their designees; at a minimum, however, the bridge or elevated surface shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges. Bridges and elevated surfaces shall be designed for a live load sufficient to carry the imposed loads of a 30 or more ton fire apparatus, the total imposed load to be determined by the fire code official. Vehicle load limits shall be posted at both entrances to bridges when required by the fire code official. Where elevated surfaces designed for emergency vehicle use are adjacent to surfaces which are not designed for that use, approved barriers or approved signs, or both, shall be installed and maintained, if required by the fire code official. 

G. Fire apparatus access roads – Grade. Section 503 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Apparatus Access Roads,” is amended by substituting subsection 503.2.7 with the following:

Sec. 503.2.7. Grade. Fire apparatus access roads shall not exceed 15 percent longitudinal and/or 6 percent laterally in grade. Approach and departure angle for fire apparatus access shall be as determined by the fire code official.

H. Fire apparatus access roads – Access road width with a hydrant. Section 503 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Apparatus Access Roads,” is amended by adding the following new subsection 503.2.9:

Sec. 503.2.9. Access road width with a hydrant. Where a fire hydrant is located on a fire apparatus access road, the minimum road width shall be 26 feet for 20 feet on both sides of the hydrant operating nut and shall be marked as a fire lane per Section 503.3. 

I. Fire apparatus access roads – Marking. Section 503 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Apparatus Access Roads,” is amended by substituting subsection 503.3 with the following:

Sec. 503.3. Marking. Fire apparatus access roads shall be marked whenever necessary to maintain the unobstructed minimum required width of roadways. Subject to the fire code official’s prior written approval, marked fire apparatus access roads, or “fire lanes,” may be established or relocated at the time of plan review, pre-construction site inspection, and/or post construction site inspection as well as any time during the life of the occupancy. Only those fire apparatus access roads established by the fire code official can utilize red marking paint and the term “fire lane.” Fire lanes shall be marked as directed by the fire code official with one or more of the following types of markings in accordance with the Kent Design and Construction Standards:

Sec. 503.3.1. Type 1. Type 1 marking shall be installed to identify fire lanes on commercial and multi-family developments or as directed by the fire code official. 

Sec. 503.3.2. Type 2. Type 2 marking shall be installed to identify fire lanes in one- and two-family dwelling developments, or as directed by the fire code official. 

Sec. 503.3.3. Type 3. Type 3 marking shall be installed to address situations where neither Type 1 or 2 marking is effective as determined by the fire code official.

1. Specific areas designated by the fire code official shall be marked with diagonal striping across the width of the fire lane. Diagonal marking shall be used in conjunction with painted curbs and/or edge striping and shall run at an angle of 30 to 60 degrees from one side to the other. These diagonal lines shall be in red traffic paint, parallel with each other, at least 6 inches in width, and 24 inches apart. Lettering shall occur as with Type 1 marking.

J. Fire apparatus access roads – Establishment of fire lanes. Section 503 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Apparatus Access Roads,” is amended by adding the following new subsection 503.7:

Sec. 503.7 Establishment of fire lanes. Fire lanes in conformance with this code shall be established by the fire code official or designee, and shall be in accordance with 503.7.1 through 503.7.8.

Sec. 503.7.1 Obstruction of fire lanes prohibited. The obstruction of a designated fire lane by a parked vehicle or any other object is prohibited and shall constitute a traffic hazard as defined in State law and an immediate hazard to life and property.

Sec. 503.7.2 Existing fire lane signs and markings. The following signs and markings shall be provided:

1. Signs (minimum nine-inch by 16-inch) may be allowed to remain until there is a need for replacement and at that time the sign shall meet the requirements of subsection 503.3.2

2. Markings may be allowed to remain until there is a need for repainting and at that time the provisions outlined in 503.3 shall be complied with.

Sec. 503.7.3 Maintenance. Fire lane markings shall be maintained at the expense of the property owner(s) as often as needed to clearly identify the designated area as being a fire lane.

Sec. 503.7.4 Towing notification. At each entrance to property where fire lanes have been designated, signs shall be posted in a clearly conspicuous location and shall clearly state that vehicles parked in fire lanes may be impounded, and the name, telephone number, and address of the towing firm where the vehicle may be redeemed.

Sec. 503.7.5 Responsible property owner. The owner, manager, or person in charge of any property upon which designated fire lanes have been established shall prevent the parking of vehicles or placement of other obstructions in such fire lanes.

Sec. 503.7.6 Violation – Penalty. Any person who fails to mark or maintain the marking of a designated fire lane as prescribed herein, or who obstructs or allows the obstruction of a designated fire lane, other than the parking of a vehicle, shall be deemed to have committed a violation. The penalty for violation of this section shall be the monetary penalty identified in the current fee resolution.

Sec. 503.7.7 Violation – Civil penalty. In addition to, or as an alternate to, the penalties specified above, a violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a civil violation under Chapter 1.04 KCC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required and/or otherwise enforced as provided therein.

Sec. 503.7.8 Impoundment. Any vehicle or object obstructing a designated fire lane is declared a traffic hazard and may be abated without prior notification to its owner by impoundment pursuant to the applicable State law. The owner or operator shall be responsible for all towing and impound charges.

K. Fire apparatus access roads – Commercial and industrial developments. Section 503 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Apparatus Access Roads,” is amended by adding the following new subsection 503.8:

Sec. 503.8. Commercial and Industrial Developments. Fire apparatus access roads serving commercial and industrial developments shall be in accordance with Sections 503.8.1 through 503.8.3.

Sec. 503.8.1. Buildings exceeding three stories or 30 feet in height. Buildings or facilities exceeding 30 feet or three stories in height shall have at least two means of fire apparatus access for each structure.

Sec. 503.8.2. Buildings exceeding 62,000 square feet in area. Buildings or facilities having a gross building area of more than 62,000 square feet shall be provided with two separate and approved fire apparatus access roads.

Exception: Projects having a gross building area of up to 124,000 square feet that have a single approved fire apparatus access road when all buildings are equipped throughout with approved automatic sprinkler systems.

Sec. 503.8.3. Remoteness. Where two access roads are required, they shall be placed a distance apart equal to not less than one half of the length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the property or area to be served, measured in a straight line between accesses or as approved by the fire code official and the fire chief.

L. Fire apparatus access roads – Aerial fire apparatus access roads. Section 503 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Apparatus Access Roads,” is amended by adding the following new subsection 503.9:

Sec. 503.9. Aerial fire apparatus roads. The fire apparatus access roads that accommodate aerial fire apparatus shall be in accordance with Sections 503.9.1 through 503.9.3.

Sec. 503.9.1. Where required. Buildings or portions of buildings or facilities exceeding 30 feet in height above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access shall be provided with approved fire apparatus access roads that are capable of accommodating fire department aerial apparatus. Overhead utility and power lines shall not be located within the aerial fire apparatus access roadway.

Sec. 503.9.2 Width. Fire apparatus access roads shall have a minimum unobstructed width of 26 feet, exclusive of shoulders, in the immediate vicinity of any building or portion of building more than 30 feet in height.

Sec. 503.9.3 Proximity to building. At least one of the required access routes meeting this condition shall be positioned parallel to one entire side of the building. The location of the parallel access route shall be approved.

M. Fire apparatus access roads – Multifamily residential developments. Section 503 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Apparatus Access Roads,” is amended by adding the following new subsection 503.10:

Sec. 503.10. Multi-family residential developments. The fire apparatus access roads serving multi-family residential developments shall be in accordance with Sections 503.10.1 through 503.10.23.

Sec. 503.10.1. Projects having from 100 through 200 dwelling units. Multi-family residential projects having from 100 through 200 dwelling units shall be provided with two separate and approved fire apparatus access roads.

Exception: Projects having up to 200 dwelling units may have a single approved fire apparatus access road when all buildings, including nonresidential occupancies, are equipped throughout with approved automatic sprinkler systems installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.

Sec. 503.10.2. Projects having more than 200 dwelling units. Multi-family residential projects having more than 200 dwelling units shall be provided with two separate and approved fire apparatus access roads regardless of whether they are equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system.

Sec. 503.10.3. Remoteness. Where two access roads are required, they shall be placed a distance apart equal to not less than one half of the length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the property or area to be served, measured in a straight line between accesses or as approved by the fire code official and the fire chief.

N. Fire apparatus access roads – One- and two-family residential developments. Section 503 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Apparatus Access Roads,” is amended by adding the following new subsection 503.11:

Sec. 503.11. One- and Two-family residential developments. The fire apparatus access roads serving one- and two-family residential developments shall be in accordance with Section 503.11.1 and 503.11.2.

Sec. 503.11.1. Projects having more than 30 dwelling units. Developments of one- or two-family dwellings where the number of dwelling units exceeds 30 shall be provided with two separate and approved fire apparatus access roads.

Exceptions:

1. Where there are more than 30 dwelling units on a single public or private fire apparatus access road and all dwelling units are equipped throughout with approved automatic sprinkler systems installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, 903.3.1.2, or 903.3.1.3 of the International Fire Code, access from two directions shall not be required.

2. The number of dwelling units on a single fire apparatus access road shall not be increased unless fire apparatus access roads will, within a reasonable time, connect with future development, as determined by the fire code official.

Sec. 503.11.2. Remoteness. Where two access roads are required, they shall be placed a distance apart equal to not less than one half of the length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the property or area to be served, measured in a straight line between accesses or as approved by the fire code official and the fire chief.

O. Fire apparatus access roads – Underground structures. Section 503 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Apparatus Access Roads,” is amended by adding the following new subsection 503.12:

Sec. 503.12. Underground structures. Installation of underground structures under or within 10 feet of fire apparatus access roads shall be designed using approved load criteria that shall accommodate the loading of fire department aerial apparatus unless otherwise approved.

P. Fire protection water supplies – Records. Section 507 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Protection Water Supplies,” is amended by adding a new subsection 507.5.2.1:

Sec. 507.5.2.1. Records. Records of all system inspections, tests and maintenance required by the referenced standard shall be maintained on the premises for three years; copies shall be submitted in a form and manner determined by the fire code official within 30 calendar days of each test, inspection, or maintenance of the system.

Q. Fire protection water supplies – Physical protection. Section 507 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Protection Water Supplies,” is amended by substituting subsection 507.5.6 with the following:

Sec. 507.5.6. Physical protection. Where fire hydrants are subject to impact by a motor vehicle, guard posts shall be designed and installed in accordance with the Kent Design and Construction Standards.

R. Fire protection water supplies – Fire hydrant. Section 507 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Protection Water Supplies,” is amended by adding a new subsection 507.5.7 as follows:

Sec. 507.5.7. Fire hydrant. Fire hydrants shall be designed and installed in accordance with the local water purveyor’s design and construction standards.

S. Fire protection water supplies – Backflow prevention. Section 507 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Protection Water Supplies,” is amended by adding a new subsection 507.5.8 as follows:

Sec. 507.5.8. Backflow prevention. All private fire systems shall be isolated by an approved method in accordance with the local water purveyor.

T. Fire protection water supplies – Capacity for residential areas. Section 507 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Protection Water Supplies,” is amended by adding a new subsection 507.6 as follows:

Sec. 507.6. Capacity for residential areas. All hydrants installed in single family residential areas shall be capable of delivering 1,500 gpm fire-flow over and above average maximum demands at the farthest point of the installation. 

U. Fire protection water supplies – Spacing. Section 507 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Protection Water Supplies,” is amended by adding a new subsection 507.7 as follows:

Sec. 507.7. Spacing. The spacing of hydrants shall be in accordance with Sections 507.7.1 through 507.7.5.

Sec. 507.7.1. Single family. The maximum fire hydrant spacing serving single family residential areas shall be 600 feet as measured along the fire apparatus access road. 

Sec. 507.7.2. Commercial, industrial and multi-family. The maximum fire hydrant spacing serving commercial, industrial, multi-family or other areas shall be 300 feet as measured along the fire apparatus access road.

Sec. 507.7.3. Medians. Where streets are provided with median dividers which cannot be crossed by firefighters pulling hose lines, hydrants shall be provided on each side of the street and be arranged on an alternating basis, providing, on each side of the street, no more than the maximum spacing.

Sec. 507.7.4. Arterials. Where arterial streets are provided with four or more traffic lanes hydrants shall be provided on each side of the street and be arranged on an alternating basis, providing, on each side of the street, no more than the maximum spacing.

Sec. 507.7.5. Transportation. Where new water mains are extended along streets where hydrants are not needed for protection of structures or similar fire problems, fire hydrants shall be provided at a spacing not to exceed 1,000 feet to provide for transportation hazards. 

V. Fire protection water supplies – Required hydrants. Section 507 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Protection Water Supplies,” is amended by adding a new subsection 507.8 as follows:

Sec. 507.8. Required hydrants. The number of hydrants required for a building shall be based on the calculated fire-flow. The first hydrant will be calculated for up to 1,500 gpm. An additional hydrant will be required for every additional 1,000 gpm, or fraction thereof. The required hydrants shall be within 600 feet of the building as measured along the fire apparatus access roads serving the building.

W. Fire protection water supplies – Notification. Section 507 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Protection Water Supplies,” is amended by adding a new subsection 507.9 as follows:

Sec. 507.9. Notification. The owner of property on which private hydrants are located and the public agencies that own or control public hydrants must provide the fire code official with the following written service notifications in accordance with 507.9.1 and 507.9.2:

Sec. 507.9.1. In-service notification. The fire code official shall be notified when any newly installed hydrant or main is placed into service.

Sec. 507.9.2. Out-of-service notification. Where any hydrant is out of service or has not yet been placed in service, the hydrant shall be identified as being out of service and shall be appropriately marked as out of service, by a method approved by the fire code official.

X. Fire protection water supplies – Building permit requirements. Section 507 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Protection Water Supplies,” is amended by adding a new subsection 507.10 as follows:

Sec. 507.10. Building permit requirements. No building permit shall be issued until all plans required by this section have been submitted and approved in accordance with the provisions of this section.

No construction beyond the foundation shall be allowed until all hydrants and mains required by this section are in place and approved.

(Ord. No. 3691, § 1, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3810, § 1, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 3840, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 3957, § 1, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4082, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4201, § 1, 5-17-16; Ord. No. 4313, § 1, 3-5-19. Formerly 13.01.050)


13.01.070 Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 6, Building Services and Systems.

The following local amendments to Chapter 6 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Building Services and Systems,” including all amendments enacted by the state of Washington, are hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code as follows:

A. Mechanical refrigeration – Testing of equipment. Section 606 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Mechanical Refrigeration,” is amended by substituting 606.6 with the following:

Sec. 606.6 Testing of equipment. Refrigeration equipment and systems having a refrigerant circuit more than 220 pounds of Group A1 or 30 pounds of any other group refrigerant shall be subject to periodic testing in accordance with Section 606.6.1. A written record of the required testing shall be maintained on the premises for a minimum of three years; a copy shall be submitted in a form and manner determined by the fire code official within 30 calendar days of the testing; and a label or tag shall be affixed to the individual system identifying the date of the testing. Tests of emergency devices or systems required by this chapter shall be conducted by persons trained and qualified in refrigeration systems. 

B. Commercial kitchen hoods – Where required. Section 609 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Commercial Kitchen Hoods,” is amended by adding the following subsections to section 609.2:

Sec. 609.2.2. Permit Required. Permits shall be required as set forth in Section 105.6.

Sec. 609.2.3. Approved drawing. The stamped and approved cook line drawing shall be displayed adjacent to the suppression system pull station prior to the final inspection. The approved drawing shall be maintained and available for inspection. 

C. Commercial kitchen hoods – Records. Section 609 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Commercial Kitchen Hoods,” is amended by substituting subsection 609.3.3.3 with the following:

Sec. 609.3.3.3 Records. Records for inspections shall state the individual and company performing the inspection, a description of the inspection, and the date on which the inspection took place. Records for cleanings shall state the individual and company performing the cleaning and the date on which the cleaning took place. Such records shall be completed after each inspection or cleaning, and maintained on the premises for a minimum of three years; a copy shall be submitted in a form and manner determined by the fire code official within 30 days of the inspection or cleaning.

(Ord. No. 3957, § 1, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4082, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4201, § 1, 5-17-16; Ord. No. 4313, § 2, 3-5-19. Formerly 13.01.060)


13.01.080 Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 7, Fire and Smoke Prevention Features.

The following local amendments to Chapter 7 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire and Smoke Prevention Features,” including all amendments enacted by the state of Washington, are hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code as follows:

A. Fire-resistance-rated construction – Testing. Section 703 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire-Resistance-Rated Construction,” is amended by substituting 703.4 with the following:

Sec. 703.4. Testing. Horizontal, vertical sliding and rolling fire doors shall be inspected and tested annually to confirm proper operation and full closure. A written record shall be maintained on the premises for three years; a copy shall be sent to the fire code official within 30 calendar days of the inspection or test; and a label or tag shall be affixed to the individual assembly identifying the date of the scheduled confidence test. 

(Ord. No. 3957, § 1, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4082, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4201, § 1, 5-17-16. Formerly 13.01.070)


13.01.090 Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 9, Fire Protection Systems.

The following local amendments to Chapter 9 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Protection Systems,” including all amendments enacted by the state of Washington, are hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code as follows:

A. Fire protection systems – Scope and application. Section 901 of the International Fire Code, entitled “General,” is amended by supplementing subsection 901.1 with the following:

Sec. 901.1. Scope and application. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all occupancies and buildings, shall specify where fire protection systems are required, and shall apply to the design, installation, inspection, operation, testing, and maintenance of all fire protection systems; however, nothing contained in this chapter shall diminish or reduce the requirements of any duly adopted building codes, including state and local amendments, or other city ordinances, resolutions, or regulations. In the event of any conflict in requirements among these codes, ordinances, resolutions, or regulations, the more stringent provision shall apply.

B. Fire protection systems – Records. Section 901 of the International Fire Code, entitled “General,” is amended by substituting 901.6.2 with the following:

Sec. 901.6.2. Records. Records of all system inspections, tests and maintenance required by the referenced standards shall be maintained on the premises for three years; copies shall be submitted in a form and manner determined by the fire code official within 30 calendar days of each test, inspection, or maintenance of the system; and a label or tag shall be affixed to the individual system identifying the date of the scheduled confidence test. 

C. Fire protection systems – General. Section 901 of the International Fire Code, entitled “General,” is amended by adding the following new subsection 901.11:

Sec. 901.11. Emergency contacts. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any monitored fire protection system to provide and maintain a minimum of three emergency contacts that are capable of responding to the system location with their monitoring company.

D. Fire protection systems – Definitions. Section 902 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Definitions,” is amended by adding the following to the list in subsection 902.1:

PROBLEMATIC FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM

E. Automatic sprinkler systems – Where required. Section 903 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Automatic Sprinkler Systems,” is amended by supplementing subsection 903.2 with the following:

Sec. 903.2. Where required. Approved automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be installed as follows:

1. In all buildings without adequate fire flow.

Exception: Miscellaneous Group U Occupancies.

2. All new buildings and structures regulated by the International Building Code requiring 2,000 gallons per minute or more fire flow, or with a gross floor area of 10,000 or more square feet (929 m2), or where this code provides a more restrictive floor/fire area requirement, and shall be provided in all locations or where described by this code. 

Exception: Spaces or areas in telecommunications buildings used exclusively for telecommunications equipment, associated electrical power distribution equipment, batteries, and standby engines, provided those spaces or areas are equipped throughout with an automatic smoke detection system in accordance with Section 907.2 and are separated from the remainder of the building by not less than 1 hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the International Building Code or not less than 2 hour horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 712 of the International Building Code, or both.

3. Where this code requires the installation of an automatic sprinkler system to protect an occupancy within an otherwise non-sprinklered building, then automatic sprinkler protection will be required throughout the entire building.

4. When the required fire apparatus access roadway grade is 12 percent or greater.

F. Automatic sprinkler systems – Speculative use warehouses. Section 903 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Automatic Sprinkler Systems,” is amended by adding the following new subsection 903.2.9.3:

Sec. 903.2.9.3. Speculative use warehouses. Where the occupant, tenant, or use of the building or storage commodity has not been determined or it is otherwise a speculative use warehouse or building, the automatic sprinkler system shall be designed and installed to protect not less than Class IV non-encapsulated commodities on wood pallets, with no solid, slatted, or wire mesh shelving, and with aisles that are 8 feet or more in width and up to 20 feet in height.

G. Automatic sprinkler systems – Check valve. Section 903 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Automatic Sprinkler Systems,” is amended by adding a new subsection 903.3.8 as follows:

Sec. 903.3.8. Check valve. All automatic sprinkler system risers shall be equipped with a check valve.

H. Automatic sprinkler systems – Riser room access. Section 903 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Automatic Sprinkler Systems,” is amended by adding a new subsection 903.7 as follows:

Sec. 903.7. Riser room access. All risers shall be located in a dedicated room with an exterior door, and with lighting and heat for the room.

I. Fire alarm and detection systems – General. Section 907 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Alarm and Detection Systems,” is amended by substituting subsection 907.1.3 with the following:

Sec. 907.1.3. Equipment. Systems and their components shall be listed and approved for the purpose for which they are installed. All new alarm systems shall be addressable. Each device shall have its own address and shall annunciate individual addresses at a UL Central Station.

J. Fire alarm and detection systems – Initiating device identification. Section 907 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Alarm and Detection Systems,” is amended by substituting subsection 907.6.3 with the following:

Sec. 907.6.3 Initiating device identification. The fire alarm system shall identify the specific initiating device address, location, device type, floor level where applicable and status including indication of normal, alarm, trouble and supervisory status, as appropriate.

Exception: Special initiating devices that do not support individual device identification.

K. Fire alarm and detection systems – Records. Section 907 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Alarm and Detection Systems,” is amended by substituting subsection 907.8.5.1 with the following:

Sec. 907.8.5.1. Records. Records of all system inspections, tests and maintenance required by the referenced standards shall be maintained on the premises for three years; a copy shall be submitted in a form and manner determined by the fire code official within 30 calendar days of each test, inspection, or maintenance of the system; and a label or tag shall be affixed to the individual system identifying the date of the scheduled confidence test.

L. Fire alarm and detection systems – Latched alarms. Section 907 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Alarm and Detection Systems,” is amended by adding a new subsection 907.11 as follows:

Sec. 907.11. Latched alarms. All signals shall be automatically “latched” at the fire alarm control unit until their operated devices are returned to normal condition, and the control unit is manually reset. 

M. Fire alarm and detection systems – Resetting. Section 907 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Alarm and Detection Systems,” is amended by adding a new subsection 907.12 as follows:

Sec. 907.12. Resetting. All fire alarm control units shall be reset only by an approved person.

Sec. 907.12.1. Reset code. The reset code for the fire alarm control unit or keypad shall be 3-7-1-2-3-4. The reset code shall not be changed without approval of the fire code official.

N. Fire alarm and detection systems – Fire alarm control unit location. Section 907 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Alarm and Detection Systems,” is amended by adding a new subsection 907.13 as follows:

Sec. 907.13. Fire alarm control unit location. All fire alarm control units shall be located in the riser room designed and installed in accordance with Section 903.7, or an approved location.

O. Smoke control systems – Written record. Section 909 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Smoke Control Systems,” is amended by substituting 909.20.2 with the following:

Sec. 909.20.2. Written record. The records shall include the date of the maintenance, identification of the servicing personnel and notification of any unsatisfactory condition and the corrective action taken, including parts replacement. The written record of smoke control system testing and maintenance shall be maintained on the premises for three years and copies shall be submitted in a form and manner determined by the fire code official within 30 calendar days of each test or maintenance of the system; and a label or tag shall be affixed to the individual system identifying the date of the scheduled testing.

P. Fire protection systems – Signs. Section 912 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Department Connections,” is amended by substituting 912.5 with the following: 

Sec. 912.5. Signs. Fire department connections shall be clearly identified in an approved manner.

All fire department connections shall have an approved sign attached below the Siamese clapper. The sign shall specify the type of water-based fire protection system, the structure, and the building areas served.

(Ord. No. 3691, § 1, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3810, § 2, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 3840, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 3957, § 1, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4082, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4201, § 1, 5-17-16; Ord. No. 4313, § 3, 3-5-19. Formerly 13.01.080)


13.01.100 Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 11, Construction Requirements for Existing Buildings.

The following local amendments to Chapter 11 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Construction Requirements for Existing Buildings,” including all amendments enacted by the state of Washington, are hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code as follows:

A. Fire safety requirements for existing buildings – Additions and alterations. Section 1103 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Safety Requirements for Existing Buildings,” is amended by adding a new subsection 1103.5.3 as follows:

Sec. 1103.5.3. Substantial Alterations. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to substantial alterations to existing buildings regardless of use when a substantial alteration occurs in a structure equaling 10,000 or greater square feet. For purposes of this section, a substantial alteration shall be defined as an alteration that costs 50 percent or more of the current assessed value of the structure and impacts more than 50% of the gross floor area.

B. Fire safety requirements for existing buildings – Fire alarm control unit replacement. Section 1103 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire Safety Requirements for Existing Buildings,” is amended by adding a new subsection 1103.7.8 as follows:

Sec. 1103.7.8. Fire alarm control unit replacement. If an existing fire alarm control unit is replaced with identical equipment it shall be considered maintenance.

(Ord. No. 3957, § 1, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4082, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4201, § 1, 5-17-16. Formerly 13.01.090)


13.01.110 Amendments to the International Fire Code – Chapter 80, Referenced Standards.

The following local amendments to Chapter 80 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Referenced Standards,” including all amendments enacted by the state of Washington, are hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code as follows:

A. Referenced standards – NFPA. Section NFPA of the International Fire Code, entitled “Reference Standards,” is amended by modifying the standard reference number dates of publication as follows:

	13-16	Installation of Sprinkler Systems

	13D-16	Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes 

	13R-16	Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies up to and Including Four Stories in Height

	20-16	Installation of Stationary Pumps for Fire Protection

	24-16	Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and Their Appurtenances

	72-16	National Fire Alarm and Signaling Code

	110-16	Emergency and Standby Power Systems

	111-16	Stored Electrical Energy Emergency and Standby Power Systems

	720-15	Installation of Carbon Monoxide (CO) Detection and Warning Equipment

(Ord. No. 3957, § 1, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4082, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4201, § 1, 5-17-16. Formerly 13.01.100)


13.01.120 Amendments to the International Fire Code – Appendix B, Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings.

The following local amendments to Appendix B to the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings,” including all amendments enacted by the state of Washington, are hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code as follows:

A. Fire-flow requirements for buildings – Increases. Section B103 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings,” is amended by substituting subsection B103.1 with the following:

B103.1 Increases. The fire chief is authorized to increase the fire-flow requirements where exposures could be impacted by fire. An increase shall not be more than twice that required for the building under consideration.

B. Fire-flow requirements for buildings. Section B105 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings,” is amended by substituting section B105 with the following:

B105.1 One- and two-family dwellings. Fire-flow requirements for one- and two-family dwellings shall be in accordance with Sections B105.1.1 through B105.1.3.

B105.1.1 Buildings less than 3,600 square feet. The minimum fire-flow and flow duration requirements for buildings less than 3,600 square feet shall be 1,000 gallons per minute for 1 hour.

Exception: A reduction in required fire-flow of 50 percent, as approved, is allowed when the building is equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system.

B105.1.2 Buildings greater than 3,600 square feet or more. The minimum fire-flow and flow duration requirements for buildings that are 3,600 square feet or larger shall not be less than that specified in Table B105.1(2).

Exception: A reduction of fire-flow and flow duration to 1,000 gallons per minute for 1 hour, as approved, is allowed when the building is equipped with the following;

1. An approved automatic sprinkler system.

2. 1-hour fire resistant rated exterior walls tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 with exposure on the exterior side and projections with 1-hour underside protection, fire blocking installed from the wall top plate to the underside of the roof sheathing and no gable vent openings.

Exception: Walls with a distance greater than 11' to the nearest exposure or face an unbuildable lot, tract or buffer. The distance shall be measured at right angles from the face of the wall.

B105.2 Buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings. The minimum fire-flow and flow duration for buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings shall be as specified in Table B105.1(2).

Exception: A reduction in required fire-flow of 50 percent, as approved, is allowed when the building is provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system. The resulting fire-flow shall not be less than 1,500 gallons per minute for the prescribed duration as specified in Table B105.1(2).

B105.2.1 Tents and Membrane structures. No fire flow is required for tents and membrane structures.

B105.2.2 Accessory residential Group U buildings. Accessory residential Group U buildings shall comply with the requirements of B105.1.

B105.3 Water supply for buildings equipped with an automatic sprinkler system. For buildings equipped with an automatic sprinkler system, the water supply shall be capable of providing the greater of:

1. The automatic sprinkler system demand, including hose stream allowance.

2. The required fire flow.

C. Fire-flow requirements for buildings. Section B105 of the International Fire Code, entitled “Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings,” is amended by deleting the following tables from section B105:

Table B105.1 (1) Required Fire-Flow for One- and two-family dwellings, Group R-3 and R-4 Buildings and Townhomes.

Table B105.2 Required Fire-Flow for Other than One- and two-family dwellings, Group R-3 and R-4 Buildings and Townhomes.

D. Section B105 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding new subsection B105.4 as follows:

B105.4 Alternative Fire Flow Mitigation. For development projects, where it has been determined not feasible to extend the water main by the local water purveyor, the following alternative fire flow mitigations are approved for use in accordance with Sections B105.4.1 through B105.4.2

B105.4.1 One- and two-family dwellings. Fire flow will not be required for one- and two-family dwellings if all of the following mitigations are met;

1. The fire-flow calculation area is less than 3600 square feet

2. The construction type of the dwelling is Type VA

3. The dwelling is equipped with a central station monitored automatic fire sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 with a water supply of no less than 30 minutes

4. The dwelling has a fire separation distance of no less than 150 feet on all sides

B105.4.2 Buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings. Fire flow will not be required for buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings if all of the following mitigations are met;

1. The fire-flow calculation area is less than 3600 square feet

2. The construction type of the dwelling is not Type VB

3. The dwelling is equipped with a central station monitored automatic fire sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 with a water supply of no less than 30 minutes

4. The dwelling has a fire separation distance of no less than 150 feet on all sides

(Ord. No. 3810, § 3, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 3840, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 3957, § 1, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4082, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4201, § 1, 5-17-16. Formerly 13.01.110)


13.01.130 Fire codes – Fees.

The city council shall, by resolution, establish the fees to be assessed to implement and enforce the fire codes adopted in this title.

(Ord. No. 3691, § 1, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3840, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 3957, § 1, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4082, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4201, § 1, 5-17-16. Formerly 13.01.120)


13.01.140 Appeals. 

A. Appeals to the hearing examiner.

1. Jurisdiction. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, determinations, or decisions made by the fire code official relative to the suitability of alternate materials, designs, and methods of construction, and to provide for reasonable application and interpretation of the provisions of the International Fire Code, the city of Kent hearing examiner is hereby designated as the board of appeals created pursuant to Section 108 of the International Fire Code adopted in KCC 13.01.030 for all matters concerning the application of the fire codes. The city hearing examiner, however, shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of these codes, nor shall the city hearing examiner be empowered to waive requirements of these codes.

2. Filing. Appeals shall be filed with the hearing examiner by 5:00 p.m. of the fourteenth calendar day following the date of the order, determination, or decision being appealed. When the last day of the appeal period so computed is a Saturday, Sunday, or federal or city holiday, the period shall run until 5:00 p.m. on the next business day. The appeal shall be accompanied by payment of the filing fee. Specific objections to the fire code official’s decision and the relief sought shall be stated in the written appeal.

3. Standing. Standing to bring an appeal under this chapter is limited to the following persons:

a. The applicant and the owner of property to which the permit decision is directed.

b. Another person aggrieved or adversely affected by the order, determination, or decision, or who would be aggrieved or adversely affected by a reversal or modification of the order, determination, or decision. A person is aggrieved or adversely affected within the meaning of this section only when all of the following conditions are present:

i. The order, determination, or decision has prejudiced or is likely to prejudice that person;

ii. A judgment in favor of that person would substantially eliminate or redress the prejudice to that person caused or likely to be caused by the order, determination, or decision; and 

iii. The appellant has exhausted his or her administrative remedies to the extent required by law.

B. Appeals to superior court. Appeals to the hearing examiner shall be made pursuant to Chapter 2.32 KCC. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be final and conclusive unless within 21 calendar days of the hearing examiner’s decision an appeal is filed with the superior court. When the last day of the appeal period so computed is a Saturday, Sunday, or federal or city holiday, the period shall run until the next business day.

(Ord. No. 3691, § 1, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3840, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 3957, § 1, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4082, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4201, § 1, 5-17-16. Formerly 13.01.130)


Chapter 13.02 ENFORCEMENT OF THE FIRE CODES

Sections:

13.02.010    Scope.

13.02.020    Definitions.

13.02.030    Administration and enforcement.

13.02.040    Investigation and notice of violation.

13.02.050    Stop work order and stop use order.

13.02.060    Emergency order.

13.02.070    Deadline for compliance – Extension of compliance deadline.

13.02.080    Violations.

13.02.090    Violation – Penalty.

13.02.100    Additional relief.


13.02.010 Scope.

This chapter shall supplement the procedures outlined in Ch. 1.04 KCC for enforcement of violations of the Kent City Code and both chapters shall govern enforcement of the fire codes adopted in KCC Title 13.

(Ord. No. 3691, § 3, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3880, § 3, 5-6-08)


13.02.020 Definitions.

The definitions contained in KCC 1.04.020 shall also apply to this chapter. In addition, the following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Fire code official means the chief of the city’s fire department, or any person authorized by the fire chief or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of the fire codes.

Fire codes means and includes the International Fire Code as now or hereafter adopted, amended, and/or supplemented pursuant to KCC Title 13, the Revised Code of Washington, and/or the Washington Administrative Code.

(Ord. No. 3691, § 3, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3880, § 3, 5-6-08)


13.02.030 Administration and enforcement.

A. It shall be the duty of the fire code official to enforce the fire codes in the manner generally described in the fire codes and as more particularly described in this chapter and in Ch. 1.04 KCC. Enforcement of the fire codes shall be performed by the fire code official or with his or her concurrence. The fire code official may call upon the police or other appropriate city department(s) to assist in enforcement.

B. The obligation of complying with the requirements of the fire codes shall fall upon any person defined under KCC 1.04.020(K) as a “person responsible for the violation,” and shall expressly include an owner, occupier, or other person responsible for the condition of the buildings, structures, dwelling units, or premises.

C. In case of conflict between the provisions of the fire codes and of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall control. In case of any conflict between this chapter and Ch. 1.04 KCC, this chapter shall control.

(Ord. No. 3691, § 3, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3880, § 3, 5-6-08)


13.02.040 Investigation and notice of violation. 

A. The fire code official shall investigate any building, structure, dwelling unit, or premises which the fire code official reasonably believes does not comply with the standards and requirements of the fire codes.

B. If, after investigation, the fire code official determines that the standards or requirements of the fire codes have been violated, the fire code official may seek compliance and serve a notice of violation on a person responsible for the violation or may otherwise enforce the fire codes pursuant to this chapter and Ch. 1.04 KCC.

(Ord. No. 3691, § 3, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3880, § 3, 5-6-08)


13.02.050 Stop work order and stop use order.

The fire code official may issue a stop work order and/or a stop use order pursuant to the provisions of the International Fire Code or may issue such order whenever a continuing violation of any of the fire codes will materially impair the fire code official’s ability to secure compliance, or when a continuing violation threatens the health or safety of the public. A stop work order or a stop use order may include the placement of a stop work or a stop use red tag upon the building, structure, dwelling unit, or premises.

(Ord. No. 3691, § 3, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3880, § 3, 5-6-08)


13.02.060 Emergency order.

A. Whenever any building, use, dwelling unit, and/or premises violates the fire codes in a manner that, in the opinion of the fire code official, creates a risk of imminent harm to the occupants of the building, dwelling unit, premises, or any member of the public, the fire code official may issue an emergency order barring use of the building, dwelling unit, and/or premises until the building, dwelling unit, and/or premises has been inspected by the city and approved as restored to a condition of safety, and the order may require that the building, dwelling unit, and/or premises be immediately vacated and closed to entry until the dangerous condition has been corrected to the satisfaction of the fire code official. The emergency order shall also specify a deadline for correction of the conditions that caused the emergency order to be issued.

B. The emergency order shall be posted on the building, dwelling unit, and/or premises and shall be mailed by regular first class mail to the last known address of the owners, and if applicable, to any known occupants.

C. Any building, dwelling unit, and/or premises subject to an emergency order which is not repaired within the time specified in the order is hereby found and declared to be a public nuisance, and the fire code official is authorized to abate that nuisance by any legal means and with any assistance that may be available, and all abatement costs shall become a lien against the property and shall be recovered by the fire code official in any manner provided by law.

(Ord. No. 3691, § 3, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3880, § 3, 5-6-08)


13.02.070 Deadline for compliance – Extension of compliance deadline.

A. Where violations of the fire codes occur, deadlines for compliance with the fire codes, and any extension of the deadline for compliance granted by the fire code official, shall be governed by the conditions outlined in KCC 1.04.050.

B. An extension of the deadline for compliance may be revoked by the fire code official pursuant to the conditions outlined in KCC 1.04.050.

(Ord. No. 3691, § 3, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3880, § 3, 5-6-08)


13.02.080 Violations.

A. It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with a notice of violation, final order, stop work order, condemnation tag or any other order or restriction imposed by the fire code official and issued pursuant to this title or Ch. 1.04 KCC.

B. It shall be unlawful to remove or deface any sign, notice, complaint, or order posted by the fire code official in accordance with his or her enforcement duties.

C. It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally obstruct, impede, or interfere with any lawful attempt to serve notice of a violation or intentionally obstruct, impede, or interfere with lawful attempts to correct a violation.

D. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with an emergency order issued by the fire code official requiring that the building, dwelling unit, and/or premises be restored to a condition of safety by a specified time.

E. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or occupy, or to cause or permit any person to use or occupy the building, dwelling unit, and/or premises after the date provided in an emergency order requiring the building, dwelling unit, and/or premises to be vacated and closed, until the fire code official certifies that the conditions described in the emergency order have been corrected and the building, dwelling unit, and/or premises have been restored to a safe condition.

(Ord. No. 3691, § 3, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3880, § 3, 5-6-08)


13.02.090 Violation – Penalty.

A. Civil code enforcement action. Any violation of any provision of this title constitutes a civil violation under Chapter 1.04 KCC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required and/or otherwise enforced as provided therein.

B. Criminal offense. In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of the Kent City Code may be charged criminally, pursuant to KCC 1.04.030(B).

C. Civil infraction. In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of this chapter may be issued a class 1 civil infraction pursuant to RCW 7.80.120, as currently enacted or hereafter amended, and KCC 1.04.225.

D. Separate offense. Each day, or portion thereof, that a violation continues to exist shall be considered a separate offense.

(Ord. No. 3691, § 3, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3880, § 3, 5-6-08; Ord. No. 4282, § 7, 7-3-18)


13.02.100 Additional relief.

The fire code official may seek legal or equitable relief to enjoin any acts and practices and abate any condition which constitutes or will constitute a violation of the fire codes when civil or criminal penalties are inadequate to effect compliance. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit or preclude any other action or proceeding relating to the enforcement of the fire codes.

(Ord. No. 3691, § 3, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3880, § 3, 5-6-08)


Chapter 13.03 PREVENTABLE ACTIVATION OF FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

Sections:

13.03.010    Purpose.

13.03.020    Scope.

13.03.030    Preventable nuisance – Violation.

13.03.040    Preventable malfunction – Violation.

13.03.050    Non-preventable events.

13.03.060    Fire protection system – Registration required.

13.03.070    Penalties – Fees – Notice of correction.

13.03.080    Notice of fee assessment – Collection.

13.03.090    Appeals.


13.03.010 Purpose.

It is the intent of this chapter to reduce the number of false fire alarms, or preventable activations of fire protection systems, that occur within the city and the resulting impact those preventable alarms or activations have on city resources by providing for corrective administrative action, including the imposition of fees.

(Ord. No. 3702 § 1, 8-3-04)


13.03.020 Scope.

This chapter shall apply to any structure for which a fire protection system is required by the International Fire Code, which code has been adopted by the city in KCC 13.01.010; provided, that this chapter shall not apply to single-family homes.

(Ord. No. 3702 § 1, 8-3-04)


13.03.030 Preventable nuisance – Violation. 

It shall be deemed a violation of this section if a fire protection system is triggered due to the following preventable nuisance events, which results in a response by the fire department:

A. Erroneous transmission of an alarm, including reports of trouble signals by fire protection system monitoring companies.

B. Work conducted on a fire protection system connected to an alarm when reasonable steps were not taken to prevent reporting of an alarm to the fire department.

C. Fire drill or other test of a fire protection system when reasonable steps were not taken to prevent reporting of an alarm to the fire department.

D. Painting, welding, cleaning, cooking, dust producing, or other work or activity that activates an alarm.

E. Unintentional manual activation of a fire protection system when reasonable steps were not taken to prevent reporting of an alarm to the fire department.

F. Unintentional striking of a detector, circuitry, panel, or other component of an alarm system, or unintentional breaking or discharging of a sprinkler system or other fire extinguishing system, when reasonable steps were not taken to prevent the striking, breaking, or discharge.

(Ord. No. 3702 § 1, 8-3-04)


13.03.040 Preventable malfunction – Violation.

It shall be deemed a violation of this section if a fire protection system is triggered due to the following preventable malfunction events, which results in a response by the fire department:

A. Mechanical failure of the fire protection system.

B. Improper type or installation of a fire protection system, detector, circuitry, panel or other component, including unapproved or incompatible components.

C. Improper sensitivity or maintenance of a fire protection system, including a system with unapparent reasons for repeat alarms.

(Ord. No. 3702 § 1, 8-3-04)


13.03.050 Non-preventable events.

It shall not be deemed a violation of this section if a fire protection system is triggered due to the following non-preventable events, which results in a response by the fire department:

A. An actual fire, explosion, overheating, or other situation existed that could have resulted in a fire.

B. A person’s belief that a fire or other emergency existed that required the response of emergency personnel.

C. Unpreventable activation due to an earthquake, lightning strike, or other natural occurrence.

D. Malicious tampering with a fire protection system when, as determined by fire department personnel, the owner or occupier took reasonable steps to prevent tampering.

E. Unintentional leak of any system that releases steam, heat, gases, water, or vapors that activates a fire protection system.

F. Any other event as determined by the fire chief or his or her designee, at his or her discretion, that reasonable steps were taken to prevent the activation, or the event causing the activation was beyond the control of the person having or maintaining the fire protection system on the premises owned or occupied by him or her.

(Ord. No. 3702 § 1, 8-3-04)


13.03.060 Fire protection system – Registration required.

It shall be unlawful for any person to have or maintain on any premises a fire protection system unless there is on file with the Kent fire department a current emergency response registration, which shall be submitted on a form provided by the city. The registration form shall contain the following information:

A. The name, address, and business and evening telephone numbers of the property owner or manager of the premises wherein the fire protection system is installed.

B. The name, address, and telephone number of a minimum of two (2) people who can be notified by the fire department in the event the fire protection system is activated and who shall be authorized to enter such premises and turn off any alarm at all hours of the day and night. In addition, the individual must have the authorization to place the system on hold and perform a fire watch. 

C. All individuals identified in this section shall be capable of responding to the premises within a reasonable time not to exceed thirty (30) minutes.

D. Any changes to the information required in this section shall be reported to the fire department by the owner or manager of the premises within fifteen (15) days of such change.

E. The registration requirements contained within this section may be modified by the fire chief or his or her designee, at his or her discretion.

(Ord. No. 3702 § 1, 8-3-04)


13.03.070 Penalties – Fees – Notice of correction.

A. Fees. Each calendar year, which shall run January 1 through December 31, the city shall charge and collect fees for preventable activations that require response by fire department personnel. The fees assessed shall be charged to and collected from the owner or manager of the premises. The fees shall be assessed as follows:

1. Preventable nuisance alarms:

a. First violation: no penalty.

b. Second violation: no penalty.

c. Third violation: seventy-five dollars ($75); beginning January 1, 2007, eighty-one dollars ($81).

d. Fourth violation: one hundred dollars ($100); beginning January 1, 2007, one hundred eight dollars ($108).

e. Fifth violation: one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125); beginning January 1, 2007, one hundred thirty-five dollars ($135).

2. Preventable malfunction alarms:

a. First violation: no penalty.

b. Second violation: fifty dollars ($50); beginning January 1, 2007, fifty-four dollars ($54).

c. Third violation: seventy-five dollars ($75); beginning January 1, 2007, eighty-one dollars ($81).

d. Fourth violation: one hundred dollars ($100); beginning January 1, 2007, one hundred eight dollars ($108).

e. Fifth violation: one hundred fifty dollars ($150); beginning January 1, 2007, one hundred sixty-two dollars ($162).

3. Excessive activations. Each preventable activation in excess of five (5) during any one (1) year shall be assessed a fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250). Beginning January 1, 2007, this fee shall increase to two hundred sixty-nine dollars ($269).

4. Fire department personnel wait time. In addition to the fees set forth in subsection (A) of this section, in the event the owner, manager, or other notified person fails to respond to the premises within thirty (30) minutes of notification, the owner or manager shall be assessed a fee equal to the hourly wage paid to fire department personnel for the time spent waiting in excess of thirty (30) minutes, calculated to the nearest quarter hour; provided, that in the event the fire department is required to hire an off-duty fire department employee to work as a result of the fire department’s response, the owner or manager shall be assessed the cost to the city of hiring the off-duty firefighter.

B. Preventable malfunction – Notice of correction. In addition to the fee assessment set forth in subsection (A) of this section, the owner or manager of the premises shall, within fifteen (15) working days after receipt of written notice to do so, prepare a written report to the fire chief, on a form provided by the city, setting forth the cause of an alarm’s malfunction, the corrective action taken by the owner or occupier, whether and when such fire protection system has been inspected by authorized service personnel, and such other information as the fire chief may reasonably require to determine the cause of the malfunction, any mitigating circumstances, and the corrective action necessary.

(Ord. No. 3702 § 1, 8-3-04; Ord. No. 3819, § 7, 11-21-06)


13.03.080 Notice of fee assessment – Collection. 

A. Notice of fee assessment. Notice of the fees assessed or the corrective action required in accordance with KCC 13.03.070 shall be sent by fire department personnel to the owner and/or manager of the premises upon which the alarm occurred. Such notice shall be either personally served upon the owner or manager or transmitted via first class certified mail/return receipt requested. Any fees assessed shall be due and payable within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice.

B. Delinquent accounts. Except to the extent modified by this section, the city will treat all unpaid fee assessments as delinquent accounts under Ch. 3.10 KCC.

C. Collection agency. Any fee assessed under this chapter and unpaid shall constitute a debt to the city. The city may, pursuant to Chapter 19.16 RCW, use a collection agency to collect outstanding debts, or it may seek collection by court proceedings, which remedies shall be in addition to all other remedies.

(Ord. No. 3702 § 1, 8-3-04)


13.03.090 Appeals.

A. Appeals to the fire chief. Any person subject to the imposition of fees or other administrative sanction by fire department personnel under the terms of this chapter shall have a right of appeal therefrom to the city’s fire chief. Appeals shall be in writing and filed with the fire chief by 5:00 p.m. of the fifteenth (15th) calendar day following the date the notice of fee assessment or the notice of corrective action required was issued. When the last day of the appeal period so computed is a Saturday, Sunday, or federal or city holiday, the period shall run until 5:00 p.m. on the next business day. Specific objections to the fee assessed and the relief sought shall be stated in the written appeal.

B. Appeals to superior court. The decision of the fire chief shall be final and conclusive unless an appeal is filed with the superior court within twenty-one (21) calendar days of the fire chief’s decision. When the last day of the appeal period so computed is a Saturday, Sunday, or federal or city holiday, the period shall run until the next business day.

(Ord. No. 3702 § 1, 8-3-04)


Chapter 13.04 NOVELTY LIGHTERS

Sections:

13.04.010    Findings.

13.04.020    Definitions.

13.04.030    Retail sale of novelty lighters – Prohibited.

13.04.040    Administration and enforcement.

13.04.050    Violation – Penalty.

13.04.060    Grace period after enactment.


13.04.010 Findings.

The city council finds that the sale of novelty lighters within the city of Kent poses a public safety risk because, given their toy-like designs, they are attractive to children. Because youth fire setting has been identified as a fast-growing fire threat in the United States, the city council finds that it is a reasonable exercise of its police powers to prohibit the public sale of novelty lighters within the city limits.

(Ord. No. 3911, § 1, 2-17-09)


13.04.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter clearly requires otherwise, the words or phrases defined in this section shall have the indicated meanings.

A. Fire code official means the chief of the city’s fire department, or any person authorized by the fire chief or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of the fire codes.

B. Manufacturer means any one of the following:

1. An entity that produces, or causes the production of, novelty lighters for sale outside the city limits of Kent; or

2. An importer or first purchaser of novelty lighters that intends to offer novelty lighters for resale outside the city limits of Kent.

C. Novelty lighter means a lighter that can produce a flame using any fuel, including butane or liquid fuel. Novelty lighters have features that are attractive to children, including but not limited to visual effects, flashing lights, musical sounds, and toy-like designs. Novelty lighter does not include lighters that are only printed or decorated with logos, decals, artwork, or heat shrinkable sleeves. The term considers the shape of the lighter to be the most important characteristic when determining whether a lighter is considered a novelty lighter. Novelty lighters include, but are not limited to, lighters that are shaped like:

1. Cartoon characters;

2. Toys;

3. Musical instruments;

4. Vehicles;

5. The human body or parts of the human body;

6. Food or beverages;

7. Weaponry;

8. Furniture;

9. Sports equipment;

10. Holiday symbols;

11. Tools; or

12. Other equipment or household products including but not limited to fire extinguishers, cell phones, vases, boots, shoes, toasters, traffic lights, light bulbs, pens, pencils, magic markers, coffee cups, fishing poles, money, propane tanks, gas cans, match sticks, cigarettes, clothing items, cameras, picture frames, or flowers.

D. Retailer means a person who offers novelty lighters for sale to consumers within the city at retail through any means, but does not include a sale that is a wholesale transaction with a distributor or manufacturer, which does not involve the resale to consumers within the city limits.

E. Sell or sale means to transfer, or agree to transfer, title or possession for a monetary or nonmonetary consideration.

F. Wholesale dealer means an entity that distributes novelty lighters to a retailer or other person for resale to consumers.

(Ord. No. 3911, § 1, 2-17-09)


13.04.030 Retail sale of novelty lighters – Prohibited.

A. Within the city limits of Kent, a person may not:

1. Offer novelty lighters for retail sale to consumers; or

2. Give novelty lighters away to any person as a sample, prize, or gift for any promotional purpose.

B. The prohibition prescribed by this section shall not apply to:

1. Manufacturers who produce novelty lighters within the city for sale to distributors or retail dealers for their subsequent resale outside the city limits of Kent; or

2. Distributors or wholesale dealers located within the city who receive in and distribute novelty lighters to retailers for subsequent resale outside the city limits.

(Ord. No. 3911, § 1, 2-17-09)


13.04.040 Administration and enforcement.

A. This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the code enforcement process set forth in Ch. 1.04 KCC, as now enacted or hereafter amended.

B. The obligation of complying with the requirements of this chapter shall fall upon any person defined under KCC 1.04.020(K) as a person responsible for the violation.

C. It shall be the duty of the fire code official, or his or her designee, to enforce the provisions of this chapter in the manner generally described in this chapter and in Ch. 1.04 KCC. The fire code official may call upon the police or other appropriate city department(s) to assist in enforcement.

D. In case of conflict between the provisions of this chapter and Ch. 1.04 KCC, this chapter shall control.

(Ord. No. 3911, § 1, 2-17-09)


13.04.050 Violation – Penalty.

A violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a civil violation under Ch. 1.04 KCC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required and/or otherwise enforced as provided therein, or a misdemeanor pursuant to Ch. 1.04 KCC.

(Ord. No. 3911, § 1, 2-17-09)


13.04.060 Grace period after enactment.

On the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, March 19, 2009, retailers have a maximum of ninety (90) calendar days to eliminate their inventory of novelty lighters. In no instance may any retailer give away or sell a novelty lighter within the city of Kent after ninety (90) days from the effective date of this ordinance, or June 17, 2009.

(Ord. No. 3911, § 1, 2-17-09)


Chapter 13.05 FIREWORKS

Sections:

13.05.010    Intent.

13.05.020    Definitions – References to Revised Code of Washington.

13.05.030    Prohibited acts – Exceptions.

13.05.040    Permits.

13.05.060    Violations and penalties.

13.05.070    Seizure of fireworks.


13.05.010 Intent.

At the November 3, 2015, election, the Kent city council certified Advisory Proposition 1 to the voters. Advisory Proposition 1 asked the following question:

Whether the sale, possession and discharge of consumer fireworks should be prohibited in the city of Kent. The prohibition of the sale, possession and discharge of consumer fireworks would not affect properly licensed and permitted public displays of fireworks.

At the November 3, 2015, election, a majority of voters answered the above question in the affirmative. The city council, having determined that the prohibition of the sale, possession, and discharge of consumer fireworks is requested by the voters and is in the interests of the public health, safety, and welfare, establishes this chapter to prohibit the sale, possession, and discharge of consumer fireworks, to establish the circumstances in which public displays of fireworks and fireworks used in theatrical presentations are permitted, and to establish the penalty for a violation of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 4190, § 2, 2-16-16)


13.05.020 Definitions – References to Revised Code of Washington.

A. The words and phrases used in this chapter shall be given the definitions contained in Chapter 70.77 of the Revised Code of Washington (“RCW”) as now enacted or hereafter amended or recodified.

B. Any reference to a section of the RCW or the Washington Administrative Code (“WAC”) in this chapter shall refer to the chapter or section referenced and any amendment or recodification thereof.

(Ord. No. 4190, § 2, 2-16-16)


13.05.030 Prohibited acts – Exceptions.

A. Except as permitted in this chapter, the sale, possession, and discharge of fireworks of any kind within the city is prohibited.

B. Notwithstanding the prohibition set forth in subsection (A) of this section, the following shall be permitted in the city of Kent:

1. The public display of fireworks authorized by permit issued by the city;

2. The use of articles pyrotechnic and special effects, as defined by RCW 70.77.138 and 70.77.146, when used in accordance with RCW 70.77.535 and when authorized by permit issued by the city;

3. The use by law enforcement or emergency response agencies of devices that may fall within the definition of firework, when such devices are used in furtherance of law enforcement or emergency response operations or training;

4. The transportation of consumer fireworks through the city as part of interstate commerce;

5. The use of flares to warn motor vehicles of road hazards; or the use of torpedoes, flares, or fuses by railroads or other government transportation agencies for signal purposes as provided in RCW 70.77.530;

6. The use of agricultural and wildlife fireworks as defined by RCW 70.77.141 when used in accordance with RCW 70.77.311;

7. The possession, storage, or transportation of fireworks that is incidental to the permitted uses in this subsection.

C. It shall be unlawful for an owner of property, or a person renting, leasing, or who has control over the use of property, to knowingly permit the property that he or she owns, rents, leases or has control over, to be utilized for the discharge of fireworks when the discharge of fireworks is not properly permitted pursuant to KCC 13.05.040.

D. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit fireworks or parts of fireworks, whether discharged or not, in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place, except when the fireworks or parts of fireworks are deposited in private or public litter receptacles, and it shall be unlawful for a private property owner to fail to remove fireworks or parts of fireworks, whether discharged or not, that are not contained in a litter receptacle from private property that is open to the public within 72 hours of the deposit of such fireworks or parts of fireworks on the private property.

(Ord. No. 4190, § 2, 2-16-16)


13.05.040 Permits.

A. The city council designates the city’s fire marshal or the fire marshal’s designee as the fire official authorized to review permits required by this chapter or Chapter 70.77 RCW; provided only those acts set forth in KCC 13.05.030(B) shall be permitted.

B. Except as required elsewhere in this chapter, the procedures, requirements, and conditions set forth in Chapter 70.77 RCW and Chapter 212-17 WAC, which are applicable to the submittal, consideration, or granting of permits filed with a city shall apply to the filing, review, and issuance of any permit required by this chapter.

C. In reviewing an application for a permit, the fire official may consider relevant provisions in the fire codes, building codes, and health and sanitation codes adopted by the city in determining whether the discharge, possession, or storage of fireworks is performed in a safe manner or presents a risk to public health, safety, or welfare.

D. A permit will only issue under this section in the event a pyrotechnic operator licensed by the state of Washington is designated as the person to discharge the fireworks. The permit application shall designate the licensed pyrotechnic operator by name and Washington state license number.

E. As a condition of the issuance of any permit, the fire official retains the authority to revoke a permit at any time due to safety concerns.

F. The fee for any permit issued in accordance with this chapter shall be established by city council resolution.

(Ord. No. 4190, § 2, 2-16-16)


13.05.060 Violations and penalties.

A. It shall be a gross misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment not to exceed one year, or by a fine not to exceed $5,000, or by both such confinement and fine, for any person to:

1. Conduct an indoor or outdoor public display of fireworks without a properly issued city permit or in violation of a properly issued city permit;

2. Discharge special effects or articles pyrotechnic without a properly issued city permit or in violation of a properly issued city permit;

3. Make any misrepresentation of fact, or knowingly permit any misrepresentation of fact, on any application for a city permit required pursuant to this chapter;

4. Possess or store in excess of 20 pounds of fireworks, except when such possession or storage is incidental to a properly issued city permit; or

5. Discharge or use fireworks in a reckless manner. “Reckless manner” exists when the use or discharge creates a substantial risk of death or serious physical injury to any person or damage to any property.

B. Any person violating any provision of this chapter not set forth in subsection (A) of this section shall be deemed to have committed a class 1 civil infraction as set forth in RCW 7.80.120; provided, in lieu of a class 1 civil infraction, a person under the age of 18 who commits an infraction while not under the supervision of a responsible adult shall be subject to a fine not to exceed 10 times their age at the time of the infraction. An infraction issued pursuant to this section shall be filed in the Kent municipal court and processed in the same manner as other infractions filed in the Kent municipal court; provided an infraction issued to a person under the age of 16 shall be filed in the King County juvenile court. When assessing a penalty under this section, the court shall, in all cases, provide the violator with the option of converting the fine into community service hours.

C. For the purposes of this section, the term “person” shall be defined as it is in RCW 9A.04.110 as now enacted or hereafter amended or recodified.

D. When a corporation, joint stock association, or unincorporated association is deemed guilty of a gross misdemeanor under subsection (A) of this section, the corporation shall, in lieu of jail, be punished by a fine of $5,000 plus any applicable costs and assessments.

E. Restitution shall be considered, and when appropriate, assessed against any person, corporation, joint stock association, or unincorporated association deemed guilty of an offense set forth in subsection (A) of this section.

(Ord. No. 4190, § 2, 2-16-16)


13.05.070 Seizure of fireworks.

A. Fireworks that are sold, possessed, or discharged in violation of this chapter are subject to seizure and forfeiture, and no property right shall exist in them.

B. Fireworks may be seized by the city by process issued by municipal or superior court. A law enforcement officer may seize, without process, fireworks that the officer has probable cause to believe were sold, possessed, or discharged in violation of this chapter, or fireworks that were seized incident to a lawful arrest.

C. In the event of seizure pursuant to this section, proceedings for forfeiture shall be deemed commenced by the seizure. The city shall cause notice to be served within 15 days following the seizure on the owner of the property seized and the person in charge thereof and any person having any known right or interest therein, including any community property interest, of the seizure and intended forfeiture of the seized property. The notice of seizure may be served by any method authorized by law or court rule, including without limitation service by certified mail with return receipt requested. Service by mail shall be deemed complete upon mailing within the 15-day period following the seizure.

D. If no person notifies the city in writing of the person’s claim of ownership or right to possession of the items specified in subsection (A) of this section within 30 days of the seizure, the item seized shall be deemed forfeited.

E. If a person notifies the city in writing of the person’s claim of ownership or right to possession of the seized property within 30 days of the seizure, the city shall give the person a reasonable opportunity to be heard as to the claim or right. The hearing shall be before the city fire official and shall occur within 90 days of the city’s receipt of written notice of the claim of right. Property deemed forfeited may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of after 15 days from the issuance of the determination of forfeiture, unless the city receives written notice of an appeal to superior court. The city shall promptly return the property to the claimant upon a determination that the claimant is the present lawful owner or is lawfully entitled to possession of the property.

F. In lieu of the above process, the person from whom the fireworks were seized may waive his or her claim to any right in the fireworks, and upon such waiver, the city shall deem the fireworks forfeited.

G. In the event fireworks in the presence of an officer are not claimed by any person then present, the fireworks will be deemed abandoned property, and the officer may seize them. Abandoned fireworks may be summarily destroyed or otherwise disposed of, and the process set forth in this section shall not apply.

(Ord. No. 4190, § 2, 2-16-16)


Chapter 13.06 ADDRESSING AND STREET NAMES

Sections:

13.06.010    Purpose.

13.06.020    Authority.

13.06.030    Definitions.

13.06.040    Grid systems.

13.06.050    Kent grid system designated.

13.06.055    Kent grid system – Building numbering.

13.06.060    King County grid system designated.

13.06.065    King County grid system – Building numbering.

13.06.070    Street and road designation.

13.06.080    Street or road re-designation.

13.06.090    Address assignment.

13.06.100    Address re-assignment.

13.06.110    Notification of structure, campus, and unit address assignment or re-assignment.

13.06.120    Notification of situs address assignment.

13.06.130    Change of address.

13.06.140    Numerals and letters.

13.06.150    Building address placement.

13.06.160    Maintenance.

13.06.170    Violation.

13.06.180    Records.


13.06.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide an address standard to facilitate consistent response by emergency services, and to provide a uniform application guideline.

(Ord. No. 3967, § 2, 6-15-10)


13.06.020 Authority.

The fire code official is authorized to establish comprehensive and systematic street naming and addressing standards in accordance with this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3967, § 2, 6-15-10)


13.06.030 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter clearly requires otherwise, words or phrases defined in this section shall have the following indicated meanings:

1. Classes of addresses. There are five (5) classes of addresses which include situs, structure, unit, campus, and mail.

2. Situs address. An address assigned to a platted lot which most nearly corresponds to the expected address as if the lot contained a single structure.

3. Structure address. An address assigned to a structure or building, except miscellaneous Group U occupancies and residential accessory structures, as defined in the Uniform Building Code.

4. Unit address. An address assigned to designate a portion of a structure. The unit address contains the structure address plus the unit designator.

5. Campus address. A single address assigned to a group of buildings that are contiguously located, in common ownership, and dedicated to the same purpose. Each building shall be assigned a letter. The building letter designator will precede the unit designator.

6. Mail address. The mail or mailing address used by the United States Postmaster.

7. Fire code official. That meaning ascribed by RCW 13.02.020.

(Ord. No. 3967, § 2, 6-15-10)


13.06.040 Grid systems.

All addresses and street names shall utilize either the Kent or King County grid system based on the properties’ locations within the city limits. Each grid system will contain a network of gridlines running north/south and east/west such that there are sixteen (16) parallel gridlines per mile creating three hundred and thirty (330) foot blocks.

(Ord. No. 3967, § 2, 6-15-10)


13.06.050 Kent grid system designated.

The Kent grid system shall be as follows:

1. The centerline of Meeker Street is hereby made the baseline for roads running east and west and the numbering of addresses on avenues. Numbers in the first block on each side of the baseline shall commence with 101, and shall progress both north and south to the boundary of the grid system.

2. The centerline of the main track of the Burlington Northern Railroad as now located shall be the baseline for roads running north and south and the numbering of addresses on the streets. Numbers in the first block on each side of the base line shall commence with 101, and shall progress both east and west to the boundary of the grid system.

3. The streets of the Kent grid system shall be shown on maps established by the fire code official who shall keep them on file for public access.

(Ord. No. 3967, § 2, 6-15-10)


13.06.055 Kent grid system – Building numbering.

Even numbers shall be used on the south sides of streets and the east sides of avenues. Odd numbers shall be used on the north sides of streets and the west sides of the avenues. Thirty-three (33) numbers shall be allotted to each block, and ten (10) feet of frontage shall be allotted to each number. Provided, however, that existing addresses issued pursuant to prior Chapter 14.10 KCC not in compliance with this section may be allowed to remain at the discretion of the fire code official.

(Ord. No. 3967, § 2, 6-15-10)


13.06.060 King County grid system designated.

The grid system adopted by King County Resolution No. 16622, as amended by King County Ordinance Nos. 1630, 1721, 1874, 1970, 2081, 2221, and 2362 excluding the areas identified as the Kent grid system shall be designated as the King County grid system.

(Ord. No. 3967, § 2, 6-15-10)


13.06.065 King County grid system – Building numbering.

Even numbers shall be used on the north sides of streets and the east sides of avenues. Odd numbers shall be used on the south sides of streets and the west sides of the avenues. Thirty-three (33) numbers shall be allotted to each block, and ten (10) feet of frontage shall be allotted to each number. Provided, however, established long block addresses may be permitted to remain at the discretion of the fire code official.

(Ord. No. 3967, § 2, 6-15-10)


13.06.070 Street and road designation.

All public and private streets shall be designated within the guidelines of the grid system as determined by the fire code official. Named streets can only be utilized in the downtown grid system or when the numbered grid is determined infeasible by the fire code official. The designation of streets shall be as follows:

1. All streets and roads running in a northerly and southerly direction on a gridline shall be called avenues.

2. All streets and roads running in an easterly or westerly direction on a gridline shall be called streets.

3. Streets and roads running in either direction may be called court, drive, lane, place, or way.

4. Street and roads which run diagonally may be called boulevard, drive, loop, road, or way.

(Ord. No. 3967, § 2, 6-15-10)


13.06.080 Street or road re-designation.

The fire code official may re-designate existing streets if the fire code official determines the street name or number is inconsistent with the grid system and could impact emergency services responsiveness. Notice of the re-designations shall be mailed at least twenty (20) days prior to the effective date to all property owners whose properties front said street or road.

(Ord. No. 3967, § 2, 6-15-10)


13.06.090 Address assignment.

The assignment of addressing shall occur during platting or in conjunction with a permit application.

(Ord. No. 3967, § 2, 6-15-10)


13.06.100 Address re-assignment.

The fire code official may re-assign an existing address if the fire code official determines that the address is inconsistent with the grid system and could impact emergency services responsiveness. Notice of the re-assignment shall be mailed at least twenty (20) days prior to the effective date to the affected property owner.

(Ord. No. 3967, § 2, 6-15-10)


13.06.110 Notification of structure, campus, and unit address assignment or re-assignment.

Upon address assignment or re-assignment, the fire code official shall notify the following:

1. Property owner;

2. Current resident;

3. United States Postal Service;

4. King County Assessor;

5. King County Enhanced 911;

6. Valley Communications Center;

7. City of Kent customer services division;

8. City of Kent planning services division;

9. Other agencies determined by the fire code official.

(Ord. No. 3967, § 2, 6-15-10)


13.06.120 Notification of situs address assignment.

Upon assignment the fire code official shall notify the following:

1. Property owner;

2. Developer;

3. Other agencies determined by the fire code official.

(Ord. No. 3967, § 2, 6-15-10)


13.06.130 Change of address.

The owners of an interest in any real estate abutting any roadway within the city may petition the city for a change of address. The petition shall be made to the fire code official on an approved form and include payment of one hundred dollars ($100) to defray the administrative costs of processing.

(Ord. No. 3967, § 2, 6-15-10)


13.06.140 Numerals and letters.

Numerals and letters shall contrast with their background. They shall be placed in a location acceptable to the fire code official that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. The following table shall be used in determining the size of numerals and letters.

Numeral and Letter Height Table d

	Distancea	Heightb,c	Stroke

	0' – 50'	6''	1''

	51' – 100'	8''	1''

	101' – 150'	10''	1''

	151' – 200'	12''	1-1/2''

	Over 200'	14''	1-1/2''

a. Distance is measured from the face of the building to the face of the curb on addressed street.

b. Exterior suite addresses shall be six (6) inches.

c. Three (3) inch numerals are permitted for one (1) and two (2) family dwellings and are to be placed near the front door.

d. If the building is not visible from the fronting street, an approved monument sign shall be required.

(Ord. No. 3967, § 2, 6-15-10)


13.06.150 Building address placement.

The owner, occupant, or tenant of any building or premises shall, upon ten (10) days’ notice from the fire code official, place the correct address on the building.

(Ord. No. 3967, § 2, 6-15-10)


13.06.160 Maintenance.

The owner, occupant, or renter of any addressed building or other structure shall maintain the address numbers and/or letters.

(Ord. No. 3967, § 2, 6-15-10)


13.06.170 Violation.

Failure to place and maintain proper building address placement shall be enforced as a violation of the International Fire Code as adopted by Chapter 13.01 KCC.

(Ord. No. 3967, § 2, 6-15-10)


13.06.180 Records.

The fire code official shall maintain the official record of current addresses.

(Ord. No. 3967, § 2, 6-15-10)


Chapter 13.14 ENFORCEMENT

(Repealed by Ord. No. 3691)


Title 14 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION Amended Ord. 4361

Chapters:

14.01    Building Codes

14.02    Unfit Dwellings, Buildings, and Structures

14.08    Enforcement of the Building Codes

14.09    Flood Hazard Regulations Amended Ord. 4361

14.10    Repealed

14.11    Vesting of Development Permit Applications

14.12    Landmark Designation and Preservation


Chapter 14.01 BUILDING CODES

Sections:

14.01.010    Building codes – Adopted.

14.01.020    Code conflicts.

14.01.030    Amendments to the International Building Code.

14.01.035    Amendments to the International Existing Building Code.

14.01.040    Amendments to the International Residential Code.

14.01.050    Amendments to the Uniform Plumbing Code.

14.01.060    Amendments to the International Mechanical Code.

14.01.070    Amendments to the Uniform Housing Code.

14.01.080    Repealed.

14.01.085    Amendments to the International Energy Conservation Code.

14.01.087    Amendments to the International Property Maintenance Code.

14.01.090    Building codes – Fees.

14.01.100    Appeals.


14.01.010 Building codes – Adopted.

In accordance with Chapter 19.27 RCW, the following codes (collectively, the “building codes”) together with any additions, deletions, and exceptions currently enacted or as may be amended from time to time by the state of Washington through its Building Code Council pursuant to the Washington Administrative Code (“WAC”), and as further amended in this chapter, are adopted by reference:

A. The International Building Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as amended pursuant to Chapter 51-50 WAC.

B. The International Existing Building Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc.

C. The International Residential Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as amended pursuant to Chapter 51-51 WAC.

D. The International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as amended pursuant to Chapter 51-52 WAC.

E. The Uniform Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, including the Uniform Plumbing Code Standards (Appendices A, B, and I to the Uniform Plumbing Code) as amended pursuant to Chapter 51-56 WAC.

F. The Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials.

G. The International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as amended pursuant to Chapters 51-11C and 51-11R WAC.

H. The International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., including the Boarding Standard (Appendix A to the International Property Maintenance Code).

One copy of each of these codes is on file with the city’s building official.

(Ord. No. 3415, § 2, 8-4-98; Ord. No. 3690, § 1, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3839, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 3956, § 1, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4081, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4170, § 1, 10-6-15; Ord. No. 4186, § 1, 1-19-16; Ord. No. 4202, § 1, 5-17-16)


14.01.020 Code conflicts.

To the extent allowed by RCW 19.27.040, if a conflict exists between the provisions of the state building codes adopted by the Washington State Building Code Council and the provisions of this chapter, the Kent City Code provisions shall govern.

(Ord. No. 3690, § 1, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3956, § 1, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4081, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4202, § 1, 5-17-16)


14.01.030 Amendments to the International Building Code.

The following local amendments to the International Building Code, including all amendments enacted by the state of Washington, are hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Building Code:

A. General – Building code appendices adopted. Section 101 of the International Building Code, entitled “General,” is amended by adding the following new subsection 101.5:

Sec. 101.5. Building code appendices adopted. Appendices C, E and J to the International Building Code are hereby adopted; however, the public works director shall have the authority to enforce and interpret Appendix J and, accordingly, all references to the “building official” in Appendix J shall be substituted with the words “public works director.”

B. Duties and powers of building official – Lot lines and setback lines. Section 104 of the International Building Code, entitled “Duties and Powers of Building Official,” is amended by adding the following new subsection 104.12:

Sec. 104.12. Lot lines and setback lines. Notwithstanding the authority of the building official to administer and enforce the building code, the building official shall have no duty to verify or establish lot lines or setback lines. No such duty is created by this code, and none shall be implied. 

C. Permits – Expiration of project permit application. Section 105 of the International Building Code, entitled “Permits,” is amended by substituting subsection 105.3.2 with the following:

Sec. 105.3.2. Expiration of project permit application. Project permit applications that are subject to Ch. 12.01 KCC or that require SEPA review are subject to the deadlines established by that code chapter or by SEPA. All other project permit applications shall expire by limitation if no permit is issued 180 days after the determination that a fully complete project permit application, as defined in KCC 14.11.020, has been submitted, unless that application has been pursued in good faith as determined solely in the building official’s discretion. The building official may extend the time for action on the permit application for one or more periods, each period not exceeding 90 days, upon written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. If an application has expired, plans and other data previously submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed. In order to renew action on an expired application, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new review fee at the rates in effect at the time of resubmission. 

D. Board of appeals. Section 113 of the International Building Code, entitled “Board of Appeals,” is amended by substituting Section 113 with the following:

Sec. 113. Board of appeals. The City of Kent hearings examiner is designated as the board of appeals in order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the building official relative to the suitability of alternate materials, design, and methods of construction and appeals of the reasonable application and interpretation of the building codes. Appeals shall be made as set forth in KCC 14.01.100.

E. Additional height increases. Section 504 of the International Building Code, entitled “Height,” is amended by adding the following new subsection 504.5:

Sec. 504.5. Additional height increases. For Group B or Group R, Divisions 1 and 2 Occupancies, the permitted increase of one story allowed by subsection 504.2 may be increased to two stories when all of the conditions enumerated below are met. The increase provided in Section 504.3, as amended by WAC 51-50, shall not be added to this increase.

1. An automatic fire sprinkler system complying with Section 903.3.1.1 is installed throughout with the installation of quick response sprinkler heads in all areas where the use of these heads is allowed.

2. Vertical exit enclosures are constructed as smokeproof enclosures or pressurized stair enclosures in accordance with Section 909.20 and Section 909.11.

3. Standby power is supplied for light, emergency, and any exit enclosure pressurization systems used, as provided in Sections 403.4.7, 403.4.8 and 909.20.6.2, and the adopted edition of the National Electrical Code. Connection ahead of service disconnect means shall be permitted for standby power.

4. Walls separating dwelling units or sleeping units, and corridor walls in Group R, Divisions 1 and 2 Occupancies shall be constructed as 1-hour fire partitions as provided in Section 708. Reduction of the fire-resistance rating is not permitted.

5. All exterior walls, including those with a fire separation distance of more than five feet, shall be of not less than 1-hour fire-resistance rated construction on the interior and the exterior of the wall.

6. Structural observation is provided during construction in accordance with Sections 202, 1702 and 1704.5.

7. An emergency voice/alarm communication system complying with subsections 907.5.2.2 through 907.5.2.2.5 is installed.

8. Approved supervised indicating control valves shall be provided at the point of connection to the automatic fire sprinkler system riser on each floor.

9. Structures meeting the requirements of this subsection shall have an automatic sprinkler zone per floor. All zones must report independently.

(Ord. No. 3415, § 2, 8-4-98; Ord. No. 3574, § 4, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 3690, § 1, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3839, § 2, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 3914, § 2, 4-21-09; Ord. No. 3956, § 1, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4081, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4202, § 1, 5-17-16. Formerly § 14.01.020)


14.01.035 Amendments to the International Existing Building Code.

The following local amendments to the International Existing Building Code, including all amendments enacted by the state of Washington, are hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Existing Building Code:

A. All references to the “code official” in the International Existing Building Code shall be substituted with the words “building official.”

B. Duties and powers of building official – Lot lines and setback lines. Section 104 of the International Existing Building Code, entitled “Duties and Powers of Code Official,” is amended by adding the following new subsection 104.12:

Sec. 104.12. Lot lines and setback lines. Notwithstanding the authority of the building official to administer and enforce the building code, the building official shall have no duty to verify or establish lot lines or setback lines. No such duty is created by this code, and none shall be implied. 

C. Permits – Expiration of project permit application. Section 105 of the International Existing Building Code, entitled “Permits,” is amended by substituting subsection 105.3.2 with the following:

Sec. 105.3.2. Expiration of project permit application. Project permit applications that are subject to Ch. 12.01 KCC or that require SEPA review are subject to the deadlines established by that code chapter or by SEPA. All other project permit applications shall expire by limitation if no permit is issued 180 days after the determination that a fully complete project permit application, as defined in KCC 14.11.020, has been submitted, unless that application has been pursued in good faith as determined solely in the building official’s discretion. The building official may extend the time for action on the permit application for one or more periods, each period not exceeding 90 days, upon written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. If an application has expired, plans and other data previously submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed. In order to renew action on an expired application, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new review fee at the rates in effect at the time of resubmission. 

D. Certificate of occupancy – Altered area use and occupancy classification change. Section 110 of the International Existing Building Code, entitled “Certificate of Occupancy,” is amended by substituting subsection 110.1 with the following:

Sec. 110.1. Altered area use and occupancy classification change. No altered area of a building and no relocated building shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or portion thereof shall be made until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein, except that no certificate of occupancy is required for detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures subject to the provisions of the International Residential Code. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction.

E. Board of appeals. Section 112 of the International Existing Building Code, entitled “Board of Appeals,” is amended by substituting Section 112 with the following:

Sec. 112. Board of appeals. The City of Kent hearings examiner is designated as the board of appeals in order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the building official relative to the suitability of alternate materials, design, and methods of construction and appeals of the reasonable application and interpretation of the building codes. Appeals shall be made as set forth in KCC 14.01.100.

F. General. Section 1401 of the International Existing Building Code, entitled “General,” is amended by substituting subsection 1401.2 with the following:

Sec. 1401.2. Applicability. Structures existing prior to May 17, 1954, in which there is work involving additions, alterations or changes of occupancy shall be made to conform to the requirements of this chapter or the provisions of Chapters 5 through 13. The provisions of Sections 1401.2.1 through 1401.2.5 shall apply to existing occupancies that will continue to be, or are proposed to be, in Groups A, B, E, F, I-2, M, R and S. These provisions shall not apply to buildings with occupancies in Group H or I-1, I-3 or I-4.

(Ord. No. 3956, § 1, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4081, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4202, § 1, 5-17-16)


14.01.040 Amendments to the International Residential Code.

The following local amendments to the International Residential Code, including all amendments enacted by the state of Washington, are hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Residential Code:

A. Duties and powers of building official – Lot lines and setback lines. Section R104 of the International Residential Code, entitled “Duties and Powers of Building Official,” is amended by adding the following new subsection R104.12:

Sec. R104.12. Lot lines and setback lines. Notwithstanding the authority of the building official to administer and enforce the building code, the building official shall have no duty to verify or establish lot lines or setback lines. No such duty is created by this code, and none shall be implied. 

B. Permits – Substantially improved or substantially damaged existing buildings in areas prone to flooding. Section R105 of the International Residential Code, entitled “Permits,” is amended by substituting subsection R105.3.1.1 with the following:

Sec. R105.3.1.1. Substantially improved or substantially damaged existing buildings in areas prone to flooding. The building official may require that all applications for reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of existing buildings or structures located in an area prone to flooding be submitted in accordance with Ch. 14.09 KCC.

C. Permits – Expiration of project permit application. Section R105 of the International Residential Code, entitled “Permits,” is amended by substituting subsection R105.3.2 with the following:

Sec. R105.3.2. Expiration of project permit application. Project permit applications that are subject to Ch. 12.01 KCC or that require SEPA review are subject to the deadlines established by that code chapter or by SEPA. All other project permit applications shall expire by limitation if no permit is issued 180 days after the determination that a fully complete project permit application, as defined in KCC 14.11.020, has been submitted, unless that application has been pursued in good faith as determined solely in the building official’s discretion. The building official may extend the time for action on the permit application for one or more periods, each period not exceeding 90 days, upon written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. If an application has expired, plans and other data previously submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed. In order to renew action on an expired application, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new review fee at the rates in effect at the time of resubmission.

D. Fees – Building permit valuations. Section R108 of the International Residential Code, entitled “Fees,” is amended by substituting subsection R108.3 with the following:

Sec. R108.3. Building permit valuations. The permit applicant shall provide an estimated permit value at time of application. Permit valuations shall include total value of the work, including materials and labor, for which the permit is being issued. (The work would include, for example and without limitation, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing equipment and other permanent systems.) If the building official decides that the permit valuation is underestimated, the permit application shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Final building permit valuation shall be set by the building official. 

E. Certificate of occupancy. Section R110 of the International Residential Code, entitled “Certificate of Occupancy,” is hereby repealed.

F. Board of appeals. Section R112 of the International Residential Code, entitled “Board of Appeals,” is amended by substituting Section R112 with the following:

Sec. R112. Board of appeals. The City of Kent hearings examiner is designated as the board of appeals in order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the building official relative to the suitability of alternate materials, design, and methods of construction and appeals of the reasonable application and interpretation of the building codes. Appeals shall be made as set forth in section 14.01.100 of the Kent City Code. Any appeal to an order, decision, or determination of the public works director with respect to work within a flood hazard area shall be made in accordance with Ch. 14.09 KCC.

(Ord. No. 3690, § 1, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3839, § 3, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 3914, § 2, 4-21-09; Ord. No. 3956, § 1, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4081, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4202, § 1, 5-17-16)


14.01.050 Amendments to the Uniform Plumbing Code.

The following local amendments to the Uniform Plumbing Code, including all amendments enacted by the state of Washington, are hereby adopted and incorporated into the Uniform Plumbing Code: 

A. Organization and enforcement – Penalties. Section 102 of the Uniform Plumbing Code, entitled “Organization and Enforcement,” is amended by substituting subsection 102.5 with the following:

Sec. 102.5. Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of its requirements or who erects, installs, alters, or repairs plumbing work in violation of: (a) the approved construction documents, (b) a directive of the building code official, or (c) a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as set forth in Chs. 14.08 and 1.04 KCC or as otherwise provided by law.

B. Organization and enforcement – Board of appeals. Section 102 of the Uniform Plumbing Code, entitled “Organization and Enforcement,” is amended by substituting subsection 102.3 with the following:

Sec. 102.3. Board of appeals. The City of Kent hearings examiner is designated as the board of appeals in order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the building official relative to the suitability of alternate materials, designs, and methods of construction and appeals of the reasonable application and interpretation of the building codes. Appeals shall be made as set forth in section 14.01.100 of the Kent City Code.

C. Permits and inspections – Expiration of project permit application. Section 103 of the Uniform Plumbing Code, entitled “Permits and Inspections,” is amended by substituting subsection 103.4.2 with the following:

Sec. 103.4.2. Expiration of project permit application. Project permit applications that are subject to Ch. 12.01 KCC or that require SEPA review are subject to the deadlines established by that code chapter or by SEPA. All other project permit applications shall expire by limitation if no permit is issued 180 days after the determination that a fully complete project permit application, as defined in KCC 14.11.020, has been submitted, unless that application has been pursued in good faith as determined solely in the building official’s discretion. The building official may extend the time for action on the permit application for one or more periods, each period not exceeding 90 days, upon written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. If an application has expired, plans and other data previously submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the building official. In order to renew action on an expired application, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new review fee at the rates in effect at the time of resubmission.

D. Plumbing permit fees. Table 103.4 of the Uniform Plumbing Code, entitled “Plumbing Permit Fees,” is amended by substituting Table 103.4 with the following:

Table 103.4. Plumbing Permit Fees. Plumbing permit fees and related fees shall be as established by resolution of the city council, in accordance with 14.01.090 KCC.

(Ord. No. 3415, § 2, 8-4-98; Ord. No. 3690, § 1, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3839, § 4, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 3956, § 1, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4081, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4202, § 1, 5-17-16. Formerly 14.01.030)


14.01.060 Amendments to the International Mechanical Code.

The following local amendments to the International Mechanical Code, including all amendments enacted by the state of Washington, are hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Mechanical Code:

A. Permits – Expiration of project permit application. Section 106 of the International Mechanical Code, entitled “Permits,” is amended by substituting subsection 106.3.3 with the following:

Sec. 106.3.3. Expiration of project permit application. Project permit applications that are subject to Ch. 12.01 KCC or that require SEPA review are subject to the deadlines established by that code chapter or by SEPA. All other project permit applications shall expire by limitation if no permit is issued 180 days after the determination that a fully complete project permit application, as defined in KCC 14.11.020, has been submitted, unless that application has been pursued in good faith as determined solely in the building official’s discretion. The building official may extend the time for action on the permit application for one or more periods, each period not exceeding 90 days, upon written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. If an application has expired, plans and other data previously submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the building official. In order to renew action on an expired application, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new review fee at the rates in effect at the time of resubmission.

B. Violations – Penalties. Section 108 of the International Mechanical Code, entitled “Violations,” is amended by substituting subsection 108.4 with the following:

Sec. 108.4. Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of its requirements or who erects, installs, alters, or repairs mechanical work in violation of: (a) the approved construction documents, (b) a directive of the building code official, or (c) a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as set forth in Chs. 14.08 and 1.04 KCC or as otherwise provided by law.

C. Means of appeal – Board of appeals. Section 109 of the International Mechanical Code, entitled “Means of Appeal,” is amended by substituting Section 109 with the following:

Sec. 109. Board of appeals. The City of Kent hearings examiner is designated as the board of appeals in order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the building official relative to the suitability of alternate materials, designs, and methods of construction and appeals of the reasonable application and interpretation of the building codes. Appeals shall be made as set forth in section 14.01.100 of the Kent City Code.

(Ord. No. 3690, § 1, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3956, § 1, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4081, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4202, § 1, 5-17-16)


14.01.070 Amendments to the Uniform Housing Code.

The following local amendments to the Uniform Housing Code are hereby adopted as if fully set forth therein:

A. Scope. Section 103 of the Uniform Housing Code is amended by substituting Section 103 with the following:

Sec. 103. Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to all buildings or portions thereof used, or designed, or intended to be used, for human habitation. These occupancies in existing buildings may be continued as provided in IBC § 102.6 or IRC § R102.7, as may be applicable, except for structures found to be substandard as defined in this code.

Where any building or portion thereof is used or intended to be used as a combination apartment house-hotel, the provisions of this code shall apply to the separate portions as if they were separate buildings.

Rooming houses, congregate residences, or lodging houses shall comply with all the requirements of this code for dwellings.

B. Application to existing buildings and structures – Additions, alterations, or repairs. Subsection 104.1 of the Uniform Housing Code is amended by substituting subsection 104.1 with the following:

Sec. 104.1. Additions, Alterations, or Repairs. For additions, alterations, or repairs, see IBC §§ 102.6, Chapter 34, and IRC § R102.7, as may be applicable.

C. Repealer. Section 202 of Chapter 2 and Chapters 11 through 16 of the Uniform Housing Code are hereby repealed.

D. Board of appeals. Section 203 of the Uniform Housing Code, entitled “Board of appeals,” is amended by substituting Section 203 with the following:

Sec. 203. Board of appeals. The City of Kent hearings examiner is designated as the board of appeals in order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the building official relative to the suitability of alternate materials, design, and methods of construction and appeals of the reasonable application and interpretation of the building codes. Appeals shall be made as set forth in section 14.01.100 of the Kent City Code.

E. Violations. Section 204 of the Uniform Housing Code, entitled “Violations,” is amended by substituting Section 204 with the following:

Sec. 204. Violations

204.1. Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish, or occupy any building, structure, or equipment regulated by this code, or cause the same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of this code.

204.2. Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code, or fails to comply with any of its requirements, or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of: (a) the approved construction documents, (b) a directive of the building official, or (c) a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as set forth in Chs. 14.08 and 1.04 KCC or as otherwise provided by law.

F. Permits and inspections – General. Section 301 of the Uniform Housing Code, entitled “General,” is amended by substituting Section 301 with the following:

Sec. 301. General. No building or structure regulated by this code shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted, or demolished unless a separate permit for each building or structure has first been obtained from the building official in the manner and according to the applicable conditions prescribed in IBC §§ 105 and 107 or IRC §§ R105 and R106, as may be applicable.

G. Permits and inspections – Fees. Section 302 of the Uniform Housing Code, entitled “Fees,” is amended by substituting Section 302 with the following:

Sec. 302. Fees. When a building permit is required by Section 301 of this code, the appropriate fees shall be paid as specified in IBC § 109 or IRC § R108, as may be applicable.

H. Permits and inspections – Inspection. Section 303 of the Uniform Housing Code, entitled “Inspection,” is amended by substituting Section 303 with the following:

Sec. 303. Inspection. Buildings or structures within the scope of this code and all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official in accordance with, and in the manner provided by, this code and IBC §§ 110 and 1704 or IRC § R109, as may be applicable.

I. Definitions – Building code. Section 401 of the Uniform Housing Code, entitled “Definitions,” is amended by revising the definition of building code as follows:

Sec. 401. Definitions.

BUILDING CODE is the International Building Code (“IBC”) or the International Residential Code (“IRC”), as may be applicable, promulgated by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted by this jurisdiction. 

J. Definitions – Mechanical code. Section 401 of the Uniform Housing Code, entitled “Definitions,” is amended by revising the definition of mechanical code as follows:

Sec. 401. Definitions.

MECHANICAL CODE is the International Mechanical Code or the International Residential Code, promulgated by the International Code Council, Inc., as may be applicable and as adopted by this jurisdiction.

K. Space and occupancy standards – Location on property. Section 501 of the Uniform Housing Code, entitled “Location on Property,” is amended by substituting Section 501 with the following:

Sec. 501. Location on property. All buildings shall be located with respect to property lines and with respect to other buildings on the same property as required by Chs. 5, 6 and 7 IBC and IRC § R302, as may be applicable.

L. Light and ventilation – Hallways. Subsection 504.4 of the Uniform Housing Code, entitled “Hallways,” is amended by substituting subsection 504.4 with the following:

Sec. 504.4 Hallways. All public hallways, stairs, and other exitways shall be adequately lighted at all times in accordance with IBC § 1006 or IRC §§ R303 and R311, as may be applicable.

M. Sanitation – Water closet compartments. Subsection 505.5 of the Uniform Housing Code, entitled “Water Closet Compartments,” is amended by substituting subsection 505.5 with the following:

Sec. 505.5. Water closet compartments. Walls and floors of water closet compartments, except in dwellings, shall be furnished in accordance with IBC § 1210. This provision is not applicable to those projects subject to the IRC.

N. Heating and ventilation – Heating. Subsection 701.1 of the Uniform Housing Code, entitled “Heating,” is amended by substituting subsection 701.1 with the following:

Sec. 701.1. Heating. Dwelling units, guest rooms, and congregate residences shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of at least 68°F (20°C) at a point 3 feet (914 mm) above the floor in all habitable rooms. Such facilities shall be installed and maintained in a safe condition and in accordance with Ch. 21 IBC or Ch. 10 and 12-24 IRC, as may be applicable, the Mechanical Code, and all other applicable laws. Unvented fuel-burning heaters are not permitted. All heating devices or appliances shall be of an approved type.

O. Exits – General. Section 801 of the Uniform Housing Code, entitled “General,” is amended by substituting Section 801 with the following:

Sec. 801. General. Dwelling units or guest rooms shall have access directly to the outside or to a public corridor. All buildings or portions thereof shall be provided with exits, exitways, and appurtenances as required by Ch. 10 IBC or IRC § R311, as may be applicable.

P. Fire protection – General. Section 901 of the Uniform Housing Code, entitled “General,” is amended by substituting Section 901 with the following:

Sec. 901. General. All buildings or portions thereof shall be provided with the degree of fire-resistive construction as required by the building code for the appropriate occupancy, type of construction, and location on property, and shall be provided with the appropriate fire-extinguishing systems or equipment required by Ch. 9 IBC or IRC §§ R314 and R315, as may be applicable.

Q. Substandard buildings – Definition – General. Subsection 1001.1 of the Uniform Housing Code, entitled “General,” is amended by substituting subsection 1001.1 with the following:

Sec. 1001.1. General. Any building or portion thereof that the building official determines to be an unsafe building in accordance with IBC § 116, or any building or portion thereof, including any dwelling unit, guest room or suite of rooms, or the premises on which the same is located, in which there exists any of the conditions referenced in this section to an extent that those conditions endanger the life, limb, health, property, safety, or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof, shall be deemed and hereby is declared to be a substandard building. 

(Ord. No. 3415, § 2, 8-4-98; Ord. No. 3690, § 1, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3701, § 1, 8-3-04; Ord. No. 3956, § 1, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4081, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4202, § 1, 5-17-16. Formerly 14.01.050)


14.01.080 Amendments to the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4186.

(Ord. No. 3415, § 2, 8-4-98; Ord. No. 3690, § 1, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3701, § 2, 8-3-04; Ord. No. 3839, § 5, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 3956, § 1, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4081, § 1, 5-21-13. Formerly 14.01.060)


14.01.085 Amendments to the International Energy Conservation Code.

The following local amendments to the International Energy Conservation Code, including all amendments enacted by the state of Washington, are hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Energy Conservation Code:

A. Compliance required, violations, penalties. Section C101.5, entitled “Compliance,” is hereby amended by adding the following new subsection C101.5.1:

Sec. C101.5.1. Unlawful acts and penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, move or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by this code, or cause the same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of this code. Any person who violates a provision of this code, or fails to comply with any of its requirements, or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of: (a) the approved construction documents, (b) a directive of the building official, or (c) a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as set forth in Chapters 14.08 and 1.04 KCC or as otherwise provided by law.

B. Compliance required, violations, penalties. Section R101.5, entitled “Compliance,” is hereby amended by adding the following new subsection R101.5.1:

Sec. R101.5.1. Unlawful acts and penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, move or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by this code, or cause the same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of this code. Any person who violates a provision of this code, or fails to comply with any of its requirements, or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of: (a) the approved construction documents, (b) a directive of the building official, or (c) a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as set forth in Chapters 14.08 and 1.04 KCC or as otherwise provided by law.

C. Appeals. Section C109, entitled “Board of Appeals,” is hereby amended by substituting Section C109 with the following:

Sec. C109. Board of Appeals. The City of Kent hearings examiner is designated as the board of appeals in order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the building official relative to the suitability of alternate materials, design, and methods of construction and appeals of the reasonable application and interpretation of the building codes. Appeals shall be made as set forth in KCC 14.01.100.

D. Appeals. Section R109, entitled “Board of Appeals,” is hereby amended by substituting Section R109 with the following:

Sec. R109. Board of Appeals. The City of Kent hearings examiner is designated as the board of appeals in order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the building official relative to the suitability of alternate materials, design, and methods of construction and appeals of the reasonable application and interpretation of the building codes. Appeals shall be made as set forth in KCC 14.01.100.

(Ord. No. 4081, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4202, § 1, 5-17-16)


14.01.087 Amendments to the International Property Maintenance Code.

The following local amendments to the International Property Maintenance Code are adopted and incorporated into the International Property Maintenance Code:

A. All references to the “code official” in the International Property Maintenance Code shall be substituted with the words “building official.”

B. Fees. Section 103.5 of the International Property Maintenance Code, entitled “Fees,” is amended by substituting Section 103.5 with the following:

Sec. 103.5. Fees shall be assessed as set forth in Section 14.01.090 of the Kent City Code.

C. Violations. Section 106 of the International Property Maintenance Code, entitled “Violations,” is amended by substituting Section 106 with the following:

Sec. 106. Violations.

106.1. Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this code.

106.2. Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of its requirements, or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of: (a) the approved construction documents, (b) a directive of the building official, or (c) a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as set forth in Chs. 14.08 and 1.04 KCC or as otherwise provided by law.

D. Notices and orders. Section 107 of the International Property Maintenance Code, entitled “Notices and Orders,” is amended by substituting Section 107 with the following:

Sec. 107. Notices of Violation. Whenever the building official or his designee determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, the code enforcement officer may issue a notice to any person responsible for the violation, pursuant to Chapter 1.04 of the Kent City Code.

E. Board of appeals. Section 111 of the International Property Maintenance Code, entitled “Means of Appeal,” is amended by substituting Section 111 with the following:

Sec. 111. Board of appeals. The City of Kent hearings examiner is designated as the board of appeals in order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the building official relative to the suitability of alternate materials, design, and methods of construction and appeals of the reasonable application and interpretation of the building codes. Appeals shall be made as set forth in section 14.01.100 of the Kent City Code.

F. Failure to comply. Section 112.4 of the International Property Maintenance Code, entitled “Failure to Comply,” is amended by substituting Section 112.4 with the following:

Sec. 112.4. Failure to Comply. Any failure to comply with a stop work or stop use order shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than ninety (90) days, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by both such imprisonment and fine, pursuant to KCC 1.04.090, 1.04.100, and 1.04.110.

G. Rubbish and garbage. Section 308 of the International Property Maintenance Code, entitled “Rubbish and Garbage,” is deleted in its entirety.

H. Electrical facilities. Section 604 of the International Property Maintenance Code, entitled “Electrical Facilities,” is deleted in its entirety.

I. Electrical equipment. Section 605 of the International Property Maintenance Code, entitled “Electrical Equipment,” is deleted in its entirety.

J. Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters. Section 606 of the International Property Maintenance Code, entitled “Elevators, Escalators and Dumbwaiters,” is deleted in its entirety.

(Ord. No. 4170, § 2, 10-6-15; Ord. No. 4202, § 1, 5-17-16)


14.01.090 Building codes – Fees.

The city council shall, by resolution, establish the fees to be assessed to implement and operate the codes adopted in this chapter. 

(Ord. No. 3415, § 2, 8-4-98; Ord. No. 3690, § 1, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3956, § 1, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4081, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4202, § 1, 5-17-16. Formerly 14.01.070)


14.01.100 Appeals.

A. Appeals to the hearing examiner.

1. Jurisdiction. The city hearing examiner has been designated as the board of appeals and shall have jurisdiction over all matters concerning the application of the building codes cited in this chapter. The city hearing examiner, however, shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of these codes, nor shall the city hearing examiner be empowered to waive requirements of these building codes.

2. Filing. Appeals shall be filed with the hearing examiner by 5:00 p.m. of the fourteenth calendar day following the date of the order, determination, or decision being appealed. When the last day of the appeal period so computed is a Saturday, Sunday, or city holiday, the period shall run until 5:00 p.m. on the next business day. The appeal shall be accompanied by payment of the filing fee. Specific objections to the building official’s decision and the relief sought shall be stated in the written appeal.

3. Standing. Standing to bring an appeal under this chapter is limited to the following persons:

a. The applicant and the owner of property to which the permit decision is directed.

b. Another person aggrieved or adversely affected by the order, determination, or decision, or who would be aggrieved or adversely affected by a reversal or modification of the order, determination, or decision. A person is aggrieved or adversely affected within the meaning of this section only when all of the following conditions are present:

i. The order, determination, or decision has prejudiced or is likely to prejudice that person;

ii. A judgment in favor of that person would substantially eliminate or redress the prejudice to that person caused or likely to be caused by the order, determination, or decision; and 

iii. The appellant has exhausted his or her administrative remedies to the extent required by law.

B. Appeals to superior court. Appeals to the hearing examiner shall be made pursuant to Chapter 2.32 KCC. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be final and conclusive unless, within 21 calendar days of the hearing examiner’s decision, an appeal is filed with the King County superior court. When the last day of the appeal period so computed is a Saturday, Sunday, or city holiday, the period shall run until the next business day.

(Ord. No. 3415, § 2, 8-4-98; Ord. No. 3622, § 1, 10-1-02; Ord. No. 3690, § 1, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3956, § 1, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4081, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4202, § 1, 5-17-16. Formerly § 14.01.080)


Chapter 14.02 UNFIT DWELLINGS, BUILDINGS, AND STRUCTURES

Sections:

14.02.010    Findings and purpose.

14.02.020    Definitions.

14.02.030    Duties of the code enforcement officer.

14.02.040    Duties of the improvement officer.

14.02.050    Duties of the hearing examiner.

14.02.060    Rules and regulations.

14.02.070    Determination of unfitness.

14.02.080    Standards for determination of unfitness.

14.02.090    Standards for repair, vacation, or demolition.

14.02.100    Security of unoccupied dwellings, buildings, structures, or premises.

14.02.110    Preliminary investigation.

14.02.120    Notice and order – Contents.

14.02.130    Service of notice and order – Filing with county auditor.

14.02.140    Improvement officer hearing to review notice and order.

14.02.150    Enforcement.

14.02.160    Appeal of improvement officer’s decision.

14.02.170    Hearings before the hearing examiner.

14.02.180    Appeals to superior court.

14.02.190    Costs of abatement and administrative fees.

14.02.200    Assessment and lien on the real property.

14.02.210    Abatement project fund.


14.02.010 Findings and purpose.

Pursuant to Chapter 35.80 RCW, the city council finds that dwellings exist within the city of Kent that are unfit for human habitation. When all or any portion of buildings, structures, and premises become unfit for their intended uses due to dilapidation; disrepair; structural defects; defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; inadequate ventilation; uncleanliness; inadequate light or sanitary facilities; inadequate drainage; overcrowding; or other conditions, they are harmful to the health, safety, and welfare of the city’s residents.

The purpose of this chapter is to implement the process and to acquire and exercise the powers authorized by Chapter 35.80 RCW to address conditions such as those described above that render dwellings, buildings, structures, and premises in the city unfit.

The purpose of this chapter is not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 4186, § 2, 1-19-16)


14.02.020 Definitions.

The definitions contained in KCC 1.04.020 and 14.08.020 will also apply to this chapter. In addition, the following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, will have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

A. Abandoned means any property, real or personal, that is unattended and either open or unsecured so that, in the case of real property, admittance may be gained without materially damaging any portion of the property, or which reasonably appears not to be presently possessed by any person. Examples of real or personal property that may reasonably appear abandoned include, without limitation, dwellings, buildings, structures, and other premises where utilities are disconnected, debris is accumulated, uncleanliness or disrepair is evident, or where items of personal property are located in places where those items are not normally kept or used.

B. Appeals commission means the office of the hearing examiner as created in Chapter 2.32 KCC.

C. Boarded-up building means any unoccupied building the exterior of which is closed by extrinsic materials or devices installed on a long-term rather than brief temporary basis, giving to the building the appearance of nonoccupancy or nonuse for an indefinite period of time. Appendix A of the International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), adopted for use and enforcement within the city, provides criteria that regulates how dwellings, buildings, and structures may be properly secured against unlawful entry, and otherwise maintained to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and the provisions and purposes of this chapter.

D. Building means all or any portion of any building, dwelling, structure, mobile home, or factory-built house built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.

E. Costs means the city’s actual expenses incurred to correct illegal conditions pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, plus any applicable administrative fee.

F. Director means the city’s director of the economic and community development department or the director’s designee.

G. Imminent danger means an immediate exposure or liability to injury, harm, or loss.

H. Improvement officer means the person authorized by the director to conduct a review hearing pursuant to this chapter.

I. Nuisance means: (1) a nuisance defined by statute or ordinance; (2) a nuisance at common law, either public or private; (3) an attractive nuisance, whether realty, fixture, or chattel, in or on a building, a building premises, or an unoccupied lot, that might reasonably be expected to attract children and constitute a danger to them, including without limitation abandoned wells, ice boxes or refrigerators with doors and latches, shafts, basements or other excavations, abandoned or inoperative vehicles or other equipment, structurally unsound fences or other fixtures, lumber, fencing, vegetation or other debris; (4) uncleanliness or other condition that is dangerous to human life or detrimental to health; (5) overcrowding; or (6) abandoned as defined in this chapter.

J. Subject property means the dwelling, building, structure, or premises that is the subject of investigation or an enforcement action pursuant to this chapter.

K. Unfit means a dwelling, building, structure, or premises that has any or all of the defects enumerated in KCC 14.02.080 and is therefore unfit for human habitation or other uses.

L. Value means the amount assessed upon a dwelling, building, structure, or premises for purposes of general taxation.

(Ord. No. 4186, § 2, 1-19-16)


14.02.030 Duties of the code enforcement officer.

The code enforcement officer’s duties and powers include:



A. Investigating dwellings, buildings, structures, or premises the officer, pursuant to this chapter, has reasonable grounds to believe are unfit; and

B. Preparing, serving, and posting of notices and orders according to the provisions of this chapter regarding subject properties that the officer has reasonable grounds to believe, pursuant to this chapter, are unfit; and

C. Doing all things necessary and proper to carry out and enforce this chapter.

(Ord. No. 4186, § 2, 1-19-16)


14.02.040 Duties of the improvement officer.

The improvement officer’s duties and powers include:

A. Conducting review hearings pursuant to RCW 35.80.030 to consider notices and orders issued by code enforcement officers with other evidence that may be received from code enforcement officer or other parties and persons; and

B. Preparing, serving and posting a summary of decision, including findings of fact in support of the improvement officer’s determination, pursuant to KCC 14.02.140(D); and

C. Doing all things necessary and proper to carry out and enforce this chapter.

(Ord. No. 4186, § 2, 1-19-16)


14.02.050 Duties of the hearing examiner.

The hearing examiner is the appeals commission for purposes of this chapter. In addition to the powers conferred through Chapter 2.32 KCC, the hearing examiner shall:

A. Conduct administrative hearings pursuant to KCC 14.02.170 to consider notices and orders issued by the code enforcement officer or the improvement officer together with other evidence that may be received from the improvement officer, code enforcement officer, or other parties and persons, and where appropriate affirm, modify, or overturn the notices and orders by written decision; and

B. Do all things necessary and proper to carry out and enforce this chapter.

(Ord. No. 4186, § 2, 1-19-16)


14.02.060 Rules and regulations.

The director may establish rules and procedures to reasonably and fairly administer the provisions and achieve the purposes of this chapter. The improvement and code enforcement officers shall recognize and give appropriate effect to special and extenuating circumstances that, in order to do substantial justice in specific cases, warrant the exercise of discretion to adjust the time frames, standards, and other provisions of this chapter. Examples of circumstances that may warrant an exercise of discretion include without limitation: medical illness or disability affecting the ability of the person responsible for the violation to respond to orders or appear at hearings, and bona fide insurance coverage disputes that create a definite risk that enforcement of this chapter would unfairly result in a substantial economic loss to the property owner or the person responsible for the violation.

The building official, improvement officer, or code enforcement officer is authorized to exercise all powers, consistent with the provisions of this chapter that may be necessary or convenient to reasonably and fairly achieve its purposes. When authorized by consent of the owner or other party in possession of a subject property, or if consent to enter either cannot be requested because the owner or party in lawful possession is not available, or consent to enter is refused or revoked, and when authorized by judicial warrant or other legal authority, the building official, code enforcement officer, or designee, may enter upon a subject property to investigate violations or to enforce the provisions of this chapter. When authorized entry occurs, the building official, code enforcement officer, or designee, will take reasonable steps to minimize inconvenience to persons in lawful possession of the property.

(Ord. No. 4186, § 2, 1-19-16)


14.02.070 Determination of unfitness.

The code enforcement officer, improvement officer, or hearing examiner may determine that a dwelling, building, structure, or premises are unfit if conditions exist in the dwelling, building, structure, or premises that are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety or welfare of the occupants of the dwelling, building, structure, or premises, the occupants of neighboring dwellings, or other residents of the city.

(Ord. No. 4186, § 2, 1-19-16)


14.02.080 Standards for determination of unfitness.

Dwellings, buildings, structures, or other premises that have any or all of the following defects may be deemed dangerous or unfit:

A. Interior walls or other vertical structural members that list, lean, or buckle to an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside the middle third of its base.

B. Dwellings, buildings, and structures that, exclusive of the foundation, show 33 percent or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members, or 50 percent of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering.

C. Dwellings, buildings, and structures that have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs, or in which are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.

D. Dwellings, buildings, and structures that have become damaged by fire, wind, or other causes so as to have become dangerous to the occupants or to the general public health, safety, or welfare.

E. Dwellings, buildings, and structures that have become or are so dilapidated or decayed or unsafe or unsanitary that they are unfit, or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to those living or who may enter within or to the general public health, safety, or welfare.

F. Dwellings, buildings, and structures that have inadequate light, air, or sanitation facilities, including the lack of running potable water, to protect those who live or who may enter within or to protect the general public health, safety, or welfare.

G. Dwellings, buildings, and structures that do not comply with the applicable fire code for means of egress in case of fire or panic or that have insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes, or other means of escape.

H. Dwellings, buildings, and structures that have attached parts that may fall and injure any person or damage any property.

I. Dwellings, buildings, and structures that, because of their condition, are unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous to those living or who may enter within or the general public health, safety, or welfare.

J. Dwellings, buildings, and structures that have any exterior cantilever wall, or parapet, or appendage attached to or supported by an exterior wall of the building located adjacent to a public way or to a way set apart for exit from a building or passage of pedestrians, if that cantilever, parapet, or appendage is not so constructed, anchored, or braced as to remain wholly in its original position in event of earthquake capable of producing a lateral force equal to 0.2 of gravity.

K. Dwellings, buildings, and structures that in whole or in part are erected, altered, remodeled, or occupied contrary to the ordinances adopted by the city and create a risk of harm to person or property.

L. Dwellings, buildings, and structures that have any exterior wall located adjacent to a public way or to a way set apart for exit from a building or passage of pedestrians, if that wall is not so constructed, anchored, or braced as to remain wholly in its original position in event of an earthquake capable of producing a lateral force equal of 0.2 of gravity.

M. Premises that constitute a public nuisance pursuant to KCC 8.01.030 and are dangerous or injurious to the occupants, the occupants of neighboring premises, or the general public health, safety, or welfare.

N. Premises that have any number of unsecured vehicles, cars, trucks, bikes, farm equipment, construction equipment, boats, trailers, snowmobiles, jet skis, or other machinery or implements that meet the definition of junk vehicle provided in KCC 8.08.020 and that create a risk of harm to person or property.

O. Premises that are unsecured and unsafe due to conditions that pose a hazard or attractive nuisance including without limitation sink holes, exposed underground vaults, pipes or wires, trenches, unstable slopes, or hazardous materials.

P. Developed premises that have over 50 percent of the area covered in blackberries or other noxious vegetation constituting a nuisance under KCC 8.07.050.

(Ord. No. 4186, § 2, 1-19-16)


14.02.090 Standards for repair, vacation, or demolition.

The following standards shall be followed in substance by the improvement officer and the hearing examiner when ordering repair, remediation, vacation, or demolition of dwellings, buildings, structures, or premises:

A. If the dangerous or unfit dwelling, building, structure, or premises can reasonably be repaired or remedied so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, the improvement officer or hearing examiner shall order repair or remediation.

B. If the estimated cost to repair the dangerous or unfit dwelling, building, structure or premises is 50 percent or more of the current assessed value, it will be demolished.

C. If the dangerous or unfit dwelling, building, structure, or premises cannot be reasonably repaired or remedied so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it will be demolished.

D. If the dangerous or unfit dwelling, building, structure, or premises is a fire hazard and that condition violates any provision of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city or the laws of the state, the unfit dwelling, building, structure, or premises shall be demolished or abated, unless the owner eliminates the fire hazard within 10 days, but the improvement officer or hearing examiner, for good cause shown, may grant additional time to remedy the violation.

(Ord. No. 4186, § 2, 1-19-16)


14.02.100 Security of unoccupied dwellings, buildings, structures, or premises.

A. The code enforcement officer, improvement officer, or hearing examiner may determine that an unoccupied property is unfit for reasons including without limitation:

1. It is not secure against unauthorized entry by children, trespassers, vagrants, or other persons;

2. It is not secure against infestation by insects or animals;

3. It is not secure against deterioration as a result of exposure to vandalism, weather, or the elements; or

4. It is inadequately maintained and repaired as evidenced by broken windows, overgrown vegetation, graffiti, or other conditions.

B. In making this determination, the code enforcement officer will consider and document with photographs and written accounts the factors that in his or her judgment reasonably bear on the determination, including without limitation:

1. The physical condition of the subject property and whether it reflects ongoing maintenance and repair, including the presence of broken windows or evidence of vandalism, overgrown vegetation, the presence of insect or animal pests, deterioration due to weather or exposure to the elements, and whether graffiti, when it occurs, is painted over promptly.

2. The length of time the subject property has been unoccupied.

3. The subject property is being actively marketed for sale or lease.

4. Other facts that demonstrate that the subject property has been or will likely be subject to hazards and circumstances contrary to the public health, safety, and welfare.

5. Other considerations established by this chapter.

C. In addition to any other powers authorized by this chapter, the improvement officer may order the person responsible for the violation to perform any or all of the following on or before a stated compliance deadline:

1. Secure all exterior openings of the subject property in accordance with Appendix A of the International Property Maintenance Code, or if the property owner requests otherwise in writing, by using alternative materials or methods that the code enforcement officer or improvement officer determines are adequate to make the dwellings, buildings, structures, or premises weather-tight and secure against unauthorized entry.

2. To disconnect all utilities including electricity, gas, and water.

3. To remove any graffiti and to keep the property free of graffiti.

4. To maintain the premises generally free of any vegetation or other matter that may constitute a nuisance or a fire hazard.

D. The improvement officer may modify orders issued under subsection (C) of this section from time to time in response to new information or changed circumstances regarding all or a portion of the dwelling, building, structures, or premises.

E. The code enforcement officer may monitor compliance of any unoccupied dwelling, building, structures, or premises that has been the subject of orders issued under this chapter. Monitoring may include regular inspections at an interval determined appropriate by the code enforcement officer based upon the subject property’s violation history.

(Ord. No. 4186, § 2, 1-19-16)


14.02.110 Preliminary investigation.

After the city learns of a dwelling, building, structure, or other premises that may be unfit, the code enforcement officer will investigate whether the condition exists, and if so, whether that condition is a violation of this chapter or other provision of the Kent City Code. This investigation should typically include reasonable efforts to speak with the owner of the subject property, or the tenant if the property is rented. The code enforcement officer will make a record of the investigation, including:

A. Identification of the subject property.

B. Documentation of inspection actions, including relevant dates, efforts to establish identity of, and contact with owners, tenants, or others responsible for the violations.

C. Written observations relevant to possible conditions of unfitness, possibly including diagrams of the building or premises and photographs.

D. The officer’s conclusion of whether the dwelling, building, structure, or other premises is unfit and the officer’s reasons for that conclusion.

If the code enforcement officer determines no violation exists, the officer will note that determination for the record and the matter will be concluded. The code enforcement officer will notify the owner or other person responsible for the violation, or other persons who have requested notice of the officer’s determination.

(Ord. No. 4186, § 2, 1-19-16)


14.02.120 Notice and order – Contents.

If, after preliminary investigation, the code enforcement officer determines that a dwelling, building, structure, or other premises is unfit, the officer will serve, according to the provisions of KCC 1.04.060, a notice and order that will state, identify, or describe:

A. The subject property including at least the property address and county assessor’s tax parcel number;

B. The condition(s) on the subject property that is illegal or that renders one or more dwellings, buildings, structures, or premises unfit;

C. The actions needed to correct the noncompliant condition(s);

D. The deadline for correction of the condition(s), which should allow a reasonable time for correction and must be set at least 48 hours before the matter will be presented at a hearing before the improvement officer;

E. The cost or administrative fees that may be charged to the person responsible for the violation as a consequence of the described noncompliant conditions, as described in KCC 14.02.190;

F. The place and date where and when the matter will be presented to the improvement officer, which will be at least 10 and not more than 30 days after the notice and order is served or posted;

G. Advise that at the improvement officer hearing, the improvement officer will be requested to:

1. Affirm the code enforcement officer’s determination of unfitness;

2. Authorize the city to proceed to abate the described nonconforming conditions on the subject property, if those conditions are not corrected before the deadline or otherwise corrected by the person responsible for the violation; and

3. Affirm that the owner will pay administrative fees plus the costs incurred by the city, through the date of the code enforcement officer’s determination of the nonconforming conditions, together with all reasonable costs that the city subsequently incurs to abate the nonconforming conditions, together with all administrative fees incurred for the subsequent abatement;

H. That all parties responsible for the violation shall be given the right to file an answer to the notice and order, to appear in person or otherwise, and to give testimony at the time and place for the improvement officer’s review stated in the notice and order;

I. That city policy allows the improvement officer to waive the city’s costs or administrative fees, or both, for a first offense if the nonconforming conditions are corrected at least 48 hours prior to the improvement officer’s hearing;

J. Invite the cooperation of the person(s) responsible for the violation and inform the violator(s) that city policy allows first offenders to negotiate a voluntary correction agreement consistent with the provisions of KCC 1.04.070 in which, among other things, the person responsible for the violation:

1. Admits that the nonconforming condition(s) exist(s);

2. Promises to correct the nonconforming condition(s) by an agreed deadline;

3. Understands that he or she: (a) may refuse consent to enter, (b) may limit the scope of any consent to enter to certain areas, (c) may withdraw at any time any consent to enter once consent is given, (d) must allow entry by representatives of the city or persons under contract with the city to correct any nonconforming condition(s) that the violator fails to correct by the required deadline, and (e) acknowledges that any evidence discovered during the consent to entry may be used against the person responsible for the violation in the existing proceeding or in other proceedings, including criminal proceedings; and

4. Agrees to pay the city’s costs to abate the illegal conditions if the owner fails to abate, pursuant to KCC 14.02.190;

K. If the subject property is lawfully occupied by someone other than the person responsible for the violation and if the person(s) responsible for the violation has not corrected the violations by the required deadline, no voluntary correction agreement will be offered unless the persons lawfully occupying the property also consent to entry by either the city or persons under contract with the city to correct the illegal condition(s);

L. Advise the violator(s) that if the nonconforming conditions are not timely corrected, the city may pursue the matter further by civil or criminal enforcement, or both, in addition to further proceedings authorized under this chapter; and

M. Advise the violator(s) that city policy is to criminally prosecute repeat offenders.

(Ord. No. 4186, § 2, 1-19-16)


14.02.130 Service of notice and order – Filing with county auditor.

If, after a preliminary investigation of any dwelling, building, structure, or premises, the code enforcement officer determines that it is unfit, he or she will serve all parties responsible for the violation, either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested. The officer must also post at one or more conspicuous places on the subject property a copy of the notice and order stating, in accordance with the provisions of KCC 14.02.120, in what respects the dwelling, building, structure, or premises is unfit. If the whereabouts of the violator(s) is unknown and cannot be ascertained by the officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the officer makes an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of the notice and order upon the violator(s) may be made either by personal service or by mailing a copy of the notice and order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each violator at the address of the building involved in the proceedings, and mailing a copy of the notice and order by first class mail to any address of each violator in the records of the county assessor or the county auditor. A copy of the notice and order must also be filed with the county recorder’s office, and filing the notice and order shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law.

(Ord. No. 4186, § 2, 1-19-16)


14.02.140 Improvement officer hearing to review notice and order.

A. Unless, prior to the time fixed in the notice and order for a hearing before the improvement officer, the property owner has entered into a voluntary correction agreement, or city staff have determined that the nonconforming conditions have been corrected, the improvement officer will hold a hearing to review the notice and order and determine the immediate disposition of any nonconforming conditions existing at the subject property. The hearing will be canceled if the code enforcement officer approves the completed corrective action at least 48 hours before the scheduled hearing, and the code enforcement officer will provide notice of satisfactory correction to the owner, complainants, and other interested persons, and to the county recorder’s office if a notice of the enforcement action was previously filed.

B. The improvement officer shall conduct a hearing pursuant to any rules adopted by the director. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the improvement officer. The code enforcement officer, the person(s) subject to the violation, and other parties entitled to be served with the notice and order may participate as parties in the hearing, and each party may call witnesses. The city has the burden of demonstrating by a preponderance of the evidence that the subject property is unfit and that the required corrective action stated in the notice and order is reasonable. When considering the evidence, the code enforcement officer’s determination of unfitness and order to correct nonconforming conditions shall be accorded substantial weight.

C. If the cited violator or other parties fail to appear at the scheduled hearing, the improvement officer may affirm the notice and order by finding that the subject property is unfit as determined by the code enforcement officer. The improvement officer may further authorize the city to assess costs and administrative fees according to the provisions of this chapter.

D. If persons appear and provide testimony, then the improvement officer will consider evidence and argument submitted by the code enforcement officer, the party responsible for the violation, and the complainant(s). The improvement officer will then determine whether the subject property is unfit for human habitation or other use and, if so determined, issue a summary of decision according to the provisions of this section. Within five business days following the date of hearing, the summary of decision shall be served, either personally or by certified mail, with return receipt requested, upon the person responsible for the violation and other persons entitled to notice of the notice and order, and shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the subject property. The summary of decision will include at least the following:

1. Findings of fact in support of the improvement officer’s decision affirming the notice and order;

2. Either:

a. That the compliance deadline under the notice and order was reasonable and has passed without satisfactory correction of the illegal conditions; or

b. That the compliance deadline under the notice and order should be extended until a date certain by which time the illegal conditions must be corrected;

3. An accounting of the city’s costs and administrative fees which, as of the date of the hearing, have been incurred as a consequence of the illegal conditions, and that those costs and fees will be charged to the owner and shall be specially assessed and shall constitute a lien against the real property if they are not paid timely; and

4. Direction that, after exhaustion of any appeal rights, if the owner or responsible parties fail to comply with the notice and order as confirmed by the improvement officer, the city may, with judicial warrant or other legal authority, directly or by private contract, correct the illegal conditions, and the costs incurred by the city for that correction, including administrative fees as authorized by this chapter, will be charged to the person determined to be responsible for the violation and will be specially assessed and that special assessment will constitute a lien against the real property if not paid timely.

E. The summary of decision shall state that the person responsible for the violation is entitled to appeal the improvement officer’s decision to the hearing examiner within 30 days and, unless he or she does appeal or correct the illegal conditions, the city has the power, when authorized by judicial warrant or other legal authority, to secure the subject property, to do any act required of the person responsible for the violation in the notice and order, to charge costs and administrative fees incurred to correct the illegal conditions to the person responsible for the violation, and to assess those costs and fees against the property.

F. If no appeal is filed, a copy of the summary of decision will be filed with the recorder’s office of King County and the notice and order will be final.

(Ord. No. 4186, § 2, 1-19-16)


14.02.150 Enforcement.

The summary of decision may prescribe times other than times stated in the notice and order within which correction of nonconforming conditions must be commenced or completed. If the required corrective action is not commenced or completed within the prescribed time, or if no time is prescribed within the time for appeal, the code enforcement officer may, after the period for appeal has expired, begin the legal process to obtain a warrant to abate the nonconforming conditions. If satisfactory progress has been made and sufficient evidence is presented that the nonconforming conditions will be corrected within a reasonable time, the code enforcement officer or improvement officer may extend the time for completion of the work. If the time for appeals to the hearing examiner under KCC 14.02.170 and petition to the court under KCC 14.02.180 has passed, the person responsible for the violation may, for good and sufficient cause beyond his or her control, request in writing an extension of time. The improvement officer may grant a reasonable extension of time only if the officer finds that the delay was due to extenuating circumstances beyond the control of the person responsible for the violation, as evidenced by supporting documentation or other reliable information. There shall be no appeal or petition from the improvement officer’s ruling on an extension of time.

(Ord. No. 4186, § 2, 1-19-16)


14.02.160 Appeal of improvement officer’s decision.

A. The owner or any party responsible for the violation, as those terms are defined in KCC 1.04.020, may file an appeal of the improvement officer’s decision within 30 days from the date of service and posting. The appeal must be filed with the director.

B. Appeals shall be in writing, be accompanied by an appeal fee as set by the city council, and contain the following information:

1. Appellant’s name, address, phone number, and email address;

2. Appellant’s statement describing his or her standing to appeal;

3. Identification of the summary of decision which is the subject of the appeal;

4. Appellant’s statement of grounds for appeal and the facts upon which the appeal is based;

5. The relief sought, including the specific nature and extent; and

6. A statement affirming that the appellant has read the appeal and believes the contents to be true, followed by the appellant’s signature.

C. Any appeal of the improvement officer’s decision will be heard by the city’s hearing examiner. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be served by regular first class mail to the address of the party who filed the appeal. The matter of the appeal will be scheduled for public hearing before the hearing examiner so as to allow 10 days’ notice of the hearing to the appellant and all responsible parties and to permit final decision thereon to be made within 60 days after the filing of the appeal. The filing of the notice of appeal shall stay the notice and order as confirmed by the improvement officer, except so much thereof as requires temporary measures, such as securing of a building to minimize any emergent danger to the public health or safety.

(Ord. No. 4186, § 2, 1-19-16)


14.02.170 Hearings before the hearing examiner.

A. Upon timely appeal, the hearing examiner shall review the proceedings and decisions of the improvement officer and determine whether to affirm, modify, or vacate those decisions.

B. The hearing examiner’s review shall be on the record as prepared before the improvement officer, not de novo. In the absence of new information or changes in circumstances outside the parties’ control, the hearing examiner will not accept new evidence or evidence not made available to the improvement officer. At the appeal hearing, the hearing examiner shall consider the file of the proceedings before the improvement officer and such other evidence as the hearing examiner may permit in accordance with this section. Unless other rules or guidelines are set by the hearing examiner at the time of the hearing, each party will be given 15 minutes to present oral argument to the hearing examiner.

C. The hearing examiner shall review the record, oral argument of the parties and such supplemental evidence as is permitted under subsection (B) of this section. The hearing examiner may grant relief only if the party seeking relief has carried the burden of establishing that one of the following standards has been met:

1. The improvement officer or code enforcement officer engaged in unlawful procedure or failed to follow a prescribed process, unless the error was harmless;

2. The improvement officer’s decision is an erroneous interpretation of the law;

3. The improvement officer’s decision is not supported by evidence that is substantial when viewed in light of the whole record before the hearing examiner;

4. The improvement officer’s decision is a clearly erroneous application of the law to the facts;

5. The improvement officer’s decision is outside the authority or jurisdiction of the improvement officer;

6. The improvement officer’s decision or the code enforcement officer’s notice and order violates the constitutional rights of the party seeking relief; or

7. Special and extenuating circumstances exist that, in order to do substantial justice, warrant the grant of relief from the improvement officer’s summary of decision.

D. After the hearing, the hearing examiner may affirm, modify, or vacate the decision of the improvement officer, or may continue the matter for further deliberation or presentation of additional evidence.

E. A record of the proceedings shall be made and kept in accordance with the state records retention schedule and applicable to local governments.

F. The hearing examiner shall prepare a written order that contains findings of fact and conclusions of law based on the record before the hearing examiner that includes the following information:

1. For each alleged violation of the city code, a statement indicating whether the violation has been found committed;

2. For violations found committed, the monetary penalties and costs to be assessed pursuant to this chapter;

3. For violations found committed, any required corrective actions;

4. For violations found committed, a finding that abatement of the violations by the city is authorized, at the expense of the violator(s);

5. A statement notifying the violator(s) that the violator(s) may be subject to additional civil and/or criminal penalties if the violation(s) is not corrected or abated;

6. A statement that the violator(s) has the right to petition the King County superior court for appropriate relief within 30 days from the date the order was issued.

G. The hearing examiner’s findings, conclusions, and order shall be served upon the same persons in the same manner as the summary of the improvement officer’s decision.

H. The hearing examiner must file the order within 60 days after the filing of a notice of appeal, unless continued with consent of the owner or occupant.

I. The appeal hearing will be recorded and a copy of the recording will be made available to the violator or other party. Should the violator or other party request a transcript of the appeal hearing, in lieu of the recording, a transcript will be made available at the requestor’s expense.

J. The findings, conclusions, and orders of the hearing examiner on appeals of decisions issued by the improvement officer shall be reported in the same manner and shall bear the same legal consequences as if issued by the improvement officer, and shall be subject to review only in the manner and to the extent provided in KCC 14.02.180.

(Ord. No. 4186, § 2, 1-19-16)


14.02.180 Appeals to superior court.

Pursuant to KCC 14.02.170, any person affected by the hearing examiner’s order may, within 30 days after the posting and service of the order, petition the superior court for an injunction restraining the city from carrying out the provisions of the order.

(Ord. No. 4186, § 2, 1-19-16)


14.02.190 Costs of abatement and administrative fees.

A. The costs of abatement, repair, alteration, or improvement, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition, when those actions are performed at the city’s cost, will be assessed against the real property upon which those costs were incurred unless paid within 30 days after billing by the city, or unless alternative payment arrangements are made within 30 days after billing. The building official will forward a report of any unpaid costs of abatement and administrative fees to the city finance director, who will certify them to the county treasurer for assessment on the tax rolls, as provided by RCW 35.80.030(h).

B. The cost of “vacating and closing” as referenced in subsection (A) of this section will include:

1. The amount of relocation assistance payments that a property owner has not repaid to the city or other local government entity that has advanced relocation assistance payments to tenants under RCW 59.18.085; and

2. All penalties and interest that accrue as a result of the failure of the property owner to timely repay the amount of these relocation assistance payments under RCW 59.18.085.

C. The city must use a licensed contractor when bidding to correct nonconforming conditions. Contract documents must provide that the value of the materials and other salvage of the property will be credited against the costs of the corrective action. The contract documents may require bidders to estimate the salvage value of the property and, by claiming the salvage, reduce the amount of the contractor’s bid accordingly. After the city accepts the bid, the contractor may not adjust the bid to reflect the actual salvage value. Bids may be let prior to the time for compliance or appeal, but cannot be binding or accepted until the order for corrective action is final.

D. In addition to actual abatement costs, the city may assess the following administrative fees and collect those fees in the same manner as for the collection of actual abatement costs:

1. If the code enforcement officer approves the abatement before the improvement officer’s hearing, the administrative fee will be $200, except that this fee will not be required for a first offense if the abatement required in the notice and order is complete at least 48 hours prior to the improvement officer’s hearing.

2. Where the abatement required in the notice and order is accomplished less than 48 hours before the improvement officer’s hearing as provided for in KCC 14.02.140, the administrative fee will be $300.

3. When abatement is accomplished after breach of a voluntary correction agreement between the property owner and the city, the administrative fee will be $600.

4. Where abatement is accomplished after the issuance of the improvement officer’s summary of decision or following material breach of a voluntary correction agreement, the administrative fee will be $1,000.

5. Where abatement is accomplished following the issuance of the hearing examiner’s order, the administrative fee shall be $1,250.

6. Where abatement is accomplished following the issuance of an order from the superior court or higher appellate court, the administrative fee will be $1,500.

E. The improvement officer or the hearing examiner may, upon recommendation from the code enforcement officer, modify the amount, methods, or time of payment of these administrative fees as the condition of the property and the circumstances of the owner may warrant. In determining any adjustments, the hearing examiner may reduce the costs to an owner who has acted in good faith and would suffer extreme financial hardship. The hearing examiner may, upon recommendation from the code enforcement officer, increase the administrative fees if evidence is presented in an appeal under KCC 14.02.170 that the scheduled fees are inadequate to make the city whole with respect to a particular unfit dwelling, building, structure, or other premises.

(Ord. No. 4186, § 2, 1-19-16)


14.02.200 Assessment and lien on the real property.

A. All costs incurred by the city to abate illegal conditions pursuant to this chapter, including administrative fees, will be charged against the owner of the subject property, will be specially assessed, and will constitute a lien against the subject property unless those amounts are timely paid.

B. The finance director, or designee, will certify to the county treasurer any unpaid costs to correct nonconforming conditions as a special assessment due and owing to the city. Pursuant to RCW 35.80.030, the county treasurer will enter the amount of the special assessment upon the tax rolls against the property for the current year and the same will become a part of the general taxes due for that year and will be collected at the same time and with interest at the rates and in the manner provided for in RCW 84.56.020, as now enacted or subsequently amended, for delinquent taxes. When collected, the proceeds will be deposited to the credit of the city’s abatement project fund. If the city removes all or part of the dwelling, building, structure, or premises, the city will, if possible, sell the materials removed and credit the proceeds against the cost of removal. If any balance remains, the improvement officer will determine the appropriate parties to receive the balance, after deducting the city’s costs and administrative fees incident thereto.

C. The assessment will constitute a lien against the property that will be of equal rank with state, county, and municipal taxes.

(Ord. No. 4186, § 2, 1-19-16)


14.02.210 Abatement project fund.

A. The city council establishes a special revolving fund to be designated as the abatement project fund. The director may require that payments from this fund to defray the costs and expenses that the city incurs when conducting work necessary to abate dangerous or unfit buildings, structures, or premises.

B. The city council may transfer to the abatement project fund those sums it determines are necessary to expedite the performance of the work or repair or demolition. Any sum so transferred will be deemed a loan to the abatement project fund and will be repaid out of the proceeds of the collections made to the fund. All funds collected will be paid to the city and the finance director will credit them to the abatement project fund.

(Ord. No. 4186, § 2, 1-19-16)


Chapter 14.08 ENFORCEMENT OF THE BUILDING CODES

Sections:

14.08.010    Scope.

14.08.020    Definitions.

14.08.040    Administration and enforcement.

14.08.060    Investigation and notice of violation.

14.08.080    Reserved.

14.08.100    Stop work order and stop use order.

14.08.120    Emergency order.

14.08.140    Reserved.

14.08.160    Deadline for compliance – Extension of compliance deadline.

14.08.180    Reserved.

14.08.200    Violations.

14.08.220    Reserved.

14.08.240    Violation – Penalty.

14.08.260    Additional relief.


14.08.010 Scope.

This chapter shall supplement the procedures outlined in Ch. 1.04 KCC for enforcement of violations of the Kent City Code and both chapters shall govern enforcement of the building codes adopted in KCC Title 14.

(Ord. No. 3880, § 4, 5-6-08)


14.08.020 Definitions.

The definitions contained in KCC 1.04.020 shall also apply to this chapter. In addition, the following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

1. Building codes means and includes the International Building Code, the International Existing Building Code, the International Residential Code, the International Mechanical Code, the International Fire Code, the International Energy Conservation Code, the International Property Maintenance Code, the Uniform Plumbing Code, and the Uniform Housing Code, as now or hereafter adopted, amended, or supplemented pursuant to this title, the Revised Code of Washington, and/or the Washington Administrative Code.

2. Building official means the building official of the city or any person authorized by the building official to enforce the building codes.

3. Premises means a plot of ground, whether occupied by a structure or not.

(Ord. No. 3053, § 2(14.24.020), 7-7-92; Ord. No. 3178, § 1, 8-2-94; Ord. No. 3690, § 14, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3880, § 4, 5-6-08; Ord. No. 3956, § 2, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 4081, § 2, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 4202, § 2, 5-17-16)


14.08.040 Administration and enforcement.

A. It shall be the duty of the building official to enforce the building codes in the manner generally described in each of the respective building codes, and as more particularly described in this chapter, Chapter 14.02 KCC, and in Chapter 1.04 KCC.

B. The obligation of complying with the requirements of the building codes shall fall upon any person or entity defined under KCC 1.04.020(K) as a “person responsible for the violation,” and shall expressly include the owner, occupier, or other person responsible for the condition of the buildings, structures, dwelling units, or premises within the scope of the building codes.

C. In case of conflict between the provisions of the building codes and of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling. In the case of any conflict between this chapter and Ch. 1.04 KCC, this chapter shall control.

(Ord. No. 3053, § 2(14.24.040), 7-7-92; Ord. No. 3178, § 1, 8-2-94; Ord. No. 3880, § 4, 5-6-08; Ord. No. 4186, § 3, 1-19-16)


14.08.060 Investigation and notice of violation.

A. The building official shall investigate any building, structure, dwelling unit, or premises which the building official reasonably believes does not comply with the standards and requirements of the building codes.

B. If, after investigation, the building official determines that the standards or requirements of the building codes have been violated, the building official may seek compliance and serve a notice of violation on a person responsible for the violation or may otherwise enforce the building codes pursuant to this chapter, Chapter 14.02 KCC, and Chapter 1.04 KCC.

(Ord. No. 3053, § 2(14.24.060), 7-7-92; Ord. No. 3130, § 1, 9-7-93; Ord. No. 3178, § 1, 8-2-94; Ord. No. 3880, § 4, 5-6-08; Ord. No. 4186, § 4, 1-19-16)


14.08.080 Reserved.

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3130, § 1, adopted Sept. 7, 1993, repealed former § 14.08.080 in its entirety, which pertained to time for compliance.


14.08.100 Stop work order and stop use order.

The building official may issue a stop work order and/or a stop use order pursuant to the provisions of the International Building Code, the International Residential Code, or any other applicable building code, or may issue a stop work order and/or a stop use order when a continuing violation of any of the building codes will materially impair the building official’s ability to secure compliance, or when a continuing violation threatens the public health, safety, or welfare.

(Ord. No. 3053, § 2(14.24.100), 7-7-92; Ord. No. 3178, § 1, 8-2-94; Ord. No. 3690, § 15, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3880, § 4, 5-6-08)


14.08.120 Emergency order.

A. Whenever any building, dwelling unit, and/or premises violates the building codes in a manner that, in the opinion of the building official, creates a risk of imminent harm to the occupants of the building, dwelling unit, premises, or any member of the public, the building official may issue an emergency order barring use of the building, dwelling unit, and/or premises until the building, dwelling unit, and/or premises has been inspected by the city and approved as restored to a condition of safety, and the order may require that the building, dwelling unit, and/or premises be immediately vacated and closed to entry until the dangerous condition has been corrected to the satisfaction of the building official. The emergency order shall also specify a deadline for correction of the conditions that caused the emergency order to be issued.

B. The emergency order shall be posted on the building, dwelling unit, and/or premises and shall be mailed by regular first class mail to the last known address of the owners, and if applicable, to any known occupants.

C. Any building, dwelling unit, and/or premises subject to an emergency order which is not repaired within the time specified in the order is hereby found and declared to be a public nuisance, which the building official is authorized to abate by such means and with such assistance as may be available, and any abatement costs shall become a lien against the property and shall be recovered by the building official in any manner provided by law.

(Ord. No. 3053, § 2(14.24.120), 7-7-92; Ord. No. 3178, § 1, 8-2-94; Ord. No. 3880, § 4, 5-6-08)


14.08.140 Reserved.

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3130, § 1, adopted Sept. 7, 1993, repealed former § 14.08.140 in its entirety, which pertained to review of notice by the building official.


14.08.160 Deadline for compliance – Extension of compliance deadline.

A.  Where violations of the building codes occur, deadlines for compliance with the building codes, and any extension of the deadline for compliance granted by the building official, shall be governed by the conditions outlined in KCC 1.04.050.

B. An extension of the deadline for compliance may be revoked by the building official pursuant to the conditions outlined in KCC 1.04.050.

(Ord. No. 3053, § 2(14.24.160), 7-7-92; Ord. No. 3880, § 4, 5-6-08)


14.08.180 Reserved.

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3130, § 1, adopted Sept. 7, 1993, repealed former § 14.08.180 in its entirety, which pertained to appeals to the superior court.


14.08.200 Violations.

A. It shall be unlawful to intentionally fail to comply with a notice of violation, final order, emergency order, stop work or stop use order, or any other notice, complaint or order issued pursuant to this chapter, Chapter 14.02 KCC, or Chapter 1.04 KCC.

B. It shall be unlawful to remove or deface any sign, notice, complaint or order posted by the building official in accordance with his enforcement duties under this chapter, Chapter 14.02 KCC, or Chapter 1.04 KCC.

C. It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally obstruct, impede or interfere with any lawful attempt to serve any notice of violation, final order, emergency order, stop work or stop use order, or any other notice, complaint or order, or intentionally obstruct, impede or interfere with any lawful attempt to comply with any notice of violation, final order, emergency order, stop work or stop use order, or any other notice, complaint or order issued pursuant to this chapter, Chapter 14.02 KCC or Chapter 1.04 KCC.

D. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with an emergency order issued by the building official requiring that the building, dwelling unit, and/or premises be restored to a condition of safety by a specified time.

E. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or occupy, or to cause or permit any person to use or occupy the building, dwelling unit, and/or premises after the date provided in an emergency order requiring the building, dwelling unit, and/or premises to be vacated and closed, until the building official certifies that the conditions described in the emergency order have been corrected and the building, dwelling unit, and/or premises have been restored to a safe condition.

(Ord. No. 3053, § 2(14.24.200), 7-7-92; Ord. No. 3880, § 4, 5-6-08; Ord. No. 4186, § 5, 1-19-16)


14.08.220 Reserved.

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3130, § 1, adopted Sept. 7, 1993, repealed former § 14.08.220 in its entirety, which pertained to civil penalties.


14.08.240 Violation – Penalty.

A. Civil code enforcement action. Any violation of any provision of a building code enforced under this chapter constitutes a civil violation under Chapter 1.04 KCC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required and/or otherwise enforced as provided therein.

B. Criminal offense. In addition to or as an alternative to any other enforcement procedure or penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of the Kent City Code may be charged criminally, pursuant to KCC 1.04.030(B).

C. Civil infraction. In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of this chapter may be issued a class 1 civil infraction pursuant to RCW 7.80.120, as currently enacted or hereafter amended, and KCC 1.04.225.

D. Each day that anyone shall continue to violate or fail to comply with any of the foregoing provisions shall be considered a separate offense.

(Ord. No. 3053, § 2(14.24.240), 7-7-92; Ord. No. 3130, § 1, 9-7-93; Ord. No. 3178, § 1, 8-2-94; Ord. No. 3415, § 3, 8-4-98; Ord. No. 3690, § 16, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3880, § 4, 5-6-08; Ord. No. 4282, § 8, 7-3-18)


14.08.260 Additional relief.

The building official may seek legal or equitable relief to enjoin any acts and practices and abate any condition which constitutes or will constitute a violation of the building codes when civil or criminal penalties are inadequate to effect compliance. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit or preclude any other action or proceeding relating to the enforcement of the building codes.

(Ord. No. 3053, § 2(14.24.260), 7-7-92; Ord. No. 3178, § 1, 8-2-94; Ord. No. 3880, § 4, 5-6-08)


Chapter 14.09 FLOOD HAZARD REGULATIONS* Amended Ord. 4361

Sections:

14.09.010    Definitions. Amended Ord. 4361

14.09.020    Findings. Amended Ord. 4361

14.09.030    Purpose. Amended Ord. 4361

14.09.040    Policies and standards for reducing flood losses. Amended Ord. 4361

14.09.050    Lands to which this chapter applies. Amended Ord. 4361

14.09.060    Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas. Amended Ord. 4361

14.09.070    Penalties for noncompliance. Amended Ord. 4361

14.09.080    Abrogation and greater restrictions. Amended Ord. 4361

14.09.090    Interpretation. Amended Ord. 4361

14.09.100    Warning and disclaimer of liability. Amended Ord. 4361

14.09.110    Repealed. Amended Ord. 4361

14.09.120    Permits and licenses. Amended Ord. 4361

14.09.130    Procedural requirements. Amended Ord. 4361

14.09.140    Use of other base flood data. Amended Ord. 4361

14.09.150    Designation of local administrator. Amended Ord. 4361

14.09.160    General standards. Amended Ord. 4361

14.09.170    Specific standards. Amended Ord. 4361

14.09.175    Compensatory storage. Amended Ord. 4361

14.09.180    Floodways. Amended Ord. 4361

14.09.190    Wetlands management. Amended Ord. 4361

14.09.200    Standards for shallow flooding areas (AO zones). Amended Ord. 4361

14.09.210    Appeals. Amended Ord. 4361

14.09.220    Variances. Amended Ord. 4361

*Cross reference(s) – Improvement plan approval and inspection fees, ch. 6.03; environmental policy, ch. 11.03; mobile home parks, ch. 12.05; recreational vehicle parks, ch. 12.06; buildings, ch. 14.09.

State law reference(s) – Environmental policy act, RCW 43.21C.010 et seq.; flood ordinances, RCW 86.16.010 et seq.


14.09.010 Definitions.Amended Ord. 4361

The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

A. Appeal means a request for review of any final action pursuant to this chapter, or of the interpretation of any provision of this chapter by any city official.

B. Area of shallow flooding means the land within the floodplain where the base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident.

C. Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also referred to as the 100-year flood.

D. Base flood elevation means the actual elevation (in mean sea level) of the water surface of the base flood determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or other qualified person or agency as described in this chapter.

E. Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.

F. Best available data means: (1) the data provided by FEMA in a scientific and engineering report entitled Flood Insurance Study for King County, Washington and Incorporated Areas, dated May 16, 1995, along with the accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRM), including any subsequent revisions thereto; or (2) hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice and in accordance with FEMA standards contained in 44 C.F.R. Part 65.

G. Compensatory flood storage means any new, excavated flood storage volume equivalent to any flood storage capacity which has been or would be eliminated by filling or grading within the special flood hazard area. The compensatory flood storage must be provided within the special flood hazard area and be free draining.

H. Critical facility means a facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire, and emergency response installations; and public and private facilities which produce, use, or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste as defined by the State Department of Ecology.

I. Development means any proposed or actual manmade changes to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations located within the special flood hazard area and other site preparation activities, storage of materials or equipment, subdivision of land, removal of substantial amounts of vegetation, or alteration of natural site characteristics.

J. Director means the city of Kent economic and community development director or the director’s designee.

K. Fill means the addition of soil, sand, rock, gravel, sediment, walls, structures and their associated internal volume, or other material by artificial means.

L. Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters;

2. The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface water from any source.

M. Flood fringe means the portion of the special flood hazard area outside of the floodway which is generally covered by floodwaters during the base flood.

N. Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map on which FEMA has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

O. Flood insurance study means the official report provided by FEMA that includes flood profiles, the FIRM, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

P. Flood protection elevation means a minimum of two feet above the base flood elevation.

Q. Flood season means the period from October 1st to March 31st during which, historically, the frequency, distribution, and volume (inches of rainfall) of storms in the Green River Basin have been the largest and all known major floods have occurred.

R. Floodplain means that portion of a river or stream channel and adjacent lands which are subject to the base flood flooding.

S. Floodway means the channel of the stream and that portion of the adjoining special flood hazard area which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without increasing the base flood elevation more than one foot.

T. Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.

U. Manufactured home means a structure, used for residential or commercial purposes, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term manufactured home also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes the term manufactured home does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles.

V. Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

W. No net fill means that if any fill is brought on to a site for the construction of a structure or access road then an equal amount of soil/material will be removed from the site. Earthen fill must be obtained from the same site, to the extent practicable. The soil removed must be from within the boundaries of the site, to the extent practicable, and from within the special flood hazard area. If not practical, soil could be removed from property in the immediate vicinity and within the special flood hazard area. The area from which the soil is removed must be able to drain completely into the adjoining watercourse following a flood.

X. New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

Y. Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is:

1. Built on a single chassis;

2. Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

3. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

4. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

Z. Special flood hazard area means the total area subject to inundation by the base flood identified by FEMA in a report entitled The Flood Insurance Study for King County, Washington and Incorporated Areas, dated May 16, 1995, with accompanying pages on file with King County or the city of Kent department of economic and community development.

AA. Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date a building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days after the permit issuance date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include submission of an application for development or land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.

BB. Structure means that which is built or constructed, or an edifice or building of any kind or any piece of work composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, and includes posts for fences and signs. It specifically includes buildings that are not fully enclosed on all sides where the orientation may affect the flow of floodwaters, but does not include mounds of earth or debris.

CC. Substantial improvement means any repair, remodeling, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the appraised fair market value of the structure either:

1. Before the improvement or repair is started; or

2. If the structure has been damaged, regardless of whether or not it is determined to be substantial damage, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. 

For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 

The term does not, however, include either:

a. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct an existing violation of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications, as identified by the local code enforcement official, and which is the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

b. Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a recognized state or local inventory of historic places.

DD. Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

(Ord. No. 2867, § 1(14.22.040), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 3746, § 5, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 3909, § 1, 2-3-09; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 7-21-15; Ord. No. 4218, § 1, 11‑1‑16. Formerly Code 1986, §§ 14.22.040 – 14.22.062)

Cross reference(s) – Definitions and rules of construction generally, KCC 1.01.030.


14.09.020 Findings.Amended Ord. 4361

The city council finds that:

1. The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which endangers life and property, presents health and safety hazards, disrupts commerce and governmental services, and necessitates extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare; and

2. These flood losses are caused by the natural accumulation and ponding of floodwaters and the cumulative effect of obstructions in flood hazard areas which increase flood heights and velocities. Uses inadequately floodproofed, elevated, or protected from flood damage or that otherwise encroach on the natural holding capacity of the floodplain also contribute to the flood loss.

(Ord. No. 2867, § 1(14.22.010), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 3746, § 5, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 7-21-15. Formerly Code 1986, § 14.22.010)


14.09.030 Purpose.Amended Ord. 4361

It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by enacting provisions designed to:

1. Protect life and property by preventing the hazardous use of flood-prone lands;

2. Protect downstream or surrounding property from higher velocities or higher flood levels which may be caused by loss of holding capacity in the floodplain;

3. Minimize turbidity and pollution from upstream or surrounding development during a flood;

4. Minimize the expenditure of public money for remedial flood control measures;

5. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding which are generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

6. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in flood hazard areas;

7. Alert appraisers, assessors, owners, potential buyers, and lessees to the natural limitations of flood-prone land;

8. Ensure that those who occupy or seek to develop in flood hazard areas assume responsibility for their actions;

9. Qualify the city and existing homes and businesses for participation in the Federal Flood Insurance Program; and

10. Implement local, state, and federal flood protection programs.

(Ord. No. 2867, § 1(14.22.020), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 3746, § 5, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 7-21-15. Formerly Code 1986, § 14.22.020)


14.09.040 Policies and standards for reducing flood losses.Amended Ord. 4361

In order to accomplish its purpose, this chapter includes policies and standards to:

1. Restrict, condition, or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion, flood heights, or velocities;

2. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial development and construction;

3. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;

4. Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and

5. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood- waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas.

(Ord. No. 2282, § 3; Ord. No. 2867, § 1(14.22.030), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 3746, § 5, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 7-21-15. Formerly Code 1986, § 14.22.030)


14.09.050 Lands to which this chapter applies.Amended Ord. 4361

This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the city.

(Ord. No. 2867, § 2(14.22.050), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 3746, § 5, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 7-21-15)


14.09.060 Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas.Amended Ord. 4361

The special flood hazard areas are identified by FEMA in a scientific and engineering report entitled Flood Insurance Study for King County, Washington and Incorporated Areas, dated May 16, 1995, along with the accompanying FIRM, including any subsequent revisions thereto (the flood insurance study), which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter as if stated verbatim; or the use of best available data as defined in this chapter. The flood insurance study is on file and available for examination at the office of the department of public works.

(Ord. No. 2867, § 2(14.22.060), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 3228, § 1, 5-16-95; Ord. No. 3232, § 1, 6-20-95; Ord. No. 3746, § 5, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 3909, § 2, 2-3-09; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 7-21-15)


14.09.070 Penalties for noncompliance.Amended Ord. 4361

No structure or land shall hereafter be developed, constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 180 days, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. In addition, nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from issuing notices of violation pursuant to Chapter 1.04 KCC to any person or entity responsible for acts or omissions contrary to the regulations contained in this chapter, nor prevent the city from taking any other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.

(Ord. No. 2867, § 2(14.22.070), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 3746, § 5, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 3880, § 5, 5-6-08; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 7-21-15)


14.09.080 Abrogation and greater restrictions.Amended Ord. 4361

This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.

(Ord. No. 2867, § 2(14.22.080), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 3746, § 5, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 7-21-15)


14.09.090 Interpretation.Amended Ord. 4361

In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

1. Considered as minimum requirements;

2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.

(Ord. No. 2867, § 2(14.22.090), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 3746, § 5, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 7-21-15)


14.09.100 Warning and disclaimer of liability.Amended Ord. 4361

The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such area will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, its elected officials or any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administration decision lawfully made hereunder.

(Ord. No. 2867, § 2(14.22.110), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 3746, § 5, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 7-21-15)


14.09.110 Green River flood control zone number 2.Amended Ord. 4361

Repealed by Ord. No. 4158.

(Ord. No. 2867, § 2(14.22.120), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 3746, § 5, 4-19-05)


14.09.120 Permits and licenses.Amended Ord. 4361

No permit or license for structures or the development or use of land shall be issued by the city within a special flood hazard area unless approved by the director. Such approval shall be based on a review of the provisions set forth in this chapter and the technical findings and recommendations of city departments and divisions, including, but not limited to, building, fire, and planning. Compliance with this chapter does not obviate the need to obtain other permits which may be required pursuant to state or federal law including but not limited to approvals required from the United States Army Corps of Engineers and the State Departments of Social and Health Services and Ecology relating to water and sewer systems which ensure that water and sewer systems will be designed to avoid infiltration, inflow, or impairment.

(Ord. No. 2867, § 2(14.22.130), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 3746, § 5, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 7-21-15. Formerly Code 1986, § 14.22.130)


14.09.130 Procedural requirements.Amended Ord. 4361

City permits or licenses which relate to the development and use of land within the special flood hazard areas shall be referred to the department of economic and community development by the issuing department for approval. If it can be determined from information at hand that the property is not located in a special flood hazard area, the issuing department may approve the permit or license directly. If it appears that any portion of the property may be located in a special flood hazard area, the department of economic and community development shall require its owner to submit information necessary to determine if in fact any portion of the property is located within the floodway or flood fringe. If it is determined that any portion of the property is located within the floodway or within the flood fringe, the applicant shall be required by the department of economic and community development to submit such surveys, plans, and supporting documents as are necessary to determine the applicability of city regulations to the proposed structure, development, or use. The department of economic and community development shall consider not only the individual structure, development, or use, but shall also consider it in combination with existing and future similar structures, developments, and uses. Whenever technical information is furnished to the city by an applicant, the city shall consider such report in acting upon the requested permit. In performing such review, the department of economic and community development may request additional applicant information, including the preparation and submission of an environmental checklist under the State Environmental Policy Act or a supplement thereto if already submitted to an issuing department. The director shall, within a reasonable time, indicate approval or disapproval of the requested permit or license; and if approved, the director shall transmit all conditions of approval in a letter to the issuing department, with copies to the applicant, the issuing department, commenting departments, other agencies, and other known parties of record.

(Ord. No. 2867, § 2(14.22.140), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 3746, § 5, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 7-21-15. Formerly Code 1986, § 14.22.160)


14.09.140 Use of other base flood data.Amended Ord. 4361

In order to administer this chapter when base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with sections herein, the director shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source determined by the director to provide accurate and detailed flood related information. Such information shall supplement special flood hazard area information and maps and shall be retained on file with the department of public works, including information under KCC 14.09.150.

(Ord. No. 2867, § 2(14.22.150), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 3746, § 5, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 7-21-15)


14.09.150 Designation of local administrator.Amended Ord. 4361

The director is hereby appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions.

Duties of the administrator shall include, but not be limited to:

A. Permit review.

1. Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.

2. Review all permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.

3. Review all permits to determine if the proposed development is located within a floodway. If proposed development is located within a floodway, ensure that KCC 14.09.180 is enforced.

B. Use of other base flood data (in A and V zones).

1. When base flood elevation data has not been provided (A and V zones) in accordance with KCC 14.09.060, the director shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any best available data, base flood elevation, and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source to administer this title.

C. Information to be obtained and maintained.

1. Where base flood elevation data is provided through a flood insurance study, FIRM, or pursuant to KCC 14.09.140, the director shall obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement.

2. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures where base flood elevation data is provided through a flood insurance study, FIRM, or pursuant to KCC 14.09.140, the director shall:

a. Obtain and record the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure was floodproofed; and

b. Maintain floodproofing certifications required pursuant to this chapter.

3. The director shall maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to this chapter, to the extent required by Chapter 1.05 KCC and Chapter 42.56 RCW.

D. Alteration of watercourses.

1. Notify adjacent communities and the Department of Ecology prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.

2. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.

E. Interpretations of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations, where needed, as to exact location of boundaries of the special flood hazard areas (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the actual boundary shall be given reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided for in KCC 14.09.210.

(Ord. No. 2867, § 2(14.22.160), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 3746, § 5, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 3909, § 3, 2-3-09; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 7-21-15. Formerly Code 1986, § 14.22.090)


14.09.160 General standards.Amended Ord. 4361

In all special flood hazard areas, the following standards are required:

1. Anchoring.

a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.

b. All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (reference FEMA’s Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas Guidebook for additional techniques).

2. Construction materials and methods.

a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

b. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

c. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed, constructed, or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

3. Utilities.

a. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;

b. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;

c. Onsite waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and

d. Proposed water wells shall be located on high ground that is not located within a special flood hazard area.

4. Subdivision proposals.

a. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;

b. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;

c. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage;

d. For all proposed subdivisions or other developments that contain at least 50 lots or encompass five or more acres, whichever is less, when base flood elevation data has not been provided, or is not available from another authoritative source, the base flood elevation shall be determined through a hydrologic study completed by a qualified professional and submitted by the applicant to the city for the director’s approval. The director may accept, reject, or require the applicant to submit additional documentation that the director reasonably deems necessary for review of the hydrologic study; and

e. Subdivision approval should depict or state what portions of the development are within special flood hazard areas.

5. Review of building permits. Where elevation data is not available either through the flood insurance study or from another authoritative source, applications for building permits shall be reviewed by both the issuing department and department of economic and community development to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a judgment based, in part, on local engineering practices, and includes use of historical data, high-water marks, photographs of past flooding, and other similar evidence, where available.

(Ord. No. 2867, § 2(14.22.180), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 3746, § 5, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 7-21-15. Formerly § 14.09.170; Code 1986, § 14.22.120)


14.09.170 Specific standards.Amended Ord. 4361

In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data has been provided pursuant to KCC 14.09.060 or 14.09.140, the following provisions are required:

1. Residential construction.

a. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood protection elevation.

b. Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

i. A minimum of two openings placed on at least two separate walls and having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed areas subject to flooding shall be provided.

ii. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.

iii. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.

2. Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood protection elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:

a. Be floodproofed to the flood protection elevation so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;

c. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications, and plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in KCC 14.09.150(C)(2);

d. Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in subsection (1)(b) of this section;

e. Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building floodproofed to one foot above the base flood level will be rated as at the base flood level).

3. Critical facility. Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the floodplain shall have the lowest floor elevated to three feet or more above the level of the base flood elevation at the site. Below the lowest floor, floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.

4. Manufactured homes. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within zones A1 – 30, AH, and AE on the community’s FIRM shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at the flood protection elevation; and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with KCC 14.09.160(1)(b). Openings in accordance with subsection (1) of this section are required in rigid skirting attached to frames or foundations of manufactured homes to relieve hydrostatic loads and minimize transferring loads that can damage homes and their supporting foundation systems. Installation of skirting does not trigger the requirement for flood openings if the skirting does not provide structural support and will collapse, without causing structural damage to the elevated home or the foundation, under wind and water loads that are less than those expected during the base flood event.

5. Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites are required to meet all applicable provisions of this code. If allowed by code, recreational vehicles are required to either:

a. Be onsite for fewer than 180 days;

b. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or

c. Meet the requirements of KCC 14.09.160(1) and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes.

6. Drainage around structures. Adequate drainage paths are required around structures on slopes to guide waters around and away from proposed structures.

7. Standards for AE and A1 – 30 zones with base flood elevations but no floodways. In areas with base flood elevations, if a regulatory floodway has not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development, including fill, shall be permitted within Zones AE and A1 – 30 on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.

(Ord. No. 2867, § 2(14.22.190), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 3232, § 2, 6-20-95; Ord. No. 3746, § 5, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 3909, § 4, 2-3-09; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 7-21-15. Formerly § 14.09.180)


14.09.175 Compensatory storage.Amended Ord. 4361

A. Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, within special flood hazard areas, the following provisions apply:

1. Applicants shall provide onsite replacement of 100 percent of the storage area lost to encroachments so that there is no increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Encroachments include fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development. No net fill in a special flood hazard area shall be allowed.

2. If an applicant seeks to provide offsite replacement of 100 percent of the storage area lost to encroachments so that there is no increase in flood levels during the occurrence of base flood discharge, the applicant must submit certification by a registered professional engineer or architect demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge, and the offsite replacement location must be located within the same watershed that the encroachment is occurring.

3. If subsection (A)(1) or (2) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of KCC 14.09.170.

B. Within the lower Mill Creek floodplain delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map Panels 969, 1232, and 1251 as a floodway:

1. Applicants shall provide onsite replacement of 100 percent of the storage area lost to encroachments so that there is no increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. An alternative is to construct such that no net fill is placed onsite.

2. If an applicant seeks to provide offsite replacement of 100 percent of the storage area lost to encroachments so that there is no increase in flood levels during the occurrence of base flood discharge, the applicant must submit certification by a registered professional engineer or architect demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge, and the offsite replacement location must be located within the same watershed that the encroachment is occurring.

3. If subsection (B)(1) or (2) of this section is satisfied, all residential construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of KCC 14.09.170.

(Ord. No. 3909, § 5, 2-3-09; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 7-21-15)


14.09.180 Floodways.Amended Ord. 4361

Within the floodway of special flood hazard areas, the following provisions apply:

1. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development, unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

2. Construction or reconstruction of residential structures is prohibited within designated floodways, except for: repairs, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure which do not increase the ground floor area; and repairs, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure, the cost of which does not exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the repair, reconstruction, or improvement is started or, if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. Work done to correct an existing violation of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications, as identified by the local code enforcement official, and which is the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or work done to structures identified as historic places, shall not be included in the 50 percent determination.

3. Projects specifically designed for the enhancement of fish habitat are allowed within the floodway when they have been designed to minimize their impact on base flood elevations, keep any rise in the 100-year flood levels as close to zero as practically possible, and do not affect any insurable structures.

4. If subsection (1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of KCC 14.09.170.

(Ord. No. 2867, § 2(14.22.200), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 3746, § 5, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 3909, § 6, 2-3-09; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 7-21-15. Formerly § 14.09.190)


14.09.190 Wetlands management.Amended Ord. 4361

To the extent possible adverse impacts to wetlands should be avoided as such:

1. Proposals for development within floodplains shall be reviewed by the department of economic and community development for their probable effects on wetlands located within the floodplain.

2. Development activities in or around wetlands shall not negatively affect public safety, health, and welfare by disrupting the wetlands’ ability to reduce flood and storm drainage.

3. Assistance from the United States Army Corps of Engineers, State Department of Ecology, or qualified professional as defined in Chapter 11.06 KCC shall be sought in identifying wetland areas.

(Ord. No. 2867, § 2(14.22.210), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 3746 § 5, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 7-21-15. Formerly § 14.09.200)


14.09.200 Standards for shallow flooding areas (AO zones).Amended Ord. 4361

Shallow flooding areas appear on FIRMs as AO zones with depth designations. The base flood depths in these zones range from one to three feet above ground where a clearly defined channel does not exist, or where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is usually characterized as sheet flow. In these areas, the following provisions apply:

1. New construction and substantial improvements of residential structures within AO zones shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest grade adjacent to the building, one foot or more above the depth number specified on the FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified).

2. New construction and substantial improvements or nonresidential structures within AO zones shall either:

a. Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade of the building site, one foot or more above the depth number specified on the FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or

b. Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. If this method is used, compliance shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as in KCC 14.09.170(2).

3. Require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.

(Ord. No. 2867, § 2(14.22.200), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 3746, § 5, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 7-21-15. Formerly § 14.09.210)


14.09.210 Appeals.Amended Ord. 4361

The decision of the director to approve, to approve with conditions, or to disapprove a permit or license for work in a special flood hazard area shall be in writing, and may be appealed to the hearing examiner. The requested permit or license shall not be issued during the appeal period. Appeals from the director’s decision regarding proposals within a special flood hazard area shall be governed by the procedures set forth in KCC 12.01.190 and Chapter 2.32 KCC.

(Ord. No. 2867, § 2(14.22.230), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 3746, § 5, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 7-21-15. Formerly § 14.09.220)


14.09.220 Variances.Amended Ord. 4361

Applications for variances from the strict application of the terms of this chapter to a specific property may be submitted to the city. All variances shall be considered by the hearing examiner as a Process III application, pursuant to Chapter 12.01 KCC. Approval of variances from the strict application of flood hazard regulations shall be consistent with the following criteria:

1. There are unique physical conditions peculiar and inherent to the affected property that make it difficult or infeasible to strictly comply with the provisions of this chapter.

2. The variance is the minimum necessary to accommodate the building or structure footprint and access.

3. The proposed variance would preserve the functions and values of the flood hazard area, and the proposal does not create or increase a risk to the public health, safety, and general welfare, or to public or private property.

4. The proposed variance would not adversely affect properties surrounding the subject site.

5. Adverse impacts to flood hazard areas resulting from the proposal are minimized.

6. The special circumstances of conditions affecting the property are not a result of the actions of the applicant or previous owner.

7. The variance shall not constitute a grant of special privilege.

8. No variance shall be approved within a floodway that would cause an increase in the base flood elevation.

(Ord. No. 3746, § 5, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4158, § 1, 7-21-15; Ord. No. 4218, § 2, 11‑1‑16)


Chapter 14.10 BUILDING NUMBERS, STREETS AND AVENUES

(Repealed by Ord. No. 3967)


Chapter 14.11 VESTING OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPLICATIONS

Sections:

14.11.010    Vesting.

14.11.020    Completed application.

14.11.030    Other.


14.11.010 Vesting.

Vesting of project permit applications occur upon the determination that a fully completed project permit application, as defined in KCC 12.01.100, has been submitted. Vesting shall only apply to land use regulations in effect on the land at the time a fully completed application has been submitted. A project permit application shall be reviewed under the land use regulations in effect at that time. To establish a vested right, the applicant shall file an application on a form furnished by the city official, which form may be amended from time to time. Every application shall, at a minimum, provide the information required by the city for filing of project permit applications as set forth in the application form and applicable codes.

(Ord. No. 3149, § 1, 1-4-94; Ord. No. 3574, § 5, 9-18-01)


14.11.020 Completed application.

In order to be accepted as fully completed herein, an application for a permit shall be reviewed by the building official, or his/her designee, to verify that all information required has been provided in a clear and usable format. Once it has been determined that all required information has been provided, the building official, or his/her designee, shall accept the filed application and determine the date the application is considered complete and therefore vested.

(Ord. No. 3149, § 1, 1-4-94; Ord. No. 3574, § 5, 9-18-01)


14.11.030 Other.

A. A completed project permit application, as defined herein, does not mean or imply approval of the project.

B. A completed project permit application herein may not necessarily constitute a completed application for the purpose of processing the same. Additional information, steps, or procedures may need to be taken or completed in order to process and obtain the requested permit.

C. Vesting hereunder shall apply only to the scope of the project applied for under the permit application.

D. Vesting under this chapter expires with the expiration of the project permit application or with the expiration of a permit issued pursuant to an application.

(Ord. No. 3149, § 1, 1-4-94; Ord. No. 3574, § 5, 9-18-01)


Chapter 14.12 LANDMARK DESIGNATION AND PRESERVATION

Sections:

14.12.010    Purpose.

14.12.020    Landmarks commission authorized.

14.12.030    Definitions.

14.12.040    Designation criteria.

14.12.050    Designation procedure.

14.12.060    Certificate of appropriateness procedure.

14.12.070    Adoption by reference.

14.12.080    Nomination approval.

14.12.090    Appeal procedure.


14.12.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to designate, preserve, protect, enhance, and perpetuate those sites, buildings, districts, structures, and objects which reflect significant elements of the city of Kent’s cultural, ethnic, social, economic, political, architectural, aesthetic, archaeological, engineering, historic, and other heritage; to foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past; to stabilize and improve the economic values and vitality of landmarks; to protect and enhance the city of Kent tourist industry by promoting heritage-related tourism; to promote, assist, encourage, and provide incentives to public and private owners to preserve, restore, rehabilitate, and use landmark buildings, sites, districts, structures, and objects to serve the purposes of this chapter; and to provide the framework for the implementation of an interlocal agreement between King County and the city of Kent relating to landmark designation and protection services.

(Ord. No. 3809, § 1, 9-5-06)


14.12.020 Landmarks commission authorized.

A. Landmarks commission. The King County landmarks and heritage commission, established pursuant to Chapter 20.62 of the King County Code, is hereby designated and empowered to act as the landmarks commission for the city of Kent pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

B. Public hearings – Rules and regulations. The landmarks commission shall not conduct any public hearings required by this chapter with respect to properties located within the city of Kent until its rules and regulations, including procedures consistent with this chapter, have been filed with the city clerk.

C. Special member appointment. The mayor shall, subject to confirmation by the city council, appoint one (1) individual to act as a special member of the King County landmarks and heritage commission as provided for in King County Code Section 20.62.030. The special member shall have a demonstrated interest and competence in historic preservation. The special member shall be appointed for a three (3) year term. Each special member shall serve until his or her successor is duly appointed and confirmed. In the event of a vacancy, an appointment shall be made to fill the vacancy in the same manner and with the same qualifications as if such appointment were made at the beginning of the term, and the person appointed to fill the vacancy shall hold the position for the remainder of the unexpired term. A special member may be reappointed but may not serve more than two (2) consecutive three (3) year terms. A special member shall be deemed to have served one (1) full term if that special member resigns at any time after appointment or if that special member serves more than two (2) years of an unexpired term. Special members shall serve without compensation except for out of pocket expenses incurred in connection with commission meetings or programs. The city of Kent shall reimburse such expenses incurred by the special member.

(Ord. No. 3809, § 1, 9-5-06)


14.12.030 Definitions.

The city council adopts by reference the definitions contained in King County Code Section 20.62.020, except as provided below:

A. Council is the Kent city council.

B. Manager shall be read to be the city chief administrative officer.

(Ord. No. 3809, § 1, 9-5-06)


14.12.040 Designation criteria.

The designation criteria for landmarks as contained in King County Code Section 20.62.040 is hereby adopted by reference for the designation criteria of landmarks within the city of Kent.

(Ord. No. 3809, § 1, 9-5-06)


14.12.050 Designation procedure.

The designation procedure for landmarks as contained in King County Code Section 20.62.070 is hereby adopted by reference for the designation procedure of landmarks within the city of Kent.

(Ord. No. 3809, § 1, 9-5-06)


14.12.060 Certificate of appropriateness procedure.

The certificate of appropriateness procedure for landmarks as contained in King County Code Section 20.62.080 is hereby adopted by reference for the city of Kent, except for the last sentence of King County Code Section 20.62.080(a).

(Ord. No. 3809, § 1, 9-5-06)


14.12.070 Adoption by reference.

The following sections in Chapter 20.62 of the King County Code are adopted by this reference:

A. Nomination procedure. King County Code Section 20.62.050.

B. Evaluation of economic impact. King County Code Section 20.62.100.

C. Penalty for violation. King County Code Section 20.62.130.

D. Special valuation for historic properties. King County Code Section 20.62.140.

(Ord. No. 3809, § 1, 9-5-06)


14.12.080 Nomination approval.

No historic resource may proceed through the nomination procedure of King County Code Section 20.62.050 until such time as the Kent city council has approved the historic resource for nomination. A minimum of four (4) council members must vote in favor in order that the resource be eligible for nomination. Said approval by the council is a condition precedent to any nomination procedure.

(Ord. No. 3809, § 1, 9-5-06)


14.12.090 Appeal procedure.

A. A party of record aggrieved by a decision of the commission designating or rejecting a nomination for designation of a landmark, or issuing or denying a certificate of appropriateness may, within fourteen (14) calendar days of mailing of notice of such decision, appeal such decision in writing to the hearing examiner. The written notice of appeal shall be filed with the historic preservation officer and the city clerk. The written notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a statement that includes the items required in KCC 12.01.195(E) for similar closed record appeals.

B. The appeal to the hearing examiner shall be a “closed record appeal,” as that term is used in Ch. 12.01 KCC.

C. If, after the closed record appeal hearing, the hearing examiner determines:

1. An error in fact was made by the commission, the hearing examiner shall remand the proceeding to the commission for reconsideration; or

2. The decision of the commission is based on an error in judgment or conclusion, the hearing examiner may modify or reverse the decision of the commission.

D. The hearing examiner’s final decision shall include findings of fact and conclusions from the record which support the decision. The hearing examiner may adopt all or portions of the commission’s findings and conclusions.

E. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be final unless within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date of issuance of the decision an appeal is filed in King County superior court.

(Ord. No. 3809, § 1, 9-5-06)


Title 15 ZONING* Revised 8/19 Revised 12/19 Revised 1/20 Revised 6/20

Chapters:

15.01    Short Title and Purpose

15.02    Definitions Revised 8/19 Revised 1/20 Revised 5/20 Revised 6/20

15.03    Districts Established – Zoning Map Revised 5/20

15.04    District Regulations Revised 8/19 Revised 1/20 Revised 5/20 Revised 6/20

15.05    Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements Revised 5/20

15.06    Sign Regulations Revised 1/20 Revised 5/20

15.07    Landscaping Regulations Revised 5/20

15.08    General and Supplementary Provisions Revised 8/19 Revised 5/20

15.09    Administration Revised 12/19 Revised 5/20

15.10    Enforcement

15.15    High Capacity Transit (HCT) Facilities

*Editor’s note – Printed in this title 15 are the zoning regulations of the city as adopted by Ordinance 2404, adopted May 3, 1983, as amended, and printed in the pamphlet dated March 1992. Amendments to the zoning ordinance as it was supplemented by the city, are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the section remains unchanged from the provisions in Ordinance 2404. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions have been made for clarity.

Cross reference(s) – Powers and duties of planning department, § 2.30.070.


Chapter 15.01 SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE

Sections:

15.01.010    Short title.

15.01.020    Purpose of zoning code.


15.01.010 Short title.

This title shall be known and cited as the “Zoning Code, City of Kent.”


15.01.020 Purpose of zoning code.

A. In adopting this title, the city recognizes that there is a continuing need to regulate the use of land to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare. The city recognizes the opportunities to obtain an urban environment of high quality without unduly high public or private expenditures for development and without unreasonably restricting private enterprise or initiative.

B. The city further recognizes that since the general welfare of the public is superior in importance to the pecuniary profits of the individual, this title may (1) limit the use of property, (2) cause depreciation of property values, or (3) prevent the most profitable use of land. Zoning does not, therefore, constitute a vested right. Also, if some reasonable use of the property is allowed by this title, the effect is not confiscatory and is a proper exercise of the police power.

C. This title, in order to obtain the greatest benefits from the opportunities which exist in the city, has been prepared in accordance with the following principles:

1. This title is based on the city comprehensive plan with respect to the general pattern of future land uses and the principles of future land development expressed in such plan.

2. This title recognizes the importance to the community of all legitimate uses of land. This title further recognizes the need of all such uses to be protected from other uses which are unrelated or incompatible. Thus, each district is exclusive with respect to every other zoning district established in this title, and industrial zoning districts are protected from encroachment by residential uses as firmly as residential districts are protected from industrial encroachment.

3. Development standards are based on the best accepted contemporary practice, rather than on past practices. Contemporary practice recognizes the need for more flexible regulation than in the past, with more administrative discretion concerning land development decisions. Review of development plans is required in many districts to obtain well-designed and properly integrated developments.

4. Uses which would adversely affect adjoining uses or the public welfare, unless regulated in a particular way and meeting established standards and criteria, may be allowed as conditional uses subject to review by the hearing examiner.

5. Industrial uses are subject to control by performance standards. The approach allows potential nuisances to be measured factually and objectively and regulated accordingly.


Chapter 15.02 DEFINITIONS Revised 8/19 Revised 1/20 Revised 5/20 Revised 6/20

Sections:

15.02.001    Rules of construction.

15.02.002    Applicability.

15.02.003    Accessory dwelling unit (ADU).

15.02.004    Accessory living quarters.

15.02.005    Accessory use or structure.

15.02.006    Adult entertainment.

15.02.007    Adult entertainment business.

15.02.008    Adult uses.

15.02.009    Adult entertainment material.

15.02.010    Agricultural use.

15.02.015    Alley.

15.02.020    Apartment.

15.02.025    Repealed.

15.02.026    Architectural detail element.

15.02.026.1    Assisted living facility.

15.02.027    Automobile body repair.

15.02.028    Automobile detailing.

15.02.030    Automobile repair.

15.02.033    Repealed.

15.02.035    Automobile service station or gasoline filling station.

15.02.040    Automobile wrecking or motor vehicle wrecking.

15.02.045    Basement.

15.02.050    Repealed.

15.02.051    Battery charging equipment.

15.02.052    Battery exchange station.

15.02.055    Short-term rental. Revised 1/20

15.02.060    Building.

15.02.065    Building height. Revised 8/19

15.02.066    Build-to line.

15.02.067    Bulk retail uses.

15.02.070    Canopy.

15.02.070.1    Card room, house-banked.

15.02.071    Cargo containers.

15.02.072    Charging levels.

15.02.073    Clustering or cluster subdivision.

15.02.073.1    Communal residence. Revised 1/20

15.02.074    Repealed.

15.02.075    Comprehensive plan.

15.02.080    Combining district.

15.02.085    Common open space.

15.02.086    Composted material.

15.02.088    Repealed.

15.02.089    Repealed.

15.02.090    Conditional use.

15.02.091    Condominium.

15.02.092    Repealed.

15.02.093    Repealed.

15.02.095    Crop and tree farming.

15.02.097    Dangerous wastes.

15.02.098    Day-care center.

15.02.099    Day-care home.

15.02.100    Day-care operation.

15.02.100.5    Designated manufactured home.

15.02.101    Designated zone facility.

15.02.102    Development plan.

15.02.103    Density, maximum permitted.

15.02.105    Development standards.

15.02.106    Diminished garage door.

15.02.107    Discontinuance.

15.02.110    District.

15.02.110.1    Dock-high doors. Revised 5/20

15.02.111    Dock-high loading areas.

15.02.111.1    Downtown.

15.02.112    Repealed.

15.02.113    Dripline.

15.02.113.1    Drive-in, drive-through facilities.

15.02.114    Duplex.

15.02.115    Dwelling, single-family.

15.02.120    Repealed.

15.02.125    Dwelling, multifamily.

15.02.130    Dwelling unit.

15.02.130.1    Electric vehicle (EV).

15.02.130.2    Electric vehicle (EV) charging station.

15.02.130.3    Electric vehicle charging station – Public.

15.02.130.4    Electric vehicle charging station – Restricted.

15.02.130.5    Electric vehicle parking space.

15.02.131    Emergency housing facility, emergency shelter. Revised 6/20

15.02.131.5    Equitable distribution.

15.02.132    Repealed.

15.02.133    Extremely hazardous waste.

15.02.134    Facade modulation.

15.02.135    Family. Revised 1/20

15.02.140    Fence, sight-obscuring.

15.02.145    Fence, one hundred (100) percent sight-obscuring.

15.02.147    Floor area ratio.

15.02.150    Frontage, building or occupancy.

15.02.151    Fulfillment center. Revised 5/20

15.02.155    Garage or carport, private.

15.02.160    General conditional uses.

15.02.165    Grade.

15.02.170    Gross floor area.

15.02.172    Repealed.

15.02.173    Group home. Revised 1/20

15.02.174    Guest cottage.

15.02.175    Hazardous substance.

15.02.176    Hazardous substance facility buffer zone.

15.02.177    Hazardous substance land use.

15.02.178    Hazardous substance land use facility.

15.02.179    Hazardous substance, processing or handling of.

15.02.180    Hazardous waste.

15.02.181    Hazardous waste facility.

15.02.182    Hazardous waste storage facility.

15.02.183    Hazardous waste treatment facility.

15.02.184    Hazardous waste treatment or storage facility, offsite.

15.02.185    Hazardous waste treatment or storage facility, onsite.

15.02.186    Hearing examiner (land use).

15.02.187    Highest shade-producing point.

15.02.190    Home occupation.

15.02.195    Homeowners’ association.

15.02.200    Hotel.

15.02.202    Impervious surface.

15.02.203    Independent senior living facility.

15.02.203.1    Industrial use. Revised 5/20

15.02.204    Institution.

15.02.205    Interior court.

15.02.210    Junkyard.

15.02.215    Kennel.

15.02.217    Lake.

15.02.220    Landscaping.

15.02.222    Repealed.

15.02.223    Less restrictive alternative.

15.02.224    Live-work unit.

15.02.225    Lot.

15.02.228    Long term commercial significance.

15.02.230    Lot, corner.

15.02.231    Lot area.

15.02.235    Lot frontage.

15.02.240    Lot lines.

15.02.245    Lot measurements.

15.02.250    Lot of record.

15.02.252    Lot, riverfront.

15.02.255    Lot, through.

15.02.257    Major nonconforming building or structure.

15.02.257.1    Manufacturing, assembly, and fabrication, heavy. Revised 5/20

15.02.257.2    Manufacturing, assembly, and fabrication, light. Revised 5/20

15.02.257.3    Manufacturing, assembly, and fabrication, medium. Revised 5/20

15.02.258    Minor nonconforming building or structure.

15.02.259    Mixed use building or structure.

15.02.260    Mixed use development.

15.02.261    Manufactured home.

15.02.262    Mobile home.

15.02.265    Mobile home park.

15.02.267    Moderate risk waste.

15.02.268    Modular home.

15.02.270    Motel, including hotel and motor hotel.

15.02.270.5    Motor vehicle.

15.02.271    Multifamily design review.

15.02.272    Repealed.

15.02.274    Native adapteds.

15.02.275    Natural or native areas.

15.02.280    Net acreage.

15.02.281    New manufactured home.

15.02.282    Nonconforming lot of record.

15.02.283    Nonconforming sign.

15.02.285    Nonconforming use.

15.02.286    Nonconformity.

15.02.287    Northern lot line.

15.02.288    North-south lot dimension.

15.02.290    Repealed.

15.02.295    Occupancy.

15.02.300    Official map.

15.02.305    Open green area.

15.02.307    Opiate substitution treatment facility.

15.02.310    Ordinary high-water mark.

15.02.315    Outdoor storage or outside storage. Revised 5/20

15.02.317    Overlay district.

15.02.318    Park, riverfront.

15.02.320    Parking space or parking stall.

15.02.325    Parking, temporary.

15.02.326    Patient cooperative, medical marijuana.

15.02.327    Pedestrian-oriented use.

15.02.330    Performance standards.

15.02.331    Permeable surface.

15.02.332    Planned unit development.

15.02.333    Planning director.

15.02.334    Preempted facility.

15.02.335    Preschool.

15.02.335.01    Provider. Revised 1/20

15.02.335.1    Public area.

15.02.335.2    Rapid charging station.

15.02.335.3    Residential facility with health care.

15.02.336    Revegetation.

15.02.337    Repealed.

15.02.338    Recreational vehicles.

15.02.338.1    Research, development, and testing. Revised 5/20

15.02.338.5    Risk potential activity or risk potential facility.

15.02.339    Road, scenic and recreational.

15.02.340    Roadside stand.

15.02.340.1    Roofline variation.

15.02.341    Secure community transition facility.

15.02.342    Repealed.

15.02.343    Service uses or activities.

15.02.344    Setback, average.

15.02.345    Shopping center.

15.02.350    Sign.

15.02.355    Sign area.

15.02.360    Sign height.

15.02.365    Sign, abandoned.

15.02.370    Sign, advertising.

15.02.375    Sign, business.

15.02.380    Sign, canopy.

15.02.385    Sign, construction.

15.02.390    Sign, directional or informational.

15.02.391    Sign, electronic messaging center. Revised 1/20

15.02.395    Sign, flashing.

15.02.400    Sign, freestanding.

15.02.403    Sign, freestanding monument.

15.02.405    Sign, gate or entrance.

15.02.410    Sign, identification.

15.02.415    Sign, illuminated.

15.02.420    Sign, indirectly illuminated.

15.02.425    Sign, institutional.

15.02.430    Sign, off-premises.

15.02.435    Sign, on-premises.

15.02.440    Sign, painted.

15.02.445    Repealed. Revised 1/20

15.02.450    Sign, portable.

15.02.455    Sign, projecting.

15.02.460    Sign, roof.

15.02.465    Sign, rotating.

15.02.470    Sign, subdivision.

15.02.475    Sign, temporary. Revised 1/20

15.02.480    Sign, wall.

15.02.485    Sign, window.

15.02.487    Single-family zoning district.

15.02.490    Site coverage.

15.02.495    Slope line.

15.02.496    Solar factor.

15.02.497    Solar setback.

15.02.498    Solar slope.

15.02.499    Solid waste incinerator.

15.02.499.1    Special life safety measures.

15.02.500    Special use.

15.02.501    Special trees.

15.02.502    Specified anatomical areas.

15.02.503    Specified sexual activities.

15.02.505    Stacking space.

15.02.506    Stadium.

15.02.510    Structure.

15.02.515    Story.

15.02.520    Street.

15.02.525    Townhouse.

15.02.525.1    Townhouse with ownership interest.

15.02.527    Trade, retail.

15.02.527.5    Transit operations and maintenance facilities.

15.02.528    Transitional housing.

15.02.528.5    Transportation and transit facilities, including high capacity transit facilities.

15.02.529    Tree.

15.02.529.5    Undeveloped land.

15.02.530    Repealed.

15.02.531    Urban separators.

15.02.532    Use.

15.02.533    Use, change of.

15.02.534    Use, temporary.

15.02.535    Used.

15.02.536    Variance.

15.02.540    Vegetation, shading.

15.02.541    Vegetative aid.

15.02.545    Veterinary clinic.

15.02.550    Veterinary hospital.

15.02.555    View.

15.02.560    View property.

15.02.565    Yards.

15.02.570    Yard, front.

15.02.575    Yard, rear.

15.02.580    Yard, side.

15.02.585    Zoning.

15.02.588    Zoning districts redefined.

15.02.590    Zoning lot.

15.02.595    Zoning permit.


15.02.001 Rules of construction.

For purposes of this title, certain terms or words used in this title shall be interpreted as follows:

A. The word person includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation, as well as an individual.

B. The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular.

C. The word shall is mandatory; the word may is permissive.

D. The word used or occupied includes the words “intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied.”

E. The word lot includes the words “plot” and “parcel.”


15.02.002 Applicability.

The definitions contained in this chapter are those that are generally used throughout this title; except for those definitions specified in KCC 15.08.035, which are specific to that section and chapter.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 1, 7-7-98)




15.02.003 Accessory dwelling unit (ADU).

An accessory dwelling unit (ADU) is a habitable dwelling unit added to, created within, or detached from and on the same lot with a detached single-family dwelling that provides basic requirements for living, sleeping, eating, cooking (including a stove), and sanitation.

(Ord. No. 3251, § 1, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 3409, § 2, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 4174, § 1, 11-17-15. Formerly § 15.02.004)


15.02.004 Accessory living quarters.

Accessory living quarters is a single residential dwelling unit within a commercial or manufacturing building which is incidental to the commercial or manufacturing use.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 3, 7-7-98)


15.02.005 Accessory use or structure.

Accessory use or structure means a use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure. Accessory structures include, but are not limited to: garages, accessory dwelling units, guest cottages, sheds, storage buildings, and workshops.

(Ord. No. 4174, § 2, 11-17-15)


15.02.006 Adult entertainment.

Adult entertainment means any dance, amusement, show, display, merchandise, material, exhibition, pantomime, modeling, or any other like performance of any type, for the use or benefit of a member or members of the public or advertised for the use or benefit of a member of the public where such is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description, or simulation of “specified anatomical areas,” as defined in this chapter, or the exhibition of “specified sexual activities,” also as defined in this chapter, or in the case of live adult entertainment performances, which emphasizes and seeks to arouse or excite the patron’s sexual desires.

Any patron of an adult entertainment business, as defined in KCC 15.02.007, shall be deemed a member of the public. 

(Ord. No. 2687, § 2, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 3475, § 6, 10-5-99)


15.02.007 Adult entertainment business.

Adult entertainment business means any establishment providing adult entertainment as defined in KCC 15.02.006 including, but not limited to, adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult motion picture theater, and exotic dance studio, more specifically defined as follows:

A. Adult arcade means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, one (1) or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, computer-generated or enhanced pornography, panoram, peep show, or similar machines, or other image-producing machines, for personal viewing, are used to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which provide materials for individual viewing by patrons on the premises of the business which are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description, or simulation of “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities.” 

B. Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description, or simulation of “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities” are regularly shown for any form of consideration.

C. Adult retail establishment means any bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, or other similar commercial establishment, business, service, or portion thereof, which, for money or any other form of consideration, provides as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade the sale, exchange, rental, loan, trade, transfer, and/or provision for viewing or use off the premises of adult entertainment material as defined in this chapter. For purposes of this provision, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that thirty (30) percent or more of a business’ stock-in-trade in adult retail material, based on either the dollar value (wholesale or retail) or the number of titles of such material, is significant or substantial.

In determining whether or not the presumption is rebutted, the clerk may consider the following factors, which are not conclusive:

1. Whether minors are prohibited from access to the premises of the establishment due to the adult entertainment nature of the inventory;

2. Whether the establishment is advertised, marketed, or held out to be an adult merchandising facility;

3. Whether adult entertainment material is an establishment’s primary or one of its principal business purposes; or

4. Whether thirty (30) percent or more of an establishment’s revenue is derived from adult entertainment material.

An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of adult entertainment materials and still be categorized as an adult retail establishment. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such establishments from being categorized as an adult retail establishment so long as one (1) of its principal business purposes is offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, the specified adult entertainment materials.

The clerk shall have full discretion to give appropriate weight to the factors set forth above as well as other factors considered depending on the particular facts and circumstances of each application.

D. Exotic dance studio, also known as “topless bar” and “adult cabaret,” means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment, or any premises or facility to which any member of the public is invited or admitted and where an entertainer provides live performances to any member of the public, which performances are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description, or simulation of “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities,” or which emphasize and seek to arouse or excite the patron’s sexual desires.

(Ord. No. 2687, § 2, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 3475, § 7, 10-5-99)


15.02.008 Adult uses.

Adult uses means and includes any adult entertainment business as defined by KCC 15.02.007 and regulated pursuant to Chapter 5.10 KCC.

(Ord. No. 2687, § 2, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 2785, § 1, 6-21-88; Ord. No. 3475, § 8, 10-5-99)


15.02.009 Adult entertainment material.

Adult entertainment material means any books, magazines, cards, pictures, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video tapes, slides, or other photographic reproductions, or visual representations, CD-ROMs, DVDs, disks, electronic media, or other such media, or instruments, devices, equipment, paraphernalia, toys, novelties, games, clothing, or other merchandise or material, which are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description, or simulation of “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities.”

(Ord. No. 2785, § 1, 6-21-88; Ord. No. 3475, § 9, 10-5-99)


15.02.010 Agricultural use.

Agricultural use means land primarily devoted to the commercial production of horticultural, viticultural, floricultural, dairy, apiary, vegetable, or animal products or of berries, grain, hay, straw, turf, seed, Christmas trees not subject to the excise tax imposed by RCW 84.33.100 through 84.33.140, fin fish in upland hatcheries, or livestock, and that has long-term commercial significance for agricultural production.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 4, 7-7-98)


15.02.015 Alley.

Alley means a public or private way not more than thirty (30) feet wide at the rear or side of property affording only secondary means of vehicular or pedestrian access to abutting property. 

(Ord. No. 3409, § 5, 7-7-98)


15.02.020 Apartment.

Apartment means a dwelling unit in a multifamily building.


15.02.025 Apartment house (multifamily dwelling).

Repealed by Ord. No. 3409.


15.02.026 Architectural detail element.

Architectural detail element means contrasting trim at least five and one-half (5 1/2) inches wide around the doors and windows of a facade; window shutters; minimum fifty (50) square foot and five (5) foot deep covered area around a point of entry; minimum three (3) foot deep eaves; minimum of two (2) distinct finish materials used on a facade, not including trim material; balconies; or other methods approved by the planning manager which diminish the perception of bulk and provide visual interest along home facades facing public areas.

(Ord. No. 3830, § 13, 3-6-07)


15.02.026.1 Assisted living facility.

Assisted living facility means an establishment that has the express or implied purpose of providing housing and basic services (such as laundry, housekeeping, meals, and activities), and assuming general responsibility for the safety and well-being of the residents, and that may also provide domiciliary (home or personal) care, to more than 10 individuals who may be unable to live independently due to infirmity of age, or physical or mental handicap, but who do not need the skilled nursing care of a convalescent home or a residential facility with health care. These facilities may consist of individual dwelling units, with separate bathroom facilities, a full kitchen, partial kitchen, or no kitchen. In addition, these facilities may have communal dining areas, recreation facilities (library, lounge, game room), laundry facilities and open space. An assisted living facility is a state-licensed residential facility pursuant to Chapter 18.20 RCW, as amended, but not a group home or a residential facility with health care.

(Ord. No. 4089, § 1, 9-17-13; Ord. No. 4188, § 2, 2-16-16)


15.02.027 Automobile body repair.

Automobile body repair includes those establishments primarily engaged in furnishing automotive vehicle body work and painting.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 7, 7-7-98)


15.02.028  Automobile detailing.

Automobile detailing means any scratch and oxidation removal, buffing, interior and exterior washing or shampooing, paint overspray removal, stain removal, non-spray touch up painting, power washing, hand drying, road tar removal, polishing, deodorizing of any type of passenger vehicles and trucks. Automobile detailing does not include cleaning of engines or engine parts.

(Ord. No. 3575, § 2, 9-18-01)


15.02.030 Automobile repair.

Automobile repair includes fixing, incidental body or fender work, painting, upholstering, engine tuneup, adjusting lights or brakes, or supplying and installing replacement parts of or for passenger vehicles and trucks.


15.02.033 Use, temporary.

Repealed by Ord. No. 3409.


15.02.035 Automobile service station or gasoline filling station.

Automobile service station or gasoline filling station means a building or lot having pumps and storage tanks where fuels, oils, or accessories for motor vehicles are dispensed, sold, or offered for sale at retail only, repair service is incidental, and no storage or parking space is offered for rent.


15.02.040 Automobile wrecking or motor vehicle wrecking.

Automobile wrecking or motor vehicle wrecking means the dismantling or disassembling of motor vehicles or the storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled, obsolete, or wrecked motor vehicles or their parts.


15.02.045 Basement.

Basement means that portion of a building between floor and ceiling, which is partly below and partly above grade, but so located that the vertical distance from grade to the floor below is less than the vertical distance from grade to ceiling.


15.02.050 Board of adjustment.

Repealed by Ord. No. 3409.

Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3169, § 3, adopted May 16, 1994, repealed provisions relating to the board of adjustment. The hearing examiner now performs the duties of the former board of adjustment.


15.02.051 Battery charging equipment.

Battery charging equipment means an electrical component assembly or cluster of component assemblies designed specifically to charge batteries within electric vehicles, which meet or exceed any standards, codes, and regulations set forth by Chapter 19.28 RCW and consistent with rules adopted under RCW 19.27.540.

(Ord. No. 3976, § 1, 10-19-10)


15.02.052 Battery exchange station.

Battery exchange station means a fully automated facility that will enable an electric vehicle with a swappable battery to enter a drive lane and exchange the depleted battery with a fully charged battery through a fully automated process, which meets or exceeds any standards, codes, and regulations set forth by Chapter 19.27 RCW and consistent with rules adopted under RCW 19.27.540.

(Ord. No. 3976, § 1, 10-19-10)


15.02.055 Short-term rental. Revised 1/20

Short-term rental means a dwelling or part thereof, other than a motel or hotel, where lodging, with or without meals, is provided, for compensation, for fewer than 30 consecutive nights.

(Ord. No. 4339, § 1, 11-19-19)


15.02.060 Building.

Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind.


15.02.065 Building height. Revised 8/19

Building height means the vertical distance from the average finished grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof as depicted in Diagram A below. The average finished grade shall be determined by first delineating the smallest square or rectangle that can enclose the building and then averaging the elevations taken at the midpoint of each side of the square or rectangle as depicted in Diagram B below; provided, that the measured elevations do not include berms.

Diagram A
[IMAGE]


Diagram B
[IMAGE]


(Ord. No. 4329, § 5, 7-16-19)


15.02.066 Build-to line.

Build-to line means the location along a designated block or right-of-way where a building must be constructed. The build-to line is the property line.

(Ord. No. 4011, § 3, 12-13-11)


15.02.067 Bulk retail uses.

Bulk retail uses are distinguished from other retail uses in that they typically combine retail sales with warehouse and storage of goods. These uses generally require large, high-ceiling buildings since they store large quantities of inventory onsite. They also require large sites since adequate parking is essential.

(Ord. No. 3175, § 1, 7-19-94)


15.02.070 Canopy.

Canopy means a rooflike projection.


15.02.070.1 Card room, house-banked.

House-banked card room means a use governed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 9.46 RCW, 1973 Gaming Act, and licensed by the Washington State Gambling Commission.

(Ord. No. 4257, § 4, 11-21-17)


15.02.071 Cargo containers.

Cargo containers means standardized, reusable vessels, designed without an axle or wheels, which were:

1. Originally, specifically, or formerly designed for or used in the packing, shipping, movement or transportation of freight, articles, goods or commodities; and/or

2. Designed for or capable of being mounted or moved on a rail car; and/or

3. Designed for or capable of being mounted on a chassis or bogie for movement by truck trailer or loaded on a ship.

When used for any purpose other than those listed in subsection (1) of this section, a cargo container is a structure.

(Ord. No. 3792, § 1, 3-21-06)


15.02.072 Charging levels.

Charging levels means the standardized indicators of electric force, or voltage, at which an electric vehicle’s battery is recharged. The terms 1, 2, and 3 are the most common EV charging levels, and include the following specifications:

1. Level 1 is considered slow charging.

2. Level 2 is considered medium charging.

3. Level 3 is considered fast or rapid charging.

(Ord. No. 3976, § 1, 10-19-10)


15.02.073 Clustering or cluster subdivision.

Clustering or cluster subdivision means a development or division of land in which residential building lots are reduced in size and concentrated in specified portion(s) of the original lot, tract, or parcel.

(Ord. No. 3551, § 8, 3-20-01)


15.02.073.1 Communal residence. Revised 1/20

Communal residence means a business operated out of a single-family residential home with or without an owner occupant residing therein, where the residential home, or portions thereof, are rented to residential tenants through separate, unrelated lease or rental agreements. The fact that the individuals rent the residence or a portion thereof through separate, unrelated lease or rental agreements shall be prima facie evidence that the individuals are unrelated, not living as a single housekeeping unit, and do not meet the definition of family per KCC 15.02.135. Group homes and short-term rentals are not communal residences.

(Ord. No. 4339, § 2, 11-19-19)


15.02.074 Collective gardens.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4208.

(Ord. No. 4036, § 1, 6-5-12)


15.02.075 Comprehensive plan.

Comprehensive plan means the document, including maps, adopted by the city council which outlines the city’s goals and policies relating to management of growth, and prepared in accordance with Chapter 36.70A RCW. The term also includes adopted subarea plans prepared in accordance with Chapter 36.70A RCW.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 10, 7-7-98)


15.02.080 Combining district.

Combining district means district regulations superimposed on an underlying zoning district which impose additional regulations for specific

uses, and which are valid for a stipulated time period. Uses permitted by the underlying zone may also be developed.


15.02.085 Common open space.

Common open space means a parcel of land or an area of water or a combination of land and water within the site designated for a planned unit development, and designed and intended primarily for the use or enjoyment of the residents of such development.


15.02.086 Composted material.

Composted material means organic solid waste that has undergone biological degradation and transformation under controlled conditions designed to promote aerobic decomposition at a solid waste facility in compliance with state regulations. Natural decay of organic solid waste under uncontrolled conditions does not result in composted material. Composted material must contain forty (40) to sixty-five (65) percent organic matter and meet the contaminant standards for “composted materials” in WAC 173-350-220.

(Ord. No. 4074, § 8, 2-19-13)


15.02.088 Congregate care facilities.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4089.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 11, 7-7-98)


15.02.089 Convalescent home.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4089.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 12, 7-7-98)


15.02.090 Conditional use.

Conditional use means a use permitted in a zoning district only after review and approval by the hearing examiner. Conditional uses are such that they may be compatible only on certain conditions in specific locations in a zoning district, or if the site is regulated in a certain manner.


15.02.091 Condominium.

Condominium means real property, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of those portions. Real property is not a condominium unless the undivided interest in the common elements are vested in the unit owners, and unless a declaration and a survey map and plans have been recorded. Condominiums must meet all provisions of Chapter 64.34 RCW.

(Ord. No. 3381, § 1, 12-9-97)


15.02.092 Creeks, major.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4257.


15.02.093 Creeks, minor.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4257.


15.02.095 Crop and tree farming.

Crop and tree farming means the use of land for horticultural purposes.


15.02.097 Dangerous wastes.

Dangerous wastes means those wastes designated in WAC 173-303-070 through 173-303-103 as dangerous wastes. This may include any discarded, useless, unwanted, or abandoned substances, including but not limited to certain pesticides, or any residues or containers of such substances which are disposed of in such quantity or concentration as to pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, wildlife, or the environment because such wastes or constituents or combinations of such wastes:

A. Have short-lived toxic properties that may cause death, injury, or illness or have mutagenic, teratogenic, or carcinogenic properties; or

B. Are corrosive, explosive, or flammable, or may generate pressure through decomposition or other means.

A moderate risk waste is not a dangerous waste.

(Ord. No. 2801, § 1, 9-6-88)


15.02.098 Day-care center.

Day-care center means a day-care operation with thirteen (13) or more persons in attendance at any one (1) time. 

(Ord. No. 2801, § 1, 9-6-88; Ord. No. 3409, § 13, 7-7-98)


15.02.099 Day-care home.

Day-care home means a day-care operation with no more than twelve (12) persons in attendance at any one (1) time in the provider’s home in the family living quarters, including immediate family members who reside in the home.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 14, 7-7-98)


15.02.100 Day-care operation.

Day-care operation means the temporary care of persons in a residence or structure (meeting the requirements of Chapter 388-150 WAC) for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day on a regular recurring basis for pay or other valuable consideration, including, but not limited to, the furnishing of shelter, sustenance, supervision, education, or other supportive services.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 15, 7-7-98)


15.02.100.5 Designated manufactured home.

Designated manufactured home means a manufactured home constructed after June 15, 1976, in accordance with state and federal requirements for manufactured homes, which:

A. Is comprised of at least two (2) fully enclosed parallel sections each of not less than twelve (12) feet wide by thirty-six (36) feet long;

B. Was originally constructed with and now has a composition or wood shake or shingle, coated metal, or similar roof of nominal 3:12 pitch; and 

C. Has exterior siding similar in appearance to siding materials commonly used on conventional site-built Uniform Building Code single-family residences.

(Ord. No. 3753, § 1, 6-7-05)


15.02.101 Designated zone facility.

Designated zone facility means any hazardous waste facility that requires an interim or final status permit under rules adopted under Chapter 70.105 RCW and Chapter 173-303 WAC, and that is not a preempted facility as defined in RCW 70.105.010 or in Chapter 173-303 WAC. A hazardous waste treatment or storage facility is a designated zone facility. 

(Ord. No. 2801, § 1; Ord. No. 3409, § 16, 7-7-98. Formerly § 15.02.098)


15.02.102 Development plan.

Development plan means a plan drawn to scale, indicating the proposed use, the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon, the exact sizes and locations on the lot of buildings already existing, if any, and the location on the lot of the proposed building or alteration, yards, setbacks, landscaping, off-street parking, ingress and egress, and signs. 

(Ord. No. 3409, § 17, 7-7-98)


15.02.103 Density, maximum permitted.

Maximum permitted density refers to the maximum number of dwelling units permitted per acre, subject to lot size and other development standards of Chapter 15.04 KCC. When determining the allowed number of lots or dwelling units for a subdivision, short subdivision, or multifamily project all site area may be included in the calculation. If calculations result in less than one full lot or unit, fractions above 0.50 shall be rounded up and fractions 0.50 and below shall be rounded down.

(Ord. No. 3290, § 1, 4-18-96; Ord. No. 3830, § 13, 3-6-07; Ord. No. 3978, § 1, 10-19-10; Ord. No. 4257, § 7, 11-21-17. Formerly 15.02.096)


15.02.105 Development standards.

Development standards means regulations including but not limited to setbacks, landscaping, screening, height, site coverage, signs, building layout, parking, and site design, and related features of land use.


15.02.106 Diminished garage door.

Diminished garage door means a garage in the rear portion of the lot accessed via a common driveway between lots; or a side access garage where the front facade facing a public area is finished with a window or other architectural feature; or a garage accessed via a rear alley; or a garage set back no less than ten (10) feet from the front facade of the home; or other design strategies which similarly diminish the prominence of the garage and are approved by the planning manager.

(Ord. No. 3830, § 13, 3-6-07)


15.02.107 Discontinuance.

Discontinuance means the abandonment or nonuse of a building, structure, sign, or lot for a period of six (6) months.


15.02.110 District.

District means an area designated by this title, with specific boundaries, in which lie specific zones, which zones are described in this title.


15.02.110.1 Dock-high doors. Revised 5/20

Dock high doors means the openings in the loading dock area to the outside of a building. The typical interface involves a semi-truck backing up to a building directly aligning the back doors of the truck with a loading dock door. The elevation of the dock apron, the approach pavement area, is lower than the building slab elevation so that the bed of the truck will match the building slab elevation. The typical offset is 48 inches and the typical loading dock door is nine feet wide by 10 feet tall. A loading dock can be accessorized with dock equipment that interfaces with the truck. These may include dock seals, dock bumpers, dock levelers, dock communication lights, and canopies. Also known as loading dock doors.

(Ord. No. 4355, § 4 (Exh. D), 3-3-20)


15.02.111 Dock-high loading areas.

Dock-high loading areas means truck maneuvering areas and loading or unloading areas associated with loading doors that are located above the finish grade.


15.02.111.1 Downtown.

Downtown means the area designated in the city of Kent downtown subarea action plan as the “downtown study area,” as amended.

(Ord. No. 4225, § 1, 12-13-16)


15.02.112 Drainage ditch.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4257.


15.02.113 Dripline.

Dripline means a circle drawn at the soil line directly under the outermost branches of a tree.

(Ord. No. 2932, § 1, 7-17-90)


15.02.113.1 Drive-in, drive-through facilities.

Drive-in, drive-through facilities means a business or portion of a business where a consumer is permitted or encouraged, either by the design of physical facilities or by the provisions of services and/or packaging procedures, to carry on business while seated in a motor vehicle. This definition shall include but not be limited to drive-up windows, drive-through banks, and drive-in/drive-through restaurants. 

(Ord. No. 3600, § 2, 5-7-02)


15.02.114 Duplex.

Duplex means one (1) detached residential building containing two (2) dwelling units totally separated from each other by a one (1) hour fire wall or floor, designed for occupancy by not more than two (2) families. 

(Ord. No. 3409, § 18, 7-7-98)


15.02.115 Dwelling, single-family.

Single-family dwelling means a detached residential dwelling unit, other than a mobile home, designed for and occupied by one (1) family only.


15.02.120 Dwelling, two-family.

Repealed by Ord. No. 3409.


15.02.125 Dwelling, multifamily.

Multifamily dwelling means a residential building designed for or occupied by three or more families, with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided. This definition does not include independent senior living facilities, assisted living facilities, detached single-family structures designed as part of a multiple-structure development such as a planned unit development, residential facilities with health care, transitional housing, or group homes. This definition does include senior housing that does not provide meals.

(Ord. No. 4089, § 3, 9-17-13; Ord. No. 4188, § 3, 2-16-16; Ord. No. 4225, § 2, 12-13-16)


15.02.130 Dwelling unit.

Dwelling unit means one room, or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, or rental or lease on a weekly, monthly, or longer basis, and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure or on the same property, and containing independent cooking (including a stove) and sleeping facilities.

(Ord. No. 4174, § 3, 11-17-15)


15.02.130.1 Electric vehicle (EV).

Electric vehicle (EV) means any vehicle that operates, either partially or exclusively, on electrical energy from the grid, or an off-board source, that is stored on-board for motive purpose.

(Ord. No. 3976, § 1, 10-19-10)


15.02.130.2 Electric vehicle (EV) charging station.

Electric vehicle (EV) charging station means a public or private parking space that is served by battery charging equipment that has as its primary purpose the transfer of electric energy (by conductive or inductive means) to a battery or other energy storage device in an electric vehicle.

(Ord. No. 3976, § 1, 10-19-10)


15.02.130.3 Electric vehicle charging station – public.

Electric vehicle charging station – public means an electric vehicle charging station that is (1) publicly owned and publicly available (e.g., Park & Ride parking, public library parking lot, on-street parking), or (2) privately owned and publicly available (e.g., shopping center parking, nonreserved parking in multi-family parking lots).

(Ord. No. 3976, § 1, 10-19-10)


15.02.130.4 Electric vehicle charging station – restricted.

Electric vehicle charging station – restricted means an electric vehicle charging station that is (1) privately owned with restricted access (e.g., single-family home, executive parking, designated employee parking) or (2) publicly owned and restricted (e.g., fleet parking with no access to the general public).

(Ord. No. 3976, § 1, 10-19-10)


15.02.130.5 Electric vehicle parking space.

Electric vehicle parking space means any marked parking space that identifies the use to be exclusively for the parking of an electric vehicle.

(Ord. No. 3976, § 1, 10-19-10)


15.02.131 Emergency housing facility, emergency shelter. Revised 6/20

Emergency housing facility means a facility operated to provide temporary housing within a permanent enclosed building for individuals who are otherwise homeless and have no immediate living options available to them.

Emergency shelter means a temporary structure, not served by fixed permanent utilities, operated to provide temporary shelter to individuals who are otherwise homeless and have no immediate living options available to them.

(Ord. No. 3600, § 2, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 4089, § 3, 9-17-13; Ord. No. 4358, § 3, 5-5-20)


15.02.131.5 Equitable distribution.

Equitable distribution means siting or locating secure community transition facilities in a manner that will not cause a disproportionate grouping of similar facilities either in any one (1) county, or in any one (1) jurisdiction or community within a county, as relevant. 

(Ord. No. 3615, § 1, 9-17-02)


15.02.132 Erosion hazard areas.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4257.


15.02.133 Extremely hazardous waste.

Extremely hazardous waste means those wastes designated in WAC 173-303-070 through 173-303-103 as extremely hazardous wastes. This may include any dangerous waste which:

A. Will persist in a hazardous form for several years or more at a disposal site and which in its persistent form:

1. Presents a significant environmental hazard and may be concentrated by living organisms through a food chain or may affect the genetic makeup of man or wildlife; and

2. Is highly toxic to man or wildlife.

B. Is disposed of at a hazardous waste disposal site in such quantities as would present an extreme hazard to man or the environment.

(Ord. No. 2801, § 1, 9-6-88)


15.02.134 Facade modulation.

Facade modulation means a horizontal stepping back or projecting forward of portions of a building facade.

(Ord. No. 3830, § 13, 3-6-07; Ord. No. 4225, § 3, 12-13-16)


15.02.135 Family. Revised 1/20

Family means an individual; two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or state-registered domestic partnership under Chapter 26.60 RCW; a group of two or more disabled residents protected under the Federal Housing Act Amendments, who are not related by blood, marriage, or state-registered domestic partnership under Chapter 26.60 RCW, living together as a single housekeeping unit; or a group of four or fewer residents, who are not related by blood, marriage, or state-registered domestic partnership under Chapter 26.60 RCW, living together as a single housekeeping unit.

(Ord. No. 2958, § 1, 1-2-91; Ord. No. 3451, § 1, 4-20-99; Ord. No. 4089, § 3, 9-17-13; Ord. No. 4339, § 3, 11-19-19)


15.02.140 Fence, sight-obscuring.

The minimum for a sight-obscuring fence is a chainlink fence with woven slats in every row or available space of the fence.


15.02.145 Fence, one hundred (100) percent sight-obscuring.

One hundred (100) percent sight-obscuring fence means a fence constructed of solid wood, metal, or other appropriate material which totally conceals the subject use from adjoining uses at six (6) feet above the base of the fence line, at twenty (20) feet from the subject property line.


15.02.147 Floor area ratio.

Floor area ratio is a measure of development intensity which is determined by dividing gross floor area by lot area.

(Ord. No. 3345, § 1, 5-7-97)


15.02.150 Frontage, building or occupancy.

Building or occupancy frontage means the length of that portion of a building or ground floor occupancy which abuts a street, publicly used parking area, or mall appurtenant to such building or occupancy, expressed in lineal feet and fractions thereof.


15.02.151 Fulfillment center. Revised 5/20

Fulfillment center means a building that is used primarily for the storage and/or consolidation of manufactured goods (and to a lesser extent, raw materials) prior to their distribution to retail customers, retail locations, or other warehouses. A typical fulfillment center has a high level of onsite automation and logistics management. The automation and logistics enable highly efficient processing of goods through the center. Fulfillment centers are generally characterized by a significant storage function and direct distribution of ecommerce product to end users. These facilities usually handle smaller packages and quantities than other types of warehouses, and operations at these facilities often include employees fulfilling online orders by picking, packing, and shipping the goods and materials directly to online retail customers. These qualities, large scale, and volume of goods moved directly to home customer delivery differentiate it from other kinds of warehouse distribution.

(Ord. No. 4355, § 4 (Exh. D), 3-3-20)


15.02.155 Garage or carport, private.

Private garage or carport means a building, or a portion of a building, principally for vehicular equipment such as automobiles, boats, etc., in which only vehicles used by the tenants of the buildings on the premises are stored or kept.

(Ord. No. 4174, § 4, 11-17-15)


15.02.160 General conditional uses.

General conditional uses means uses described in KCC 15.08.030. Such uses shall be deemed conditional uses in all districts.


15.02.165 Grade.

Grade means the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground between the exterior wall of a building and a point five (5) feet distant from such wall, or the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground between the exterior wall of a building and the property line if it is less than five (5) feet distant from such wall. In case walls are parallel to and within five (5) feet of a public sidewalk, alley, or other public way, the grade shall be the elevation of the sidewalk, alley, or public way.


15.02.170 Gross floor area.

Gross floor area means the area included within the surrounding exterior walls of a building expressed in square feet and fractions thereof. The floor area of a building not provided with surrounding exterior walls shall be the usable area under the horizontal projections of the roof or floor above.


15.02.172 Ground cover.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4074.

(Ord. No. 2801, § 1, 9-6-88)


15.02.173 Group home. Revised 1/20

A. Class I group home. Class I group home means publicly or privately operated residential facilities including state-licensed adult family homes as defined by RCW 70.128.010, state-licensed foster-family homes as defined by RCW 74.15.020(e); group homes for individuals who are developmentally, physically, or mentally disabled; and group homes or halfway houses for recovering alcoholics and former drug addicts. A class I group home shall have a maximum of six residents not including providers.

B. Class II group home. Class II group home means publicly or privately operated residential facilities for juveniles under the jurisdiction of the criminal justice system. These homes include state-licensed group care homes or halfway homes for juveniles which provide residence in lieu of sentencing or incarceration, and halfway houses providing residence to juveniles needing correction or for juveniles selected to participate in state-operated work release and pre-release programs. The planning director shall have the discretion to classify a group home proposing to serve juveniles convicted of the offenses listed under class III group home in this section as a group home class III, and any such home shall be sited according to the regulations contained within the group III classification.

1. Group home, class II-A. A class II-A group home shall have a maximum of eight residents including resident staff.

2. Group home, class II-B. A class II-B group home shall have a maximum of 12 residents including resident staff.

3. Group home, class II-C. A class II-C group home shall have a maximum of 18 residents including resident staff.

C. Class III group home. Class III group home means privately or publicly operated residential facilities for adults under the jurisdiction of the criminal justice system who have entered a pre- or post-charging diversion program, or been selected to participate in state-operated work/training release or other similar programs as provided in Chapters 137-56 and 137-57 WAC. Such groups also involve individuals who have been convicted of a violent crime against a person, or a crime against property with a sexual motivation and convicted or charged as a sexual or assaultive violent predator. Secure community transition facilities are considered class III group homes. Secure community transition facilities shall have a maximum of three residents, excluding resident staff, unless the state agency proposing to establish and operate the facility can demonstrate that it has equitably distributed other secure community transition facilities with the same or a greater number of residents in other jurisdictions or communities throughout the entire geographic limits of King County.

(Ord. No. 2958, § 2, 1-2-91; Ord. No. 3451, § 2, 4-20-99; Ord. No. 3615, § 1, 9-17-02; Ord. No. 4089, § 3, 9-17-13; Ord. No. 4339, § 4, 11-19-19)


15.02.174 Guest cottage.

Guest cottage means an accessory, detached dwelling without any kitchen facilities designed for and used to house transient visitors or nonpaying guests of the occupants of the main building.

(Ord. No. 2801, § 1, 9-6-88)


15.02.175 Hazardous substance.

Hazardous substance means any liquid, solid, gas, or sludge, including any material, substance, product, commodity, or waste, regardless of quantity, that exhibits any of the characteristics or criteria of hazardous waste as described in rules adopted under Chapter 70.105 RCW or in WAC 173-303-090, 173-303-100, 173-303-101, 173-303-102, or 173-303-103.

(Ord. No. 2801, § 1, 9-6-88; Ord. No. 2808, § 1, 10-18-88)


15.02.176 Hazardous substance facility buffer zone.

Hazardous substance facility buffer zone means a setback area between the hazardous substance land use facility boundary and the nearest point of the hazardous substance land use property line, necessary to provide added protection to adjacent land uses or resources of beneficial use. All hazardous waste treatment and storage facilities must maintain at least a fifty (50) foot buffer zone.

(Ord. No. 2801, § 1, 9-6-88)


15.02.177 Hazardous substance land use.

Hazardous substance land use means any use which is permitted under this title and which includes a designated zone facility or the processing or handling of a hazardous substance.

(Ord. No. 2801, § 1, 9-6-88)


15.02.178 Hazardous substance land use facility.

Hazardous substance land use facility means the projected line enclosing the area of all structures and lands on which hazardous substance land use activities occur, have occurred in the past, or will occur in the future. This does not include the application of products for agricultural purposes or the use, storage, or handling of hazardous substances used in public water treatment facilities.

(Ord. No. 2801, § 1, 9-6-88; Ord. No. 3386, § 1, 1-7-98)


15.02.179 Hazardous substance, processing or handling of.

Processing or handling of a hazardous substance means the compounding, treatment, manufacture, synthesis, use, or storage of hazardous substances in excess of the following amounts in bulk quantities: five thousand (5,000) pounds of solid hazardous substances, five hundred (500) gallons of liquid hazardous substances, and six hundred fifty (650) cubic feet of gaseous hazardous substances.

(Ord. No. 2801, § 1, 9-6-88)


15.02.180 Hazardous waste.

Hazardous waste means any dangerous and extremely hazardous waste, including substances composed of radioactive and hazardous components. A moderate risk waste is not a hazardous waste.

(Ord. No. 2801, § 1, 9-6-88)


15.02.181 Hazardous waste facility.

Hazardous waste facility means the contiguous land and structures, other appurtenances, and improvements on the land used for recycling, storing, treating, incinerating, or disposing of hazardous waste.

(Ord. No. 2801, § 1, 9-6-88)


15.02.182 Hazardous waste storage facility.

Hazardous waste storage facility means any designated zone facility which holds hazardous waste for a temporary period not to exceed five (5) years; this does not include accumulation of hazardous waste by the generator on the site of generation, as long as the generator complies with the applicable requirements of WAC 173-303-200 and 173-303-201.

(Ord. No. 2801, § 1, 9-6-88)


15.02.183 Hazardous waste treatment facility.

Hazardous waste treatment facility means any designated zone facility which processes hazardous waste by physical, chemical, or biological means to make such waste nonhazardous or less hazardous, safer for transport, amenable for energy or material resource recovery, amenable for storage, or reduced in volume.

(Ord. No. 2801, § 1, 9-6-88)


15.02.184 Hazardous waste treatment or storage facility, offsite.

Offsite hazardous waste treatment or storage facility means any hazardous waste treatment or storage facility which treats or stores wastes that are generated off the site.

(Ord. No. 2808, § 1, 10-18-88)


15.02.185 Hazardous waste treatment or storage facility, onsite.

Onsite hazardous waste treatment or storage facility means any hazardous waste treatment or storage facility which treats or stores only those wastes that are generated on the site.

(Ord. No. 2808, § 1, 10-18-88)


15.02.186 Hearing examiner (land use).

Hearing examiner (land use) means a person appointed by the city administrator to conduct public hearings on applications outlined in the city ordinance creating the hearing examiner, and who prepares a record, findings of fact, and conclusions on such applications.

(Ord. No. 2808, § 1, 10-18-88)


15.02.187 Highest shade-producing point.

Highest shade-producing point means the point of a structure which casts the longest shadow at noon on January 21.


15.02.190 Home occupation.

Home occupation means any use customarily carried on within a dwelling by the inhabitants thereof which use is incidental to the residential use and not primarily considered as a business and which complies with the conditions of KCC 15.08.040.


15.02.195 Homeowners’ association.

Homeowners’ association means an incorporated, nonprofit organization operating under recorded land agreements through which (a) each lot owner is automatically a member, and (b) each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the common property, and (c) a charge, if unpaid, becomes a lien against the property.


15.02.200 Hotel.

Hotel means any building containing six (6) or more guestrooms which are intended or designed to be used or which are used, rented, or hired out to be occupied or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests.


15.02.202 Impervious surface.

Impervious surface means that hard surface area which either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil mantle as it entered under natural conditions preexistent to development, or that hard surface area which causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from that present under natural conditions preexistent to development. Common impervious surfaces include but are not limited to rooftops, concrete or asphalt paving, paved walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots or storage areas, and oiled, macadam or other surfaces which similarly impede the natural infiltration of surface water.


15.02.203 Independent senior living facility.

Independent senior living facility means a multi-dwelling-unit facility that provides housing, communal areas, and limited basic services (including a variety of social and transportation services) to individuals 60 or more years of age who choose to live in a congregate setting. These facilities consist of individual dwelling units that contain separate bathroom facilities, and which also may contain a full kitchen, partial kitchen, or no kitchen. Communal areas include: a dining room in which at least one meal per day is served; social and activity areas; laundry facilities; and open spaces. This definition does not include senior housing that does not provide meals, assisted living facilities, group homes, or residential facilities with health care. (Ord. No. 4188, § 1, 2-16-16)


15.02.203.1 Industrial use. Revised 5/20

Industrial use means an activity that includes production, testing, distribution, or repair of commodities or materials.

(Ord. No. 4355, § 4 (Exh. D), 3-3-20)


15.02.204 Institution.

Institution means a civic, religious, or other similar organization, including, but not limited to, an athletic field, hospital, university, religious institution, and community center.

(Ord. No. 3706, § 1, 8-17-04)


15.02.205 Interior court.

Interior court means a space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above grade level on a lot and bounded on three (3) or more sides by walls of a building.


15.02.210 Junkyard.

Junkyard means a place where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed, disassembled, or handled, including, but not limited to, auto and motor vehicle wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards, and yards for use of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment. 

(Ord. No. 3409, § 20, 7-7-98)


15.02.215 Kennel.

Kennel means any premises on which four (4) or more dogs which are five (5) months old or older are kept.


15.02.217 Lake.

Lake means a natural or artificial body of water of two (2) or more acres or where the deepest part of the basin at low water exceeds two (2) meters (six and six-tenths (6.6) feet). Artificial bodies of water with a recirculation system approved by the public works department are not included in this definition.


15.02.220 Landscaping.

Landscaping means vegetative cover including shrubs, trees, flowers, seeded lawn or sod, ivy, and other similar plant material.


15.02.222 Landslide areas.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4257.


15.02.223 Less restrictive alternative.

Less restrictive alternative means court-ordered treatment in a setting less restrictive than total confinement which satisfies the conditions set forth in RCW 71.09.092.

(Ord. No. 3615, § 1, 9-17-02)


15.02.224 Live-work unit.

Live-work unit means a structure or portion of a structure that functions predominantly as work spaces and secondarily as residences, and:

A. Combines a commercial or manufacturing activity that is allowed in the zone with a residential living space for the owner of the commercial or manufacturing business, or the owner’s employee, and that person’s household;

B. The resident owner or employee of the business is responsible for the commercial or manufacturing activity performed; and

C. The commercial or manufacturing activity conducted takes place subject to a valid business license associated with the premises.

(Ord. No. 4011, § 4, 12-13-11)


15.02.225 Lot.

Lot means a parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage, and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are required in this title. Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public street, or on an approved private street, and may consist of:

A. A single lot of record;

B. A portion of a lot of record;

C. A combination of complete lots of record and portions of lots of record;

D. A parcel of land described by metes and bounds;

provided, that in no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this title.


15.02.228 Long term commercial significance. 

Long term commercial significance includes the growing capacity, productivity, and soil composition of the land for long-term commercial production, in consideration with the land’s proximity to population areas, and the possibility of more intense uses of the land.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 21, 7-7-98)


15.02.230 Lot, corner.

Corner lot means a lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection, or upon two (2) parts of the same street, such streets or parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees within the lot lines.


15.02.231 Lot area.

Lot area means the area included within the property lines of a lot, including any easement area.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 22, 7-7-98)


15.02.235 Lot frontage.

The front of a lot shall be that portion nearest the street or, if the lot does not abut a street, the portion nearest an ingress/egress easement. On a corner lot, the front yard shall be considered the narrowest part of the lot that fronts on a street, except in industrial and commercial zones, in which case the user of a corner lot has the option of determining which part of the lot fronting on a street shall become the lot frontage.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 23, 7-7-98)


15.02.240 Lot lines.

Lot lines means the property lines bounding the lot.


15.02.245 Lot measurements.

A. Depth of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.

B. Width of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between the side lines connecting front and rear lot lines; provided, however, that width between side lot lines at their foremost points (where they intersect with the street line) shall not be less than eighty (80) percent of the required lot width, except in the case of lots on the turning circle of cul-de-sacs, where the eighty (80) percent requirement shall not apply.


15.02.250 Lot of record.

Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the county assessor, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.


15.02.252 Lot, riverfront.

Riverfront lot means any lot or land parcel which is adjacent to the Green River, a scenic and recreational road, a riverfront road, or a riverfront park.


15.02.255 Lot, through.

Through lot means a lot that has both ends fronting on a street. Either end may be considered the front.


15.02.257 Major nonconforming building or structure.

Major nonconforming building or structure means any nonconforming building or structure located on a parcel which at any point borders or is in a residential district and which is not in compliance with the minimum development standards of the district in which it is located.


15.02.257.1 Manufacturing, assembly, and fabrication, heavy. Revised 5/20

Manufacturing, assembly, and fabrication, heavy means the transformation of materials or substances into new products including additive or subtractive processes, construction, testing, and assembling of component parts, and the blending of materials such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins, or liquors. Heavy manufacturing and fabrication are often characterized by the need for large outdoor areas in which to conduct operations, and typically result in environmental impacts beyond their own sites. This definition includes, but is not limited to: manufacture and fabrication of cement, brick, lime, gypsum, asphalt, and other manufacturing and fabrication uses as determined by the community and economic development director. This definition excludes slaughterhouses, manufacture of shellac, varnish or turpentine, paper, pulp, rubber from crude material, refining and/or manufacturing of petroleum products.

(Ord. No. 4355, § 4 (Exh. D), 3-3-20)


15.02.257.2 Manufacturing, assembly, and fabrication, light. Revised 5/20

Manufacturing, assembly, and fabrication, light means the transformation of materials or substances into new products including additive or subtractive processes, construction, testing, and assembling of component parts, and the blending of materials such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins, or liquors. Light manufacturing and fabrication is characterized by the use being contained within buildings, and materials or equipment used in production not being stored outside. Light manufacturing and fabrication activities do not generate external emissions such as smoke, odor, noise, vibrations, or other nuisances outside the building. This definition includes but is not limited to manufacture and fabrication of food products, electronic components, office products, furniture, glass products, printing and publishing, and other manufacturing and fabrication uses as determined by the community and economic development director. This definition excludes manufacture of hazardous substances, as well as slaughterhouses, manufacture of shellac, varnish or turpentine, paper, pulp, rubber from crude material, refining and/or manufacturing of petroleum products.

(Ord. No. 4355, § 4 (Exh. D), 3-3-20)


15.02.257.3 Manufacturing, assembly, and fabrication, medium. Revised 5/20

Manufacturing, assembly, and fabrication, medium means the transformation of materials or substances into new products including additive or subtractive processes, construction, testing, and assembling of component parts, and the blending of materials such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins, or liquors. Medium manufacturing and fabrication is characterized by need for only very limited areas of outdoor storage and may create minor external environmental impacts during the conduct of operations but most impacts are contained onsite. This definition includes but is not limited to manufacture and fabrication of automotive and aerospace vehicles and their parts, alcoholic products, paints, printing ink, leather goods, and other manufacturing and fabrication uses as determined by the community and economic development director. This definition excludes manufacture of hazardous substances, as well as slaughterhouses, manufacture of shellac, varnish or turpentine, paper, pulp, rubber from crude material, refining and/or manufacturing of petroleum products.

(Ord. No. 4355, § 4 (Exh. D), 3-3-20)


15.02.258 Minor nonconforming building or structure.

Minor nonconforming building or structure means any nonconforming building or structure which is not a major nonconforming structure and which is not in compliance with the minimum development standards of the district in which it is located.




15.02.259 Mixed use building or structure.

Mixed use building or structure means a building that contains two (2) or more separate and distinct uses permitted in the zoning district where such building is located.

(Ord. No. 3014, § 1, 12-3-91)


15.02.260 Mixed use development.

Mixed use development shall mean two or more permitted uses or conditional uses developed in conjunction with one another on the same site. Provided that the aforementioned requirements are met, a mixed use development may include two or more separate buildings. At least 25 percent of the gross floor area, as defined in KCC 15.02.170, must be a permitted commercial use, except for mixed use in general commercial outside the downtown area, as defined in KCC 15.09.046, where at least five percent of the gross floor area must be a permitted commercial use, and except for mixed use on parcels two acres or less in size in community commercial where at least five percent of the gross floor area must be a permitted commercial use. The residential component of any mixed use development cannot be permitted or occupied prior to the permitting or lawful occupancy of the commercial component.

(Ord. No. 3092, § 1, 2-16-93; Ord. No. 3345, § 2, 5-7-97; Ord. No. 4093, § 2, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 4132, § 1, 12-9-14; Ord. No. 4166, § 2, 9-1-15)


15.02.261 Manufactured home.

Manufactured home means a single-family dwelling constructed in a factory after June 15, 1976, and installed in accordance with the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) requirements for manufactured housing and bearing the appropriate insignia indicating such compliance.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 24, 7-7-98)


15.02.262 Mobile home.

Mobile home means a factory-constructed residential unit with its own independent sanitary facilities that is intended for year round occupancy and is composed of one (1) or more major components which are mobile in that they can be supported by wheels attached to their own integral frame or structure and towed by an attachment to that frame or structure over the public highway under trailer license or by special permit, and which was constructed prior to June 15, 1976.

(Ord. No. 3092, § 2, 2-16-93; Ord. No. 3409, § 25, 7-7-98)


15.02.265 Mobile home park.

Mobile home park means an area under one (1) ownership designed to accommodate ten (10) or more mobile homes.


15.02.267 Moderate risk waste.

Moderate risk waste means those wastes defined in WAC 173-303-040 as moderate risk wastes. This may include any waste that exhibits any of the properties of hazardous waste but is exempt from regulation under Chapter 70.105 RCW solely because the waste is generated in quantities below the threshold for regulation, and any household waste which is generated from the disposal of substances identified by the Department of Ecology as hazardous household substances.

(Ord. No. 2808, § 1, 10-18-88)


15.02.268 Modular home. 

Modular home means a single-family dwelling constructed in a factory and shall be constructed and installed in accordance with applicable provisions of the International Building Code, the International Residential Code, or other applicable building codes, and shall bear the appropriate insignia indicating compliance with those codes. This definition includes “prefabricated,” “panelized,” and “factory built” units.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 26, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 3690, § 17, 5-4-04)


15.02.270 Motel, including hotel and motor hotel.

Motel, including hotel and motor hotel, means a building or group of buildings comprising individual sleeping or living units for the accommodation of transient guests for compensation.


15.02.270.5 Motor vehicle.

Motor vehicle means a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power used on highways, or any other vehicle required to be registered under the laws of this state, but does not include a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer operated exclusively on a rail.

(Ord. No. 3813, § 1, 9-5-06)


15.02.271 Multifamily design review.

Multifamily design review means an administrative process for the purpose of reviewing multifamily development applications for compliance with specific site design, landscape design, and building design criteria.

(Ord. No. 3014, § 2, 12-3-91)


15.02.272 Multifamily transition area.

Repealed by Ord. 4225.


15.02.274 Native adapteds.

Native adapteds means noninvasive plant species that have adapted to the climatic conditions of the Northwest region.

(Ord. No. 4074, § 10, 2-19-13)


15.02.275 Natural or native areas.

Natural or native areas means all or portions of a parcel of land undisturbed by development and maintained in a manner which preserves the indigenous plant materials.


15.02.280 Net acreage.

Net acreage means the buildable area after the area of street rights-of-way has been subtracted.


15.02.281 New manufactured home.

New manufactured home means any manufactured home required to be titled under RCW Title 46, which has not been previously titled to a retail purchaser, and is not a “used mobile home” as defined in RCW 82.45.032(2).

(Ord. No. 3753, § 1, 6-7-05)


15.02.282 Nonconforming lot of record.

Nonconforming lot of record means any validly recorded lot which at the time it was recorded fully complied with the applicable laws and ordinances but which does not fully comply with the lot requirements of this title.


15.02.283 Nonconforming sign.

Nonconforming sign means any sign legally established prior to the effective date of this title or subsequent amendments thereto, which is not in full compliance with the regulations of this title.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 27, 7-7-98)


15.02.285 Nonconforming use.

Nonconforming use means the use of land, a building, or a structure lawfully existing prior to the effective date of this title or subsequent amendments thereto, which does not conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is located on the effective date of such use regulations.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 28, 7-7-98)


15.02.286 Nonconformity.

Nonconformity means any land use, structure, lot of record, or sign legally established prior to the effective date of this title or subsequent amendment to it which would not be permitted by or is not in full compliance with the regulations of this title.


15.02.287 Northern lot line.

Northern lot line means a lot line or lines less than forty-five (45) degrees southeast or southwest of a line drawn east-west and intersecting the northernmost point of the lot. If the northern lot line adjoins any unbuildable area (e.g., streets, alleys, public rights-of-way, parking lots, common areas) other than a required yard area, the northern lot line shall be that portion of the northerly edge of the unbuildable area which is due north from the actual northern lot line of the applicant’s property.


15.02.288 North-south lot dimension.

North-south lot dimension means the average distance between lines from the corners of the northern lot line south to a line drawn east-west and intersecting the southernmost point of the lot.


15.02.290 Nursery school or day-care center.

Repealed by Ord. No. 3409.


15.02.295 Occupancy.

Occupancy means the purpose for which a building is used or intended to be used. The term shall also include the building or room housing such use. Change of occupancy is not intended to include change of tenants or proprietors.


15.02.300 Official map.

Official map means maps showing the designation, location, and boundaries of the various districts which have been adopted and made a part of this title.


15.02.305 Open green area.

Open green area means landscaped areas and areas of natural or native vegetation.


15.02.307 Opiate substitution treatment facility.

Opiate substitution treatment facility means an agency, business, clinic or other facility that administers opiate substitution treatment services, including the dispensing of approved opioid agonist treatment medication used in the treatment of opiate dependency, in accordance with RCW 70.96A.400 through 70.96A.420, and WAC 388-877B-0400 et seq.

(Ord. No. 4193, § 1, 4-19-16)


15.02.310 Ordinary high-water mark.

Ordinary high-water mark, on the Green River, Lake Fenwick, streams, marshes, and swamps, is that mark that will be found by examining the bed and banks and ascertaining where the presence and action of waters are so common and usual, and so long continued in all ordinary years, as to mark upon the soil a character distinct from that of the abutting upland, in respect to vegetation as that condition exists on the effective date of this title, or as it may naturally change thereafter; provided, that in any area where the ordinary high-water mark cannot be found, the ordinary high-water mark shall be the line of mean high water.


15.02.315 Outdoor storage or outside storage. Revised 5/20

Outdoor storage or outside storage means all or part of a lot which is used for the keeping of materials or products in an open, uncovered yard or in an unwalled building. Outdoor storage does not apply to materials which are displayed for marketing purposes to the general public, such as retail products for sale or rent.

(Ord. No. 4212, § 1, 8-16-16; Ord. No. 4355, § 4 (Exh. D), 3-3-20)


15.02.317 Overlay district.

Overlay district means a defined geographic area where a set of development regulations are established to achieve a specific public purpose. These regulations are in addition to those of the underlying zoning district. Where a conflict exists between the regulations of the overlay district and the underlying zoning, the regulations of the overlay district shall apply.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 30, 7-7-98)


15.02.318 Park, riverfront.

Riverfront park means a publicly owned open space which lies along the Green River, along a scenic and recreational road.


15.02.320 Parking space or parking stall.

Parking space or parking stall is any off-street space intended for the use of vehicular parking, with ingress or egress to the space easily identifiable.


15.02.325 Parking, temporary.

Temporary parking means parking facilities specifically designed to accommodate not less than fifty-one (51) vehicles and intended for public use for a period of not more than five (5) years, subject to annual maintenance review by the engineering department. Temporary parking shall not be in lieu of specified off-street parking as required in Chapter 15.05 KCC pertaining to off-street parking and loading requirements.


15.02.326 Patient cooperative, medical marijuana.

Medical marijuana patient cooperative means a group of four or fewer qualifying patients and/or designated providers who share responsibility for producing and processing marijuana only for the medical use of the members of the cooperative, pursuant to, and in accordance with, all the terms and conditions of RCW 69.51A.250, as now enacted or as subsequently amended.

(Ord. No. 4208, § 4, 7-5-16)


15.02.327 Pedestrian-oriented use.

Pedestrian-oriented use means a commercial use whose customers commonly arrive on foot, or where signage, advertising, window display, and entry ways are oriented toward pedestrian traffic on a public sidewalk. Pedestrian-oriented businesses may include restaurants, retail shops, personal service businesses, travel services, banks, (except drive-through windows), and similar establishments.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 31, 7-7-98)


15.02.330 Performance standards.

Performance standards means regulations for the control of dangerous or objectionable elements, as defined in KCC 15.08.050(A).


15.02.331 Permeable surface.

Permeable surface means a hard, drivable surface designed to allow a high degree of infiltration of water through the pavement. The pavement is usually constructed of concrete, asphalt, or manufactured systems such as interlocking brick or a combination of sand and brick lattice.

(Ord. No. 4043, § 9, 8-21-12)


15.02.332 Planned unit development.

Planned unit development is a development built under those provisions of this title which permit departures from the conventional siting, setback, and density requirements of other sections of this title in the interest of achieving superior site development, creating open space, and encouraging imaginative design by permitting design flexibility.

(Ord. No. 3007, § 1, 10-15-91)


15.02.333 Planning director.

Planning director means the director of the city of Kent economic and community development department or the director’s authorized designee.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 32, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 4209, § 2, 7-19-16)


15.02.334 Preempted facility.

Preempted facility means any hazardous waste facility defined as a preempted facility in RCW 70.105.010 or in Chapter 173-303 WAC. This may include any facility that includes as a significant part of its activities any of the following hazardous waste operations: (a) landfill, (b) incineration, (c) land treatment, (d) surface impoundment to be closed as a landfill, or (e) waste pile to be closed as a landfill.

(Ord. No. 2808, § 1, 10-18-88)


15.02.335 Preschool.

Preschool means establishments providing exclusively educational programs for prekindergarten or preschool children, but excluding day-care uses as defined in KCC 15.02.100.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 33, 7-7-98)


15.02.335.01 Provider. Revised 1/20

Provider means one of the following:

A. Any person, as defined by RCW 70.128.010(9), that is licensed to operate an adult family home;

B. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or facility, as defined by RCW 74.15.020(1), that is licensed to care for children, expectant mothers, or persons with developmental disabilities; or

C. Any person or legal entity that operates a halfway house or group home for recovering alcoholics or drug addicts.

(Ord. No. 4339, § 5, 11-19-19)


15.02.335.1 Public area.

Public area means public or private roadways, pedestrian paths, parks, open spaces, or other common spaces.

(Ord. No. 3830, § 13, 3-6-07)


15.02.335.2 Rapid charging station.

Rapid charging station means an industrial grade electrical outlet that allows for faster recharging of electric vehicle batteries through higher power levels and that meets or exceeds any standards, codes, and regulations set forth by Chapter 19.28 RCW and consistent with rules adopted under RCW 19.27.540.

(Ord. No. 3976, § 1, 10-19-10)


15.02.335.3 Residential facility with health care.

Residential facility with health care means a medically staffed facility intended for the long-term residential care of more than 10 handicapped individuals who, because of age or medical condition, are incapable of independent living. This definition also includes nursing homes, as defined in RCW 18.51.010, and continuing care retirement communities as defined in RCW 70.38.025, but does not include group homes. 

(Ord. No. 4089, § 4, 9-17-13; Ord. No. 4188, § 4, 2-16-16)


15.02.336 Revegetation.

Revegetation means the planting of vegetation to cover any land areas which have been disturbed during construction. This vegetation shall be maintained to ensure its survival and shall be consistent with planting requirements of the city landscape regulations as set out in Chapter 15.07 KCC.


15.02.337 Ravine.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4257.


15.02.338 Recreational vehicles.

A. Recreational vehicles mean motorized vehicles that include a cabin for living accommodations and are commonly used for recreational travel and touring. Vehicles included in this category come in several forms: travel trailers, tent trailers, and camping trailers, all of which must be towed by a car; and truck campers, motor homes, and camper vans, all of which have the motor within the body of the vehicle.

B. Recreational vehicles may also include any motorized or nonmotorized vehicle, boat, boat trailer, or other vehicle to be used for recreational purposes.

(Ord. No. 2656, § 3, 9-15-86)


15.02.338.1 Research, development, and testing. Revised 5/20

Research, development, and testing means activities which involve the conceptualization, design, and modification of new products or commodities. They may also involve tests, trials, or scientific analysis.

(Ord. No. 4355, § 4 (Exh. D), 3-3-20)


15.02.338.5 Risk potential activity or risk potential facility.

Risk potential activity or risk potential facility means an activity or facility that provides a higher incidence of risk to the public from persons conditionally released from the special commitment center. Risk potential activities and facilities include: public and private schools, school bus stops, licensed day-care and licensed preschool facilities, public parks, publicly dedicated trails, sports fields, playgrounds, recreational and community centers, churches, synagogues, temples, mosques, public libraries, and others identified by the department following the hearings on a potential site required in RCW 71.09.315. The term school bus stops does not include bus stops established primarily for public transit.

(Ord. No. 3615, § 1, 9-17-02)


15.02.339 Road, scenic and recreational.

Russell Road and Frager Road shall be designated as scenic and recreational roads.


15.02.340 Roadside stand.

Roadside stand means a temporary structure designed or used for the display or sale of agricultural products primarily produced on the premises upon which such a stand is located.


15.02.340.1 Roofline variation.

Roofline variation means a vertical offset in ridge line, horizontal offset in ridge line, variations of roof pitch, gables, or any other similar technique approved by the planning manager. The minimum horizontal or vertical offset shall be three (3) feet, and the minimum variation length shall be eight (8) feet.

(Ord. No. 3830, § 13, 3-6-07)


15.02.341 Secure community transition facility.

Secure community transition facility means a residential facility for persons civilly committed and conditionally released to a less restrictive alternative under Chapter 71.09 RCW. A secure community transition facility has supervision and security, and either provides or ensures the provision of sex offender treatment services. Secure community transition facilities include but are not limited to the facilities established pursuant to RCW 71.09.250 and any community-based facilities established under Chapter 71.09 RCW and operated by the Secretary of the State of Washington Department of Social and Health Services or under contract with the Secretary.

(Ord. No. 3615, § 1, 9-17-02)


15.02.342 Seismic hazard areas.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4257.


15.02.343 Service uses or activities.

Service uses or activities means a business which sells the knowledge or work of its people rather than a tangible product.


15.02.344 Setback, average.

The average setback is the mean or average depth of yard (setback) measured from the property line to the building. The average setback is computed along the full length of the property line, utilizing a designated property depth.


15.02.345 Shopping center.

Shopping center means a retail shopping area designed as a unit, which utilizes a common parking area.


15.02.350 Sign.

Sign means any structure, device, letter, figure, character, poster, picture, trademark, or reading matter which is used or designed to announce, declare, demonstrate, display, or otherwise identify or advertise, or attract the attention of the public. However, a sign shall not include the following:

A. Official notices authorized by a court, public body, or public officer.

B. Direction, warning, or information sign authorized by federal, state, or municipal authority.

C. The official flag, emblem, or insignia of a government, school, or religious group or agency.

D. A memorial plaque or tablet, or cornerstones indicating the name of a building and date of construction, when cut or carved into any masonry surface or when made of bronze or other incombustible material and made an integral part of the building or structure.


15.02.355 Sign area.

Sign area means the total area of all faces of a sign expressed in square feet. Area is measured from the outside perimeters, including backup, molding, framing, decorative scrollwork, etc. The area of a group of individual mounted letters or figures shall be the area of the geometric form necessary to enclose the group of letters or figures.


15.02.360 Sign height.

Sign height means the distance from ground level to the highest point on the sign structure.


15.02.365 Sign, abandoned.

Abandoned sign means any sign which has been deserted and its effective use terminated, and which no longer fulfills the purpose for which it was constructed.


15.02.370 Sign, advertising.

Advertising sign means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, or service or entertainment sold or offered elsewhere than on the premises and only incidentally on the premises.


15.02.375 Sign, business.

Business sign means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered on the premises.


15.02.380 Sign, canopy.

Canopy sign means a sign attached to the underside of a canopy.


15.02.385 Sign, construction.

Construction sign means a temporary sign placed in advance of occupancy of a building or structure indicating the name of the building or structure, the architects, the contractors, and other information regarding the building or structure.


15.02.390 Sign, directional or informational.

Directional or informational sign means a sign designated to guide or direct pedestrians or vehicles.


15.02.391 Sign, electronic messaging center. Revised 1/20

Electronic messaging center sign means a variable message sign that utilizes computer-generated messages or some other electronic means of changing copy. These signs include displays using incandescent lamps, LEDs, LCDs, or PDPs.

(Ord. No. 4340, § 3, 11-19-19)


15.02.395 Sign, flashing.

Flashing sign means an illuminated sign with action or motion, or light or color changes.


15.02.400 Sign, freestanding.

Freestanding sign means a sign standing directly upon the ground or having one (1) or more supports standing directly upon the ground, and being detached from any building or structure.


15.02.403 Sign, freestanding monument.

Freestanding monument sign means a sign above grade that is mounted or attached to a wide base or grade, and is composed of a sign face and a sign base. The base and architectural detail must be consistent with the character of the primary structure.

(Ord. No. 4011, § 5, 12-13-11)


15.02.405 Sign, gate or entrance.

Gate or entrance sign means a sign attached or adjacent to an entranceway of a residential site or subdivision, which identifies the site or subdivision.


15.02.410 Sign, identification.

Identification sign means a sign used only for the purpose of identifying the occupancy of a building, structure, or property.


15.02.415 Sign, illuminated.

Illuminated sign means a sign designed to give forth any artificial light or reflect such light from an artificial source.


15.02.420 Sign, indirectly illuminated.

Indirectly illuminated sign means an illuminated nonflashing sign whose illumination is derived entirely from an external artificial source and which is so arranged that no direct rays of light are projected from such artificial source into residences or the street.


15.02.425 Sign, institutional.

Institutional sign means a sign used only for the purpose of identifying an institution.


15.02.430 Sign, off-premises.

Off-premises sign means a sign that contains a message or directs attention to a business, profession, product, activity, or service that is not related to a use or activity conducted or offered on the premises or at the location where the sign is located, excluding road directional signs, and is generally available by means of rental or lease to persons other than the owner of the sign. An off-premises sign includes the sign face(s) that contains the message or direction noted above, as well as the pole or other structure upon which the sign face is attached.

(Ord. No. 3501, § 1, 2-1-00)


15.02.435 Sign, on-premises.

On-premises sign means a sign identifying a business, product, service, or activity conducted or sold on the same premises as that on which the sign is located.


15.02.440 Sign, painted.

Painted sign means a sign which is painted on any office, wall, window, fence, or structure of any kind.


15.02.445 Sign, political. Revised 1/20

Repealed by Ord. No. 4340.


15.02.450 Sign, portable.

Portable sign means a sign which is not permanently affixed to the ground or to a building or structure and which may be easily moved.


15.02.455 Sign, projecting.

Projecting sign means a sign affixed to the exterior wall of a building or structure with the exposed faces perpendicular to the plane of such wall.


15.02.460 Sign, roof.

Roof sign means a sign attached to a building which projects above the structure of the building. This definition refers to the architectural unity of a building or structure.


15.02.465 Sign, rotating.

Rotating sign means a sign containing moving parts.


15.02.470 Sign, subdivision.

Subdivision sign means a sign erected and maintained within the boundaries of a recorded subdivision and indicating the name of the subdivision, the name of the contractor or subdivider, and the name of the owner or agent, and giving information regarding directions, price, or terms.


15.02.475 Sign, temporary. Revised 1/20

Temporary sign means a sign intended to be displayed for a limited period of time.

(Ord. No. 4340, § 5, 11-19-19)


15.02.480 Sign, wall.

Wall sign means a sign affixed to the exterior wall of a building or structure with the exposed face of the sign on a plane parallel to the plane of such wall.


15.02.485 Sign, window.

Window sign means a sign painted on, affixed to, or placed in an exterior window with the exposed face of the sign on a plane parallel to the plane of such window.


15.02.487 Single-family zoning district.

A single-family zoning district is a zoning district with any of the following designations: SR-3; SR-4.5; SR-6; SR-8; single-family residential; and SR-1, residential agricultural; and A-10, agricultural district.

(Ord. No. 3290, § 2, 4-18-96; Ord. No. 3612, § 1, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 3770, § 4, 11-15-05)


15.02.490 Site coverage.

Site coverage means that portion of a lot covered by buildings or structures.


15.02.495 Slope line.

Slope line is defined as the line perpendicular to the contour lines crossing the property. The precise bearing or heading of the slope line shall be determined by the planning department.


15.02.496 Solar factor.

Solar factor means a number assigned to every lot which is based on the lot’s north-south lot dimension and solar slope as determined by Table 1 referred to in KCC 15.08.234.


15.02.497 Solar setback.

Solar setback means a setback from the northern lot line equal to the distance between the northern lot line and that point on grade immediately beneath the highest shade-producing point of a structure.


15.02.498 Solar slope.

Solar slope means the average of slope lines from the corners of the northern lot line south to a property line. The slope of a single line is determined by dividing the vertical distance between the two (2) end points by the horizontal distance between the same two (2) points. North-facing slopes will have a negative (-) value. South-facing slopes will have a positive (+) value.


15.02.499 Solid waste incinerator.

Solid waste incinerator means the processing of solid wastes by means of pyrolysis, refuse-derived fuel, or mass incineration within an enclosed structure. These processes may include the recovery of energy resources from such waste or the conversion of the energy in such wastes to more useful forms or combinations thereof. This definition refers to citywide or regional-scale operations and does not include solid waste incineration which is accessory to an individual principal use.

(Ord. No. 2786, § 1, 6-21-88)


15.02.499.1 Special life safety measures.

Special life safety measures means upper story rescue windows accessible from the front and rear of a home, or a fire department-approved automatic fire suppression system.

(Ord. No. 3830, § 13, 3-6-07)


15.02.500 Special use.

Special use means use permitted in a district provided such use meets specific development standards as outlined in KCC 15.08.020.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 34, 7-7-98)


15.02.501 Special trees.

Special trees means trees significant due to their size, age, species and variety, or historical importance.

(Ord. No. 2932, § 1, 7-17-90)


15.02.502 Specified anatomical areas.

Specified anatomical areas means:

A. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areolae; or

B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

(Ord. No. 3475, § 10, 10-5-99)


15.02.503 Specified sexual activities.

Specified sexual activities means:

A. The caressing, touching, fondling, or other intentional or erotic touching of male genitals, female genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts of oneself or of one person by another; or

B. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including masturbation, intercourse, oral copulation, flagellation, sodomy, bestiality, or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; or

C. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence or visual state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence, even if completely and opaquely covered; or

D. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (A) through (C) of this section.

(Ord. No. 3475, § 11, 10-5-99)


15.02.505 Stacking space.

Stacking space means the space specifically designated as a waiting area for vehicles whose occupants will be patronizing a drive-in business. Such space is considered to be located directly alongside a drive-in window, facility, or entrance used by patrons and in lanes leading up to and away from the business establishment.


15.02.506 Stadium.

Stadium means a large oval, round, or U-shaped open structure, as for football, baseball, track events, etc., surrounded by tiers of seats, for a minimum of two thousand five hundred (2,500) spectators.

(Ord. No. 3706, § 2, 8-17-04)


15.02.510 Structure.

Structure means that which is built or constructed, or an edifice or building of any kind or any piece of work composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, and includes posts for fences and signs, but does not include mounds of earth or debris.


15.02.515 Story.

Story means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above a basement, cellar, or unused underfloor space is more than six (6) feet above grade for more than fifty (50) percent of the total perimeter or is more than twelve (12) feet above grade at any point, such basement, cellar, or unused underfloor space shall be considered as a story.


15.02.520 Street.

Street means a public way thirty (30) feet or more in right-of-way width which affords a primary means of access to property.


15.02.525 Townhouse.

Townhouse means a multifamily residential dwelling unit which is attached to other dwelling units along one (1) or both sides and which occupies the building area from ground level to the roof with no dwelling units located above or below.

(Ord. No. 3470, § 1, 8-17-99)


15.02.525.1 Townhouse with ownership interest.

Townhouse with ownership interest means real property formed as a townhouse, where portions are designated for separate ownership and the remainder is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of those portions, with an undivided interest in the common elements vested in the unit owners. Real property is not considered a townhouse with ownership interest until after a declaration encompassing and outlining the above requirements is recorded.

(Ord. No. 3761, § 1, 9-6-05)


15.02.527 Trade, retail.

Retail trade means the sale or rental of goods and merchandise for final use or consumption.


15.02.527.5 Transit operations and maintenance facilities.

Transit operations and maintenance facilities means facilities that serve the primary purpose of storing, refueling, cleaning, repairing, refurbishing, rehabilitating, reconstructing, renovating, rebuilding, improving, or otherwise maintaining transit vehicles. Transit operations and maintenance facilities are characterized as being used to support the function of fixed route or fixed track transit systems, but not serving passengers directly. Transit operations and maintenance facilities may include, but are not limited to, buildings or structures, including office space, as well as outdoor storage space and large areas of track to support said facilities.

(Ord. No. 4325, § 2, 6-4-19)


15.02.528 Transitional housing.

Transitional housing means a facility owned by a public housing authority, nonprofit organization or other public interest group, that provides housing to persons on a temporary basis for a duration not to exceed twenty-four (24) months in conjunction with job training, self sufficiency training, life skills training, human services counseling, or other similar services. Transitional housing is not a transient accommodation. Transitional housing does not include group homes.

(Ord. No. 2832, § 1, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 3600, § 2, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 4089, § 5, 9-17-13)


15.02.528.5 Transportation and transit facilities, including high capacity transit facilities.

Transportation and transit facilities, including high capacity transit facilities means heavy rail stations, light rail stations, and bus depots that serve the primary purpose of boarding, alighting, or otherwise transferring passengers onto or off of transit vehicles. Transportation and transit facilities do not include bus stops within the right-of-way. Transportation and transit facilities, including high capacity transit facilities, may include such appurtenances as ticketing systems, rider amenities, loading and unloading zones, parking lots, driver comfort stations, traction power substations, security offices, or other similar uses that are accessory to the primary purpose of serving passengers of the particular heavy rail station, light rail station, or bus depot at which they are located.

(Ord. No. 4325, § 3, 6-4-19)


15.02.529 Tree.

Tree means any living woody plant characterized by one main stem or trunk and many branches, and having a diameter of six inches or more measured at four and one-half feet above ground level.

(Ord. No. 2832, § 1, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 4209, § 3, 7-19-16)


15.02.529.5 Undeveloped land.

Undeveloped land means a parcel of land which does not have an inhabitable building or where the inhabited buildings occupy no more than three (3) percent of the total parcel area.

(Ord. No. 2932, § 1, 7-17-90)


15.02.530 Unique and fragile area.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4257.

(Ord. No. 2832, § 1, 2-21-89)


15.02.531 Urban separators.

Urban separators are low-density lands that define community or municipal identities and boundaries, protect adjacent resource lands, rural areas, and environmentally sensitive areas, and create open space corridors within and between urban areas which provide environmental, visual, recreational, and wildlife benefits.

(Ord. No. 3551, § 10, 3-20-01)


15.02.532 Use.

Use means an activity for which land or premises or a building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, let, or leased.

(Ord. No. 2832, § 1, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 3551, § 9, 3-20-01)

Note – Formerly § 15.02.531.


15.02.533 Use, change of.

A change of use shall be determined to have occurred when it is found that the general character of the operation has been modified. This determination shall include review of but not be limited to: (1) hours of operation, (2) materials processed or sold, (3) required parking, (4) traffic generation, (5) impact on public utilities, (6) clientele, and (7) general appearance and location.

(Ord. No. 2832, § 1, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 3551, § 11, 3-20-01)

Note – Formerly § 15.02.532.


15.02.534 Use, temporary.

Temporary use means any activity or structure permitted under the provisions of KCC 15.08.205 which is intended to exist or operate for a limited period of time and which does not comply with the development standards and requirements set out in this title as specified for the zoning district in which it is located.

(Ord. No. 2832, § 1, 2-21-89)


15.02.535 Used.

The word “used” in the definition of the term “adult motion picture theater” in this chapter describes a continuing course of conduct of exhibiting specific sexual activities and specified anatomical areas in a manner which appeals to a prurient interest.

(Ord. No. 2832, § 1, 2-21-89)




15.02.536 Variance.

Variance means a modification of regulations of this title when authorized by the hearing examiner after finding that the literal application of the provisions of this title would cause undue and unnecessary hardship in view of certain facts and conditions applying to a specific parcel of property.

(Ord. No. 2832, § 1, 2-21-89)


15.02.540 Vegetation, shading.

Shading vegetation means vegetation planted on the south side of a major creek that generally provides shade from midmorning to midafternoon. Examples of shading vegetation are specified in KCC 15.07.050 pertaining to landscaping.

(Ord. No. 2832, § 1, 2-21-89)


15.02.541 Vegetative aid.

Vegetative aid means bark mulch, gravel and other nonvegetative materials which promote vegetative growth by retaining moisture or preventing weeds. These materials are not a substitute for vegetative cover.

(Ord. No. 2832, § 1, 2-21-89)


15.02.545 Veterinary clinic.

Veterinary clinic means any premises to which animals are brought, or where they are temporarily kept, solely for the purpose of diagnosis or treatment of any illness or injury, which does not have outdoor runs.


15.02.550 Veterinary hospital.

Veterinary hospital means any premises to which animals are brought, or where they are temporarily kept, solely for the purpose of diagnosis or treatment of any illness or injury, which may have outdoor runs.


15.02.555 View.

View means an unrestricted angle of vision emanating from a location that qualifies as view property.


15.02.560 View property.

View property means any property having a general slope of twenty (20) percent or more and that property located immediately upslope of such property for a distance of one hundred (100) feet in all SR zones, and a distance of two hundred (200) feet in all other zones, from the contour line where the slope becomes twenty (20) percent or greater.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 35, 7-7-98)


15.02.565 Yards.

Yard means the land unoccupied or unobstructed, from the ground upward, except for such encroachments as may be permitted by this title, surrounding a building site.


15.02.570 Yard, front.

Front yard means an open space, other than a court, on the same lot with the building, between the front line of the building (exclusive of steps) and the front property line, including the full width of the lot to its side line.


15.02.575 Yard, rear.

Rear yard means an open space on the same lot with the building between the rear line of the building (exclusive of steps, porches, and accessory buildings) and the rear line of the lot, including the full width of the lot to its side lines.


15.02.580 Yard, side.

Side yard means an open space on the same lot with the building between the side wall line of the building and the side line of the lot and extending from front yard to rear yard. No portion of a structure shall project into any side yard, except cornices, canopies, eaves, or other architectural features, which may project two (2) feet, zero inches.


15.02.585 Zoning.

Zoning means the regulation of the use of private lands or the manner of construction related thereto in the interest of implementing the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan. Zoning includes both the division of land into separate and district zoning districts, and the specific use and development standards which regulate development. Such regulation shall also govern those public and quasi-public land use and buildings which provide for government activities and proprietary type services for the community’s benefit, except as prohibited by law. State and federal governmental activities are encouraged to cooperate under these regulations to secure harmonious city development.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 36, 7-7-98)


15.02.588 Zoning districts redefined.

Any references in the Kent City Code to the former zoning districts R1-5.0, R1-7.2, R1-9.6, R1-12.0, and RA shall mean the zoning districts designated as follows:

	Former Zone	Current Zone

	R1-5.0	SR-8

	R1-7.2	SR-6

	R1-9.6	SR-4.5

	R1-12.0	SR-3

	RA	SR-1

(Ord. No. 3290, § 3, 4-18-96; Ord. No. 3770, § 4, 11-15-05)


15.02.590 Zoning lot.

Zoning lot means a tract of land occupied or to be occupied by a principal building and its accessory facilities, together with such open spaces and yards as are required under the provisions of this title, having not less than the minimum area required by this title for a zoning purpose in the district in which such land is situated, and having its principal frontage on a public street of standard width and improvement. A zoning lot need not necessarily coincide with the record lot, which refers to land designated as a separate and distinct parcel on a legally recorded subdivision plat or in a legally recorded deed filed in the records of the county.


15.02.595 Zoning permit.

Zoning permit means a certificate, issued prior to a building permit, stating that the proposed use is in accordance with the requirements and standards of this title.


Chapter 15.03 DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED – ZONING MAP Revised 5/20

Sections:

15.03.010    Establishment and designation of districts. Revised 5/20

15.03.020    Official zoning map.

15.03.030    Interpretation of district boundaries.

15.03.040    Application of district regulations.

15.03.050    Minimum requirements.


15.03.010 Establishment and designation of districts. Revised 5/20

The various districts established by this title and into which the city is divided are designated as follows:

A-10    Agricultural District

The stated goal of the city is to preserve prime agricultural land in the Green River Valley as a nonrenewable resource. The agriculture zone shall actively encourage the concentration of agricultural uses in areas where incompatibility with urban uses will be minimal to aid in the implementation of those goals. Further, such classification of prime agricultural land thus recognizes and encourages farming activity as a viable sector of the local economy.

SR-1    Residential Agricultural District

The purpose of the SR-1 zone is to provide for areas allowing low density single-family residential development. SR-1 zoning shall be applied to those areas identified in the comprehensive plan for low density development, because of environmental constraints or the lack of urban services.

AG    Agricultural General District

The purpose of the AG zone is to provide appropriate locations for agriculturally related industrial and retail uses in or near areas designated for long-term agricultural use. Such areas may contain prime farmland soils which may be currently or potentially used for agricultural production.

SR-3    Single-Family Residential District

SR-4.5    Single-Family Residential District

SR-6    Single-Family Residential District

SR-8    Single-Family Residential District

It is the purpose of the single-family residential districts to stabilize and preserve single-family residential neighborhoods, as designated in the comprehensive plan. It is further the purpose to provide a range of densities and minimum lot sizes in order to promote diversity and recognize a variety of residential environments.

MR-D    Duplex Multifamily Residential District

It is the purpose of the MR-D district to provide for a limited increase in population density and allow for a greater variety of housing types by allowing duplex dwelling units and higher density single-family detached residential development.

MR-T12    Multifamily Residential Townhouse District

MR-T16    Multifamily Residential Townhouse District

It is the purpose of the MR-T districts to provide suitable locations for low to medium density multifamily residential development where home ownership is encouraged consistent with the comprehensive plan.

MR-G    Low Density Multifamily Residential District

It is the purpose of the MR-G district to provide locations for low to medium density multifamily residential development and higher density single-family residential development, as designated in the comprehensive plan.

MR-M    Medium Density Multifamily Residential District

It is the purpose of the MR-M district to provide for locations for medium density multifamily residential development and higher density single-family residential development, as designated in the comprehensive plan.

MR-H    High Density Multifamily Residential District

It is the purpose of the MR-H district to provide for locations for high density residential districts suitable for urban living.

MHP    Mobile Home Park Combining District

The MHP combining district is designed to provide proper locations for mobile home parks. Mobile home parks may be located in any multi-family residential district when MHP combining district regulations and development plans are approved for that location.

PUD    Planned Unit Development District

The intent of the PUD is to create a process to promote diversity and creativity in site design, and protect and enhance natural and community features. The process is provided to encourage unique developments which may combine a mixture of residential, commercial, and industrial uses. By using flexibility in the application of development standards, this process will promote developments that will benefit citizens that live and work within the city.

NCC    Neighborhood Convenience Commercial District

It is the purpose of the NCC district to provide small nodal areas for retail and personal service activities convenient to residential areas and to provide ready access to everyday convenience goods for the residents of such neighborhoods. NCC districts shall be located in areas designated for neighborhood services in the comprehensive plan.

CC    Community Commercial District

The purpose of the CC district is to provide areas for limited commercial activities that serve several residential neighborhoods. This district shall only apply to such commercial districts as designated in the city comprehensive plan. It is also the purpose of this district to provide opportunities for mixed use development within the designated mixed use overlay boundary, as designated by the comprehensive plan.

DC    Downtown Commercial District

It is the purpose of the DC district to provide a place and create environmental conditions which will encourage the location of dense and varied retail, office, residential, civic, and recreational activities which will benefit and contribute to the vitality of a central downtown location, to recognize and preserve the historic pattern of development in the area and to implement the land use goals and policies in the 1989 downtown plan, the Kent comprehensive plan, and the downtown action plan. In the DC area, permitted uses should be primarily pedestrian-oriented and able to take advantage of on-street and structured off-street parking lots.

DCE    Downtown Commercial Enterprise District

The purpose of this district is to encourage and promote higher density development and a variety and mixture of compatible retail, commercial, residential, civic, recreational, and service activities in the downtown area, to enhance the pedestrian-oriented character of the downtown, and to implement the goals and policies of the 1989 downtown plan, the Kent comprehensive plan, and the downtown strategic action plan.

DCE-T    Downtown Commercial Enterprise District – Transitional Overlay

Within the downtown commercial enterprise district, a transitional overlay addresses compatibility of higher intensity mixed use development with nearby single-family residential zones through height limits and required application of certain downtown design review elements.

MTC-1    Midway Transit Community-1 District

The purpose and intent of the MTC-1 district is to provide an area that will encourage the location of moderately dense and varied retail, office, or residential activities in support of rapid light rail and mass transit options, to enhance a pedestrian-oriented character while acknowledging the existing highway corridor character, and to implement the goals and policies of the Midway Subarea Plan.

MTC-2    Midway Transit Community-2 District

The purpose and intent of the MTC-2 district is to provide a place and create environmental conditions which will promote the location of dense and varied retail, office, or residential activities, and recreational activities in support of rapid light rail and mass transit options, to ensure a primarily pedestrian-oriented character, and to implement the goals and policies of the Midway Subarea Plan.

MCR    Midway Commercial/Residential District

The purpose and intent of the MCR district is to provide area that will encourage the location of dense and varied retail, office, or residential activities in support of rapid light rail and mass transit options, to enhance a pedestrian-oriented character, and to implement the goals and policies of the Midway Subarea Plan.

CM    Commercial Manufacturing District

It is the purpose of the CM district to provide locations for those types of developments which combine some characteristics of both retail establishments and small-scale, light industrial operations, heavy commercial and wholesale uses, and specialty manufacturing.

GC    General Commercial District

The purpose and intent of the general commercial district is to provide for the location of commercial areas developed along certain major thoroughfares; to provide use incentives and development standards which will encourage the redevelopment and upgrading of such areas; to provide for a range of trade, service, entertainment, and recreation land uses which occur adjacent to major traffic arterials and residential uses; and to provide areas for development which are automobile-oriented and designed for convenience, safety, and the reduction of the visual blight of uncontrolled advertising signs, traffic control devices, and utility equipment. It is also the purpose of this district to provide opportunities for mixed use development within the designated mixed use overlay boundary, as designated by the comprehensive plan.

I1    Industrial Business District

The I1 industrial business district consists of areas of high opportunity for the city in terms of employment, revenue, and placemaking. High opportunity areas may exhibit a mix of characteristics such as high visibility from key transportation corridors, proximity to prominent gateways, adjacency to transit, commercial nodes, or residential districts, etc. The industrial business district is primarily intended to be an amenity-rich environment and to accommodate small- to moderate-scale industrial land uses with high employment density, such as light industrial, manufacturing, assembly, fabrication, industrial offices, prototyping, research and development, small-scale wholesaling, local distribution, and similar activities that generate few adverse operational impacts (e.g., noise, odor, truck traffic, etc.). Neighborhood scale uses such as food, retail, and services are encouraged in the industrial business district, as are multi-story buildings, master-planned business parks, and complexes with a mix of allowed uses. Because of its high-quality employment focus, development in the industrial business district is required to provide amenity space and attractive architectural design, to improve the daily experience for workers.

I2    Mixed Industrial District

The I2 mixed industrial district is intended to accommodate a range of small-, moderate- and large-scale industrial uses and activities with moderate to high employment density. Uses appropriate for the I2 district include manufacturing, logistics, processing, industrial parks, and other industrial activities that may generate adverse operational impacts (e.g., noise, odor, truck traffic, etc.) beyond the subject property lines but can be largely mitigated. Because of its employment focus, the mixed industrial district has some amenity and architectural design requirements to improve the daily experience for workers, but these requirements are more flexible than those in the I1 district in order to facilitate cost-effective development and redevelopment.

I3    Heavy Industrial District

The I3 heavy industrial district is primarily intended to accommodate large-scale, high-impact uses, including raw materials and metals processing, large-scale warehousing and distribution, and other activities that generate adverse operational impacts (e.g., noise, odor, truck traffic, etc.) often requiring significant movement of trucks or large vehicles, outdoor storage, or outdoor operational space within the site. Lands designated I3 may have access constraints or experience adverse impacts due to their proximity to rail lines or limited-access freeways.

SU    Special Use Combining District

It is the purpose of the SU district to provide for special controls for certain uses which do not clearly fit into other districts, which may be due to technological and social changes, or which are of such unique character as to warrant special attention in the interest of the city’s optimum development and the preservation and enhancement of its environmental quality. A special use combining district is imposed on an existing zoning district, permitting the special use as well as uses permitted by the underlying zone. The combining district becomes void if substantial construction has not begun within a one-year period, and the district reverts to its original zoning designation. It is the intent of the special use combining regulations to provide the city with adequate procedures for controlling and reviewing such uses and to discourage application for speculative rezoning.

(Ord. No. 3290, § 11, 4-18-96; Ord. No. 3409, § 37, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 3470, § 2, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3543, § 1, 2-20-01; Ord. No. 3612, § 2, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 3770, § 5, 11-15-05; Ord. No. 3988, § 2, 1-4-11; Ord. No. 4011, § 6, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 4166, § 3, 9-1-15; Ord. No. 4257, § 14, 11-21-17; Ord. No. 4355, § 5 (Exh. E), 3-3-20)

Cross reference(s) – Environmental designation for noise abatement based on zoning districts, § 8.05.070.


15.03.020 Official zoning map.

A. Adoption. The designation, location, and boundaries of the various districts are shown on the official zoning map. The official zoning map is hereby adopted and made a part of this title.

B. Location; identification. The official zoning map shall be on file in the planning department office. The map shall be identified by the signature of the city clerk and city attorney and bear the title, “City of Kent Official Zoning Map, Ordinance 1827.”

C. Display zoning map. In addition to the official zoning map there may be a display zoning map, which may be used to generally indicate the various districts, but not to locate precise boundaries.

D. Amendments. If changes are made in the district boundaries or other matters portrayed by the official zoning map, such changes shall be entered on the official zoning map after the amendment has been approved by the city council. The signature of the city clerk and the city attorney shall be entered on the official zoning map with the ordinance number of the amendment. Each amendment shall be filed as part of the official zoning record.

E. Unclassified property. All property not otherwise classified on the official zoning map shall be treated as follows:

1. Interim zoning. All property not otherwise classified on the official zoning map is hereby placed in an interim zone. Such an interim zone shall be governed by provisions applicable to the SR-3 single-family residential district.

2. Upon annexation of property, or upon the city otherwise being made aware of property in the interim zoning designation, the planning director shall commence all necessary steps to zone such property. Interim zoning of property shall be for six (6) months unless otherwise provided by ordinance.

(Ord. No. 3439, § 1, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 3770, § 5, 11-15-05)


15.03.030 Interpretation of district boundaries.

Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply:

A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such lines.

B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.

C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following city limits.

D. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed as to be midway between the main tracks.

E. Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, canals, rivers, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines.

F. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (A) through (E) of this section shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map.

G. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections (A) through (E) of this section, the planning director shall interpret the district boundaries.

H. Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this title is derived, the planning director may permit the extension of the regulation for either portion of the lot not to exceed fifty (50) feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot.


15.03.040 Application of district regulations.

Except as otherwise provided in this title:

A. No building or part thereof or other structure shall be erected, altered, added to, or enlarged, nor shall any land, building, structure, or premises be used, designated, or intended to be used for any purpose or in any manner other than is included among the uses listed in this title as permitted in the district in which such building, land, or premises are located.

B. No building or part thereof or structure shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered to exceed in height the limit designated in this title for the district in which such building is located.

C. No building or part thereof or structure shall be erected, nor shall any existing building be altered, enlarged, or rebuilt or moved into any district, nor shall any open space be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity to the yard, building site area, and building location regulations designated in this title for the district in which such building or open space is located.

D. No yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with provisions of this title shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building, and no yard or other open space on one (1) building lot shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a building on any other building lot.


15.03.050 Minimum requirements.

In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be held to be minimum requirements. Where this title imposes a greater restriction than is imposed or required by other rules or regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this title shall control.


Chapter 15.04 DISTRICT REGULATIONS Revised 8/19 Revised 1/20 Revised 5/20 Revised 6/20

Sections:

15.04.010    Interpretation of land use tables.

15.04.020    Residential land uses. Revised 1/20 Revised 5/20 Revised 6/20

15.04.030    Residential land use development conditions. Revised 1/20 Revised 6/20

15.04.040    Industrial land uses. Revised 5/20

15.04.050    Industrial land use development conditions. Revised 5/20

15.04.060    Transportation, public, and utilities land uses. Revised 5/20

15.04.065    Transportation, public, and utilities land use development conditions.

15.04.070    Wholesale and retail land uses. Revised 5/20

15.04.080    Wholesale and retail land use development conditions. Revised 5/20

15.04.090    Service land uses. Revised 5/20

15.04.100    Service land use development conditions. Revised 5/20

15.04.110    Cultural, entertainment, and recreation land uses. Revised 5/20

15.04.120    Cultural, entertainment, and recreation land use development conditions. Revised 5/20

15.04.130    Resource land uses. Revised 5/20

15.04.140    Resource land use development conditions. Revised 5/20

15.04.150    Special use combining district, SU. Revised 5/20

15.04.160    Development standards.

15.04.170    Agricultural and residential zone development standards. Revised 8/19 Revised 5/20

15.04.180    Agricultural and residential land use development standard conditions. Revised 5/20

15.04.190    Commercial and industrial zone development standards. Revised 5/20

15.04.195    Commercial and industrial land use development standard conditions. Revised 5/20

15.04.200    Mixed use overlay development standards.

15.04.205    Mixed use land use development standard conditions.


15.04.010 Interpretation of land use tables.

A. Land use tables. The land use tables in KCC 15.04.020 through 15.04.140 determine whether a specific use is allowed in a zoning district. The zoning districts are located in the vertical columns and the land uses are located on the horizontal rows of these tables. A purpose statement for each zoning district is included in Chapter 15.03 KCC.

B. Principally permitted uses. If the letter “P” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is permitted in that zoning district subject to the review procedures specified in Chapter 15.09 KCC, the development conditions following the land use table, and any requirements of an overlay zone and the general requirements of the code.

C. Special uses. If the letter “S” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is permitted in that zoning district subject to the review procedures specified in Chapter 15.09 KCC, the development conditions following the land use table, the development standards stated in KCC 15.08.020, any requirements of an overlay zone and the general requirements of the code.

D. Conditional uses. If the letter “C” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is permitted in that zoning district subject to the review procedures specified in Chapter 15.09 KCC, the development conditions following the land use table, the review criteria stated in KCC 15.09.030, any requirements of an overlay zone and the general requirements of the code. 

E. Accessory uses. If the letter “A” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is permitted in that zoning district subject to the review procedures specified in Chapter 15.09 KCC, the development conditions following the land use table and any requirements of an overlay zone and the general requirements of the code.

F. Development conditions. If a number appears next to the land use or in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use may be allowed subject to the appropriate review process indicated above, the general requirements of the code, and the specific conditions indicated in the development condition with the corresponding number in the section immediately following each land use table.

G. Multiple development conditions. If more than one letter-number combination appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is allowed in that zone subject to different sets of limitations or conditions depending on the review process indicated by the letter, the general requirements of the code, and the specific conditions indicated in the development condition with the corresponding number immediately following the table.

H. Overlay zones. Overlay districts provide policies and regulations in addition to those in the underlying zoning district. Overlay zones include the mixed use overlay and the Green River Corridor district.

I. Applicable requirements. All applicable requirements shall govern a use whether or not they are cross-referenced in a section.

J. Interpretation of other uses. Any other unnamed use shall be permitted if it is determined by the planning manager to be of the same general character as the principally permitted uses and in accordance with the stated purpose of the district, per KCC 15.09.065.

(Ord. No. 3439, § 2, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 3600, § 3, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3612, § 3, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 3750, § 2, 5-17-05; Ord. No. 4166, § 4, 9-1-15)


15.04.020 Residential land uses. Revised 1/20 Revised 5/20 Revised 6/20

 

	 	Zoning Districts

	Key

P = Principally Permitted Uses

S = Special Uses

C = Conditional Uses

A = Accessory Uses

 

 	A-10	AG	SR-1 	SR-3 	SR-4.5 	SR-6	SR-8	MR-D	MR-T12	MR-T16 	MR-G	MR-M 	MR-H	MHP	NCC	CC 	DC	DCE 	MTC-1	MTC-2 	MCR 	CM	GC 	I1 	I2	I3

	One single-family dwelling per lot	P	 	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	A

(1)	A

(1)	A

(1)

	One duplex per lot	 	 	 	 	P

(27)	P

(27)	P

(27)	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	One modular home per lot	P	 	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Duplexes	 	 	 	 	P

(27)	P

(27)	P

(27)	P

(22)	P	P	P	P	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Multifamily townhouse units	 	 	 	 	P

(27)	P

(27)	P

(27)	 	P

(19)

(20) 	P

(19)

(20)	P	P	P	 	 	P

(2)	P

(4) C

(5)	P	P	P	P	 	P

(2)	 	 	 

	Multifamily dwellings	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(26)	P

(26)	P	P	P	 	 	P

(2)	P

(4)

C

(5)	P	P	P	P	 	P

(2)	 	 	 

	Mobile homes and manufactured homes	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Mobile home parks	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(13)	P

(13)	P

(13)	P

(13)	P

(13)	P

(13)	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Group homes class I	P

(32)	 	P

(32)	P

(32)	P

(32)	P

(32)	P

(32)	P

(32)	P

(32)	P

(32)	P

(32)	P

(32)	P

(32)	P

(32)	P

(32)	P

(32)	P

(32)	P

(32)	P

(32)	P

(32)	P

(32)	P

(32)	P

(32)	 	 	 

	Group homes class II-A	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	 	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	 	 	 

	Group homes class II-B	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	 	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	 	 	 

	Group homes class II-C	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	 	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	C

(32)	 	 	 

	Group homes class III	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C

(23)

(32)	C

(23)

(32)	C

(23)

(32)	C

(23)

(32)	C

(23)

(32)	C

(23)

(32)	C

(23)

(32)	C

(23)

(32)	C

(23)

(32)	 	 	 

	Secure community transition facilities23, 24	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C

(23)

(24)	C

(23)

(24)	 

	Communal residences	P

(33)	 	P

(33)	P

(33)	P

(33)	P

(33)	P

(33)	P

(33)	P

(33)	P

(33)	P

(33)	P

(33)	P

(33)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(33)	 	 	 	 

	Rebuild/accessory uses for existing dwellings	 	P

(6)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(6)	P

(6)	P

(6)	P

(6)	P

(6)	P

(6)	P

(6)	P

(6)	P

(6)	P

(6)	P

(6)	P

(6)

	Transitional housing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(29)	P

(29)	P

(29)	 	 	P

(2)	P

(4)

C

(5)	P	P	P	P	P

(7)

C

(30)	P

(7)

C

(30)	 	 	 

	Short-term rentals	 	 	 	A

(34)	A

(34)	A

(34)	A

(34)	A

(34)	A

(34)	A

(34)	A

(34)	A

(34)	A

(34)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Farm worker accommodations	A

(17)	A

(9)	A

(17)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Accessory uses and structures customarily appurtenant to a permitted use	A	A	A

(8)

(18)	A

(8)

(18)	A

(8)

(18)	A

(8)

(18)	A

(8)

(18)	A

(18)	A

(18)	A

(18)	A

(18)	A

(18)	A

(18)	 	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A

	Accessory dwelling units and guest cottages	A

(8)

(10)	 	A

(8)

(10)	A

(8)

(10)	A

(8)

(10)	A

(8)

(10)	A

(8)

(10)	A

(8)

(10)	A

(8)

(10)	A

(8)

(10)	A

(8)

(10)	A

(8)

(10)	A

(8)

(10)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	A

(8)

(10)	 	 	 	 

	Accessory living quarters	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	A

(14)	A

(14)	A

(14)	A

(14)	A

(14)	A

(14)	A

(14)	A

(14)	A

(14)	A

(14)	A

(14)	A

(14)

	Live-work units	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(28)	 	 	 	 

	Home occupations	A

(11)	A

(11)	A

(11)	A

(11)	A

(11)	A

(11)	A

(11)	A

(11)	A

(11)	A

(11)	A

(11)	A

(11)	A

(11)	A

(11)	A

(11)	A

(11)	A

(11)	A

(11)	A

(11)	A

(11)	A

(11)	A

(11)	A

(11)	A

(11)	A

(11)	A

(11)

	Service buildings	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	A	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Storage of recreational vehicles	A

(16)	 	A

(16)	A

(16)	A

(16)	A

(16)	A

(16)	A

(16)	A

(16)	A

(16)	A

(16)	A

(16)	A

(16)	A	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Drive-in churches	 	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	 	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C

	Emergency housing; emergency shelter	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C

(31)	 	 	C

(31)	C

(31)	C

(31)	 	C

(35)	C

(35)	C

(35)	C

(35)	C

(35)	C

(35)	C

(35)	C

(35)	C

(35)	C

(35)	C

(35)	C

(35)

	Independent senior living facilities	 	 	 	C	C	C	C	C	 	 	P

(29)	P

(29)	P

(29)	 	 	P

(2)

C

(3)	P

(4)

C

(5)	P	P	P	P	C	P

(2)

C

(3)	 	 	 

	Assisted living facilities	 	 	 	C	C	C	C	C	 	 	P

(29)	P

(29)	P

(29)	 	 	P

(2)

C

(3)	P

(4)

C

(5)	P	P	P	P	C	P

(2)

C

(3)	 	 	 

	Residential facilities with health care	 	 	 	C	C	C	C	C	 	 	P

(29)	P

(29)	P

(29)	 	 	P

(2)

C

(3)	P

(4)

C

(5)	P	P	P	P	C	P

(2)

C

(3)	 	 	 

	Designated manufactured home	P

(25)	 	P

(25)	P

(25)	P

(25)	P

(25)	P

(25)	P

(25)	P

(25)	P

(25)	P

(25)	P

(25)	P

(25)	P

(25)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

(Ord. No. 3439, § 2, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 3440, § 4, 2-16-99; Ord. No. 3470, § 3, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3543, § 2, 2-20-01; Ord. No. 3600, § 3, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3612, § 3, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 3615, § 2, 9-17-02; Ord. No. 3753, § 2, 6-7-05; Ord. No. 3759, § 1, 9-6-05; Ord. No. 3770, § 5, 11-15-05; Ord. No. 3830, § 14, 3-6-07; Ord. No. 4011, § 7, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 4089, § 6, 9-17-13; Ord. No. 4166, § 4, 9-1-15; Ord. No. 4174, § 5, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 4188, § 5, 2-16-16; Ord. No. 4189, § 1, 2-16-16; Ord. No. 4225, § 6, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 4339, § 6, 11-19-19; Ord. No. 4355, § 6 (Exh. F), 3-3-20; Ord. No. 4358, § 1, 5-5-20)


15.04.030 Residential land use development conditions. Revised 1/20 Revised 6/20

1. Dwelling units, limited to not more than one per establishment, for security or maintenance personnel and their families, when located on the premises where they are employed in such capacity. No other residential use shall be permitted.

2. Multifamily residential uses, or other residential facilities where allowed, are only permissible in a mixed-use overlay and must be included within a mixed-use development.

3. Assisted living facilities, residential facilities with health care, and independent senior living facilities, when not combined with commercial or office uses, require a conditional use permit and are subject to the following conditions:

a. Must be located within one-half mile of publicly accessible amenities in at least three of the following categories, as determined by the economic and community development director. The distance shall be measured as the shortest straight-line distance from the property line of the proposed facility to the property line of the entities listed below:

i. Public park or trail, as identified in the city’s most recently adopted park and open space plan, or owned or maintained by any agency of the state, or any political subdivision thereof;

ii. Preschool, elementary, or secondary school (public or private);

iii. Indoor recreational center (community center, senior center, physical recreation facility, bingo or casino hall);

iv. Church, religious institution, or other place of worship;

v. Cultural arts center (theater, concert hall, artistic, cultural, or other similar event center);

vi. Retail services, including, but not limited to: medical services; food and beverage establishments; shopping centers; or other commercial services that are relevant (reasonably useful or germane) to the residents of the proposed facility, as determined by the city’s economic and community development director.

b. Alternatively, if the facility provides amenities in one or more of the categories listed in subsection (3)(a) of this section on the ground floor of the facility itself, oriented towards the public (meaning that they are visible, accessible, and welcoming), the number of other amenities to which a half-mile proximity is required may be reduced, at the discretion of the city’s economic and community development director.

4. Multifamily residential uses, or other residential facilities where allowed, when established in buildings with commercial or office uses, and not located on the ground floor.

5. Multifamily residential uses, or other residential facilities where allowed, when not combined with commercial or office uses.

6. Existing dwellings may be rebuilt, repaired, and otherwise changed for human occupancy. Accessory buildings for existing dwellings may be constructed subject to the provisions of KCC 15.08.160.

7. Transitional housing facilities, limited to a maximum of 20 residents at any one time, plus up to four resident staff.

8. Accessory structures composed of at least two walls and a roof, not including accessory uses or structures customarily appurtenant to agricultural uses, are subject to the provisions of KCC 15.08.160.

9. Farm dwellings appurtenant to a principal agricultural use for the housing of farm owners, operators, or employees, but not accommodations for transient labor.

10. Accessory dwelling units shall not be included in calculating the maximum density. Accessory dwelling units are allowed only on the same lot with a principally permitted detached single-family dwelling unit, and are subject to the provisions of KCC 15.08.160 and 15.08.350.

11. Customary incidental home occupations subject to the provisions of KCC 15.08.040.

12. [Reserved].

13. Subject to the combining district requirements of the mobile home park code, Chapter 12.05 KCC.

14. Accessory living quarters are allowed per the provisions of KCC 15.08.359.

15. [Reserved].

16. Recreational vehicle storage is permitted as an accessory use in accordance with KCC 15.08.080.

17. Accommodations for farm operators and employees, but not accommodations for transient labor.

18. Other accessory uses and buildings customarily appurtenant to a permitted use, except for onsite hazardous waste treatment and storage facilities, which are not permitted in residential zones.

19. The following zoning is required to be in existence on the entire property to be rezoned at the time of application for a rezone to an MR-T zone: SR-8, MR-D, MR-G, MR-M, MR-H, NCC, CC, GC, DC, or DCE.

20. All multifamily townhouse developments in an MR-T zone shall be recorded as townhouses with ownership interest, as defined in KCC 15.02.525.1, prior to approval of a certificate of occupancy by the city.

21. [Reserved].

22. One duplex per lot is permitted.

23. Secure community transition facilities are only permitted within the boundaries depicted on the following map, and only with a conditional use permit:
[IMAGE]


24. A secure community transition facility shall also comply with applicable state siting and permitting requirements pursuant to Chapter 71.09 RCW. Secure community transition facilities are not subject to the siting criteria of KCC 15.08.280 for class III group homes, but they are subject to a 600-foot separation from any other class II or III group home. In no case shall a secure community transition facility be sited adjacent to, immediately across the street or parking lot from, or within the line of sight of risk-potential activities or facilities in existence at the time a site is listed for consideration. Within the line of sight means that it is possible to reasonably visually distinguish and recognize individuals. For the purposes of granting a conditional use permit for siting a secure community transition facility, the hearing examiner shall consider an unobstructed visual distance of 600 feet to be within the line of sight. During the conditional use permit process for a secure community transition facility, the line of sight may be considered to be less than 600 feet if the applicant can demonstrate that visual barriers exist or can be created that would reduce the line of sight to less than 600 feet. This distance shall be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest point of the property or parcel upon which the proposed use is to be located, to the nearest point of the parcel or property or the land use district boundary line from which the proposed use is to be separated. For the purpose of granting a conditional use permit for a secure community transition facility, the hearing examiner shall give great weight to equitable distribution so that the city shall not be subject to a disproportionate share of similar facilities of a statewide, regional, or countywide nature.

25. A designated manufactured home is a permitted use with the following conditions:

a. A designated manufactured home must be a new manufactured home;

b. The designated manufactured home shall be set upon a permanent foundation, as specified by the manufacturer, and the space from the bottom of the home to the ground shall be enclosed by concrete or an approved concrete product that can be either load-bearing or decorative;

c. The designated manufactured home shall comply with all city design standards applicable to all other single-family homes;

d. The designated manufactured home shall be thermally equivalent to the State Energy Code; and

e. The designated manufactured home shall meet all other requirements for a designated manufactured home as defined in RCW 35.63.160.

26. Multifamily dwellings shall be allowed only within the Kent downtown districts outlined in the downtown subarea action plan and shall be condominiums recorded pursuant to Chapter 64.32 or 64.34 RCW or similar dwelling units with ownership interest and recorded as such prior to approval of a certificate of occupancy by the city.

27. Within subdivisions, as defined by KCC 12.04.025, vested after March 22, 2007, or altered to comply with zoning and subdivision code amendments effective after March 22, 2007, 25 percent of the total number of permitted dwelling units may be duplex or triplex townhouse structures.

28. Live-work units; provided, that the following development standards shall apply for live-work units, in addition to those set forth in KCC 15.04.190:

a. The unit shall contain a cooking space and sanitary facility in conformance with applicable building standards;

b. Adequate and clearly defined working space must constitute no less than 50 percent of the gross floor area of the live-work unit. Said working space shall be reserved for and regularly used by one or more persons residing there;

c. At least one resident in each live-work unit shall maintain at all times a valid city business license for a business on the premises;

d. Persons who do not reside in the live-work unit may be employed in the live-work unit when the required parking is provided;

e. Customer and client visits are allowed when the required parking is provided;

f. No portion of a live-work unit may be separately rented or sold as a commercial space for a person or persons not living on the premises, or as a residential space for a person or persons not working on the premises;

g. [Reserved];

h. Construct all nonresidential space, to the maximum allowed, to commercial building standards; and

i. Provide an internal connection between the residential and nonresidential space within each unit.

29. Subject to the maximum permitted density of the zoning district. For assisted living facilities, residential facilities with health care, and independent senior living facilities, each residential care unit is considered one dwelling unit for purposes of density calculations.

30. Conditional use when the number of residents exceeds 20 at any one time or more than four resident staff.

31. Emergency housing and emergency shelter facilities are allowed only in conjunction with an approved conditional use permit, and must satisfy the requirements of RCW 35A.21.360(10) prior to opening.

a. General conditions. Emergency housing and emergency shelter facilities are subject to the following general conditions:

i. The emergency housing or shelter facility must be located on the same lot as an actively operating church or similar religious institution.

ii. At the time of application for the conditional use permit, there shall be no other approved emergency housing or shelter facility located within 1,000 feet of the proposed emergency housing or shelter facility site. For the purposes of this subsection, distance shall be measured in a straight line between the closest property line of the existing facility and the closest property line of the proposed facility. For purposes of this section, if the city receives applications for proposed facilities that are within 1,000 feet of each other, the first complete application received by the city shall be given priority.

iii. An emergency housing facility and an emergency shelter facility may not be permitted on the same lot simultaneously.

iv. Emergency housing and shelter facilities shall be permitted to operate for a maximum of 90 consecutive days, and there shall be a minimum period of 90 consecutive days between operational periods during which the emergency housing or shelter facility does not operate. The 90-day period of nonoperation shall apply to the operation of an emergency housing facility followed by an emergency shelter facility and vice versa.

v. The building footprint of the emergency housing or shelter facility cannot exceed the building footprint of the church or similar religious institution that exists on the same lot.

vi. The church or similar religious institution on the same lot as the emergency housing or shelter facility shall be primarily responsible for the operation and maintenance of the facility itself, as well as the conduct of the residents of the facility on and in the immediate vicinity of the lot, to the maximum extent permitted by law, regardless of whether the organization contracts with a third party for the provision of any services related to the facility itself or its residents.

vii. The emergency housing or shelter facility shall comply with the setbacks and landscaping requirements for churches, as identified in KCC 15.08.020(A).

viii. The possession or use of illegal drugs at an emergency housing or shelter facility or the property occupied by the facility is prohibited.

ix. Emergency housing or shelter facilities shall be responsible for the safety of residents of the facility, and shall establish a plan to remove individuals who present a threat to other residents or the property of other residents.

x. In the event of a public health emergency, the city may require an emergency response plan that is in substantial compliance with relevant guidance and requirements issued by Public Health – Seattle and King County in response to the public health emergency.

xi. Emergency housing and shelter facilities must comply with all applicable fire and building codes set forth in Chapters 13.01 and 14.01 KCC.

xii. The church or religious institution must provide the city written documentation of the following:

(a) A description of the proposed staffing and operational characteristics, including confirmation of sanitation and basic safety measures required for emergency shelters.

(b) A description of the proposed population to be served and code of conduct to be observed including conflict resolution steps.

(c) Criteria for rejection or removal of an individual seeking access to the facility.

(d) A plan for managing the exterior appearance of the proposed site including trash/litter.

(e) A phone number, email, and point of contact at the site of the facility for the community to report concerns.

(f) A plan for addressing reported concerns and documenting resolution, and making this information publicly available.

(g) A proposed site plan showing compliance with all requirements set forth in this subsection (31) of this section and applicable fire and building codes set forth in Chapters 13.01 and 14.01 KCC.

xiii. Emergency housing and shelter facilities must have two naloxone (Narcan) kits onsite, and staff must be trained in how to administer the naloxone (Narcan).

xiv. The possession of any of the weapons described in RCW 9.41.280(1) at an emergency housing or shelter facility or the property occupied by the facility is prohibited.

b. Emergency housing facilities – Additional conditions. Emergency housing facilities must operate pursuant to an agreement with the city, approved by the director of economic and community development, and are subject to the following additional conditions:

i. The emergency housing facility must be located within a permanent, enclosed building.

ii. The emergency housing facility must be located on a lot that is a minimum of one acre in size.

c. Emergency shelter facilities – Additional conditions. Emergency shelter facilities must be located within a temporary structure as described below, and are subject to the following additional conditions:

i. Emergency shelter facilities are limited to a maximum sleeping occupancy of 35 people. The design of the temporary structure shall include an occupant load factor of a minimum of 50 square feet per occupant and a three-foot aisle around the entire inside perimeter of the tent.

ii. The emergency shelter facility must be located on a lot that is a minimum of two acres in size.

iii. Emergency shelter facilities must be within a single, large temporary enclosure, such as a tensile membrane structure, or within multiple identical temporary enclosures, such as matching vinyl canvas tents, that are a minimum of 400 square feet in size. If the floor of a temporary enclosure does not provide insulation from the ground, camping cots or other off-ground sleeping structures must be provided. The use of small, individual tents or makeshift structures including, without limitation, those created with tarps or plastic is prohibited.

iv. Gasoline-powered generators are prohibited.

v. Smoking or open flames inside the temporary structure are prohibited, and the use of portable heaters within personal tents is prohibited. All heating equipment shall be in accordance with the adopted fire code.

vi. Emergency shelter facilities shall provide sanitation and basic safety measures including the following:

(a) One portable or permanent toilet per 20 persons at a minimum, with a handwashing station at each toilet.

(b) Rodent-proof litter receptacles and food storage containers.

(c) Two large first-aid kits that include emergency eye wash bottles.

(d) Secured area for dry supplies storage (blankets, clothing, food, first-aid).

(e) Covered kitchen area at least 20 feet from any sleeping areas, with handwashing and dishwashing stations stocked with soap.

(f) Cleaning supplies including work gloves, disposable gloves, trash grabber-tool, disinfectant, hand sanitizer, masks, buckets, paper towels, etc.

(g) Feminine hygiene products.

(h) Three- to four-foot wide aisle between sleeping structures so as to be ADA compliant and accessible by emergency services personnel.

32. The following restrictions apply to all group homes:

a. A group home is considered a single-family residential use and shall not be combined with another residential use on the same parcel including, but not limited to, a communal residence or short-term rental;

b. A city of Kent business license is required in accordance with Chapter 5.01 KCC;

c. The applicant is responsible for obtaining required state licenses and providing a copy of an up-to-date state license, or proof one is not required by the state, to the city of Kent prior to approval of a city business license;

d. Family members of the provider may live in the group home, but such members are limited only to a spouse and children of the provider or spouse, and are subject to the background check requirements of WAC 388-73-10166 and 388-76-10161; and

e. An accessory dwelling unit is permitted only if used as part of the operation of a group home and may not be leased or sub-leased to a separate family.

33. The following restrictions apply to all communal residences:

a. A city of Kent business license is required in accordance with Chapter 5.01 KCC;

b. No more than three rooms within the home or accessory structure may be separately leased or sub-leased; and

c. Each room being leased or sub-leased shall have adequate space, light, electricity, heating, emergency egress, a smoke detector, and access to adequate sanitation and eating facilities pursuant to the International Residential Code and International Property Maintenance Code as adopted in Chapter 14.01 KCC. Adequate space means floor area of no less than 70 square feet in size, no less than seven feet of ceiling height and shall not have any horizontal dimension less than seven feet. Egress means one emergency escape rescue opening at least 5.7 square feet, 24 inches high and 20 inches wide.

34. The following restrictions apply to short-term rentals:

a. A city of Kent business license is required in accordance with Chapter 5.01 KCC;

b. The home shall be occupied by the owner or a nontransient tenant for at least six months of each year;

c. No more than three rooms within the home or accessory structure may be offered as short-term rentals; and

d. The applicant is responsible for complying with the short-term rental requirements of Chapter 64.37 RCW.

35. Emergency housing facilities are allowed only in conjunction with an approved conditional use permit, and must satisfy the requirements of RCW 35A.21.360(10) prior to opening.

a. General conditions. Emergency housing facilities are also subject to the following conditions:

i. The emergency housing facility must be located within a permanent, enclosed building.

ii. The emergency housing facility must be located on a lot that is a minimum of one acre in size.

iii. Emergency housing facilities must operate pursuant to an agreement with the city, approved by the director of economic and community development.

iv. At the time of application for the conditional use permit, there shall be no other approved emergency housing or shelter facility located within 1,000 feet of the proposed emergency housing facility site. For the purposes of this subsection, distance shall be measured in a straight line between the closest property line of the existing facility and the closest property line of the proposed facility. For purposes of this section, if the city receives applications for proposed facilities that are within 1,000 feet of each other, the first complete application received by the city shall be given priority.

v. Emergency housing facilities shall be permitted to operate for a maximum of 90 consecutive days, and there shall be a minimum period of 90 consecutive days between operational periods during which the emergency housing facility does not operate. The 90-day period of nonoperation shall apply to the operation of any emergency housing facility followed by an emergency shelter facility and vice versa.

vi. The person or organization that owns the property shall be primarily responsible for the operation and maintenance of the facility itself, as well as the conduct of the residents of the facility on and in the immediate vicinity of the lot, to the maximum extent permitted by law, regardless of whether the person or organization contracts with a third party for the provision of any services related to the facility itself or its residents.

vii. The emergency housing facility shall comply with the setbacks and landscaping requirements for churches, as identified in KCC 15.08.020(A).

viii. The possession or use of illegal drugs at an emergency housing facility or the property occupied by the facility is prohibited.

ix. Emergency housing facilities shall be responsible for the safety of residents of the facility, and shall establish a plan to remove individuals who present a threat to other residents or the property of other residents.

x. In the event of a public health emergency, the city may require an emergency response plan that is in substantial compliance with relevant guidance and requirements issued by Public Health – Seattle and King County in response to the public health emergency.

xi. Emergency housing facilities must comply with all applicable fire and building codes set forth in Chapters 13.01 and 14.01 KCC.

xii. The owner or operator of the emergency housing facility must provide the city written documentation of the following:

(a) A description of the proposed staffing and operational characteristics.

(b) A description of the proposed population to be served and code of conduct to be observed including conflict resolution steps.

(c) Criteria for rejection or removal of an individual seeking access to the facility.

(d) A plan for managing the exterior appearance of the proposed site including trash/litter.

(e) A phone number, email, and point of contact at the site of the facility for the community to report concerns.

(f) A plan for addressing reported concerns and documenting resolution, and making this information publicly available.

(g) A proposed site plan showing compliance with all requirements set forth in subsection (35) of this section and applicable fire and building codes set forth in Chapters 13.01 and 14.01 KCC.

xiii. Emergency housing facilities must have two naloxone (Narcan) kits on site, and staff must be trained in how to administer the naloxone (Narcan).

xiv. The possession of any of the weapons described in RCW 9.41.280(1) at an emergency housing or shelter facility or the property occupied by the facility is prohibited.

(Ord. No. 3439, § 2, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 3440, § 5, 2-16-99; Ord. No. 3470, § 4, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3600, § 3, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3612, § 3, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 3615, § 2, 9-17-02; Ord. No. 3753, § 3, 6-7-05; Ord. No. 3759, § 2, 9-6-05; Ord. No. 3761, § 2, 9-6-05; Ord. No. 3830, § 15, 3-6-07; Ord. No. 4011, § 8, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 4089, § 7, 9-17-13; Ord. No. 4166, § 4, 9-1-15; Ord. No. 4174, § 6, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 4188, § 6, 2-16-16; Ord. No. 4189, § 2, 2-16-16; Ord. No. 4225, § 7, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 4339, § 7, 11-19-19; Ord. No. 4358, § 2, 5-5-20)






15.04.040 Industrial land uses. Revised 5/20

 

	 	Zoning Districts

	Key

P = Principally Permitted Uses

S = Special Uses

C = Conditional Uses

A = Accessory Uses

 

 	A-10	AG	SR-1	SR-3	SR-4.5	SR-6	SR-8	MR-D	MR-T12	MR-T16	MR-G	MR-M	MR-H 	MHP	NCC	CC	DC	DCE	MTC-1	MTC-2	MCR	CM	GC	I1	I2	I3

	Manufacturing, assembly, and fabrication – heavy	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

	Manufacturing, assembly, and fabrication – medium	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(3)	 	 	P	P

	Manufacturing, assembly, and fabrication – light	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(2)	 	 	 	P

(3)	 	P	P	P

	Heavy equipment and truck repair	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P

(35)	P

(35)	P

(35)

	Research, development, and testing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Industrial laundry and dyeing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P	P

	Contractor shops	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(5)

(3)	 	P

(35)	P

(35)	P

(35)

	Offices incidental and necessary to the conduct of a principally permitted use	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	A	A	A	A	A	 	 	 	 	P

(2)	A	A	A	P	 	P

(37)	P

(37)	P

(37)

	Warehousing and distribution facilities	 	P

(22)

C

(31)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P	P

	Fulfillment centers	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P

	Outdoor storage (including truck, heavy equipment, and contractor storage yards as allowed by development standards, KCC 15.04.190 and 15.04.195)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	A

(2)	 	 	 	P	A	A

(35)

(38)	A

(35)

(38)	A

(35)

(38)

	Miniwarehouses self‑storage	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(19)	 	 	 	 	 	P

(19)	P

(19)	 	P

(35)

(37)	P

(35)

(37)

	Complexes which include a combination of uses, including a mixture of office, storage, commercial, and manufacturing uses	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(2)

(33)	 	 	 	P	 	P

(37)	P

(37)	P

(37)

	Accessory uses and structures customarily appurtenant to a permitted use	A	A	A

(27)

(32)	A

(32)	A

(32)	A

(32)	A

(32)	A	A	A	A	A	A	 	A

(9)	A

(9)	A

(10)	A

(10)	A

(10)	A

(10)	A

(10)	A

(9)	A

(9)	A

(6)	A

(6)	A

(6)

	Impound lots	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	 	 	 

(Ord. No. 3439, § 2, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 3470, § 5, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3543, § 3, 2-20-01; Ord. No. 3600, § 3, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3612, § 3, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 3770, § 6, 11-15-05; Ord. No. 3907, § 1, 1-6-09; Ord. No. 4011, § 9, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 4166, § 4, 9-1-15; Ord. No. 4174, § 7, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 4316, § 1, 3-19-19; Ord. No. 4317, § 1, 3-19-19; Ord. No. 4320, § 3, 4-2-19; Ord. No. 4355, § 6 (Exh. F), 3-3-20)


15.04.050 Industrial land use development conditions. Revised 5/20

1. [Reserved].

2. Light manufacturing is permitted in the downtown commercial enterprise district as follows:

a. Laboratory and related industrial research and development uses are permitted, including such uses as hardware or robotics testing, industrial showrooms, and training facilities for industrial machinery.

b. Operations of sorting, packaging, recycling, or distribution are not permitted except as accessory uses to the on-premises manufacturing.

c. Heavy industrial uses that have significant external impacts such as noise, olfactory pollution, or vibration are not permitted.

d. All processing, fabricating, or assembly of products (i.e., light manufacturing) takes place wholly within an enclosed building.

i. Assembly is defined as creation of a component or end item made from a number of parts and subassemblies. This does not include the putting together of kits, gift baskets, or packaging items produced elsewhere for purposes of e-commerce or wholesale trading.

e. Storage is limited to items consumed, produced, or altered on the premises.

i. Outdoor storage shall only be allowed as an accessory use to another principal use.

A. The material(s) being stored shall not exceed 12 feet in height at any point.

B. The material(s) being stored shall be wrapped or enclosed to prevent wind-blown debris.

C. The storage area shall not exceed 15 percent of the building footprint or five percent of the lot area, whichever is less.

D. Outdoor storage shall be screened from public view from Class A and B streets (as defined in the downtown design guidelines) and from trails by Type I landscaping and minimum six-foot-tall fence or wall.

E. Outdoor storage shall be sited to minimize visibility.

f. Truck storage is only permitted as an accessory use to a principally permitted use on sites two and one-half acres or larger that also have access to a principal arterial or higher classification roadway within 500 feet of the property, or as otherwise approved by the director.

g. Areas designated for truck parking or loading shall be concealed from view along public streets or trails. Dock-high doors for truck loading are permitted at a ratio of one door per 25,000 square feet of building area.

h. Dock-high loading doors shall be set back, recessed, and/or screened so as not to be visible from adjacent local streets or residential properties.

i. The office portion of a manufacturing use shall be adjacent to the public street with the highest classification.

j. Buildings must have entries on abutting Class A and B streets (as defined in the downtown design guidelines) and those entries shall include substantial fenestration on the associated facade to emphasize the entry.

3. Small-scale light manufacturing operations as follows: stamping, brazing, testing, electronic assembly, and kindred operations where the building, structure, or total operation does not encompass more than 10,000 square feet of area. The 10,000-square-foot total shall include all indoor and outdoor storage areas associated with the manufacturing operation. Only one 10,000-square-foot manufacturing operation shall be permitted per lot.

4. [Reserved].

5. Contractor shops where most of the work is done on call, and which do not rely on walk-in trade, but where some incidental storage or semi-manufacturing work is done on the premises, such as carpentry, heating, electrical, or glass shops, printing, publishing, or lithographic shops, furniture, upholstery, dry cleaning, and exterminators.

6. Accessory uses include sales of product accessory to and directly related to the manufacturing or warehousing use on the site.

7. [Reserved].

8. [Reserved].

9. Includes incidental storage facilities and loading/unloading areas.

10. Includes incidental storage facilities, which must be enclosed, and loading/unloading areas.

11. [Reserved].

12. For permitted uses, accessory hazardous substance land uses, including onsite hazardous waste treatment or storage facilities, which are not subject to cleanup permit requirements of Chapter 11.02 KCC, subject to the provisions of KCC 15.08.050. Offsite hazardous waste treatment or storage facilities are not permitted in this district, except through a special use combining district.

13. [Reserved].

14. For permitted uses, accessory hazardous substance land uses, including onsite hazardous waste treatment or storage facilities, which are not subject to cleanup permit requirements of Chapter 11.02 KCC, subject to the provisions of KCC 15.08.050, except offsite hazardous waste treatment or storage facilities, which require a conditional use permit in this district.

15. The following require a conditional use permit:

a. Offsite hazardous waste treatment or storage facilities, subject to the provisions of KCC 15.08.050.

b. Any hazardous substance land use that is not an accessory use to a principally permitted use.

16. [Reserved].

17. [Reserved].

18. [Reserved].

19. Miniwarehouses are limited to 40 percent of the gross leasable area of the building in which the miniwarehousing use is located, and cannot be located on the ground floor. For purposes of this title, “miniwarehouses” means any real property designed and used for the purpose of renting or leasing individual storage space to occupants who are to have access to the space for the purpose of storing and removing personal property on a self-service basis, but does not include a garage or other storage area in a private residence.

20. [Reserved].

21. The ground level or street level portion of all buildings in the pedestrian overlay of the DC district, set forth in the map below, must be retail or pedestrian-oriented.


[IMAGE]


Pedestrian-oriented development shall have the main ground floor entry located adjacent to a public street and be physically and visually accessible by pedestrians from the sidewalk, and may include the following uses:

a. Retail establishments, including but not limited to convenience goods, department and variety stores, specialty shops such as apparel and accessories, gift shops, toy shops, cards and paper goods, home and home accessory shops, florists, antique shops, and book shops;

b. Personal services, including but not limited to barber shops, beauty salons, and dry cleaning;

c. Repair services, including but not limited to television, radio, computer, jewelry, and shoe repair;

d. Food-related shops, including but not limited to restaurants (including outdoor seating areas and excluding drive-in restaurants) and taverns;

e. Copy establishments;

f. Professional services, including but not limited to law offices and consulting services; and

g. Any other use that is determined by the economic and community development director to be of the same general character as the above permitted uses and in accordance with the stated purpose of the district, pursuant to KCC 15.09.065, Interpretation of uses.

22. Permitted uses are limited to storage, warehousing, processing, and conversion of agricultural, dairy, and horticultural products, but not including slaughtering, meat packing, and fuel farm facilities.

23. [Reserved].

24. [Reserved].

25. [Reserved].

26. [Reserved].

27. Other accessory uses and buildings customarily appurtenant to a permitted use, except for onsite hazardous waste treatment and storage facilities, which are not permitted in residential zones.

28. [Reserved].

29. [Reserved].

30. [Reserved].

31. Reuse or replacement of existing structures for nonagricultural uses is allowed where it is shown that the existing structures are obsolete for agricultural use and will have no viable economic use unless they can be put to nonagricultural use. Any replacement structures must maintain or enhance the agricultural appearance of the property. Signs shall be limited to not more than 100 square feet in area per business, and of that amount, freestanding signs shall not exceed 40 square feet in area. No increase in the area of existing impervious surface shall be allowed in connection with a nonagricultural use.

32. Accessory structures composed of at least two walls and a roof, not including accessory uses or structures customarily appurtenant to agricultural uses, are subject to the provisions of KCC 15.08.160.

33. All uses within a complex must be principally permitted uses within the zoning district.

34. [Reserved].

35. Outside storage or operations yards in the I1, I2, and I3 districts shall be permitted only as accessory uses. Such uses are incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the property or structure. Outdoor storage is limited to 15 percent of the total site area in the I1 district, 30 percent of the total site area in the I2 district, and 50 percent of the total site area in the I3 district.

36. [Reserved].

37. In the I1, I2, and I3 districts, commercial, office, and retail uses are allowed; these uses are limited to 30,000 square feet per occupancy.

38. Reference KCC 15.07.040(B), outdoor storage landscaping.

(Ord. No. 3439, § 2, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 3600, § 3, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3612, § 3, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 3907, § 2, 1-6-09; Ord. No. 4166, § 4, 9-1-15; Ord. No. 4174, § 8, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 4316, § 2, 3-19-19; Ord. No. 4317, § 2, 3-19-19; Ord. No. 4320, § 4, 4-2-19; Ord. No. 4325, § 4, 6-4-19; Ord. No. 4355, § 6 (Exh. F), 3-3-20)


15.04.060 Transportation, public, and utilities land uses.  Revised 5/20

	 	Zoning Districts

	Key

P = Principally Permitted Uses

S = Special Uses

C = Conditional Uses

A = Accessory Uses

 

 	A-10	AG	SR-1	SR-3 	SR-4.5 	SR-6 	SR-8	MR-D 	MR-T12	MR-T16	MR-G	MR-M	MR-H 	MHP	NCC	CC 	DC 	DCE 	MTC-1	MTC-2	MCR	CM	GC	I1	I2 	I3 

	Commercial parking lots or structures	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	C	C	C	 	 	C	C	C

	Transportation and transit facilities, including high capacity transit facilities	C

(11)	C

(11)	C

(11)	C

(11)	C

(11)	C

(11)	C

(11)	C

(11)	C

(11)	C

(11)	C

(11)	C

(11)	C

(11)	C

(11)

(12)	C

(11)	C

(11)	C

(11)	C

(11)	C

(11)	C

(11)	C

(11)	C

(11)	C

(11)	C

(11)	C

(11)	P

(6)

(11)

	Rail-truck transfer uses	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	A	A

	Transit operations and maintenance facilities	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	 	 	C

	Utility and transportation facilities: electrical substations, pumping or regulating devices for the transmission of water, gas, steam, petroleum, etc.	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	 	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C

	Public facilities: firehouses, police stations, libraries, and administrative offices of governmental agencies, primary and secondary schools, vocational schools, and colleges	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	 	C	C	C	P	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C

	Accessory uses and structures customarily appurtenant to a permitted use	A	A	A

(13)	A

(13)	A

(13)	A

(13)	A

(13)	A	A	A	A	A	A	 	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A

	Wireless telecommunications facility (WTF) by administrative approval	P

(2)

(3)	P

(2)

(3)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(2)

(3)	P

(2)

(3)	P

(2)

(3)	 	 	P

(2)

(3)	 	 	P

(1)

(3)	P

(1)

(3)	P

(1)

(3)	P

(1)

(3)	P

(1)

(3)	P

(1)

(3)	P

(1)

(3)	P

(1)

(3)

	Wireless telecommunications facility (WTF) by conditional use permit	C

(5)

(3)	C

(5)

(3)	C

(8)	C

(8)	C

(8)	C

(8)	C

(8)	C

(8)	C

(8)	C

(8)	C

(5)

(3)	C

(5)

(3)	C

(5)

(3)	C

(8)	 	C

(5)

(3)	 	 	C

(4)

(3)	C

(4)

(3)	C

(4)

(3)	C

(4)

(3)	C

(4)

(3)	C

(4)

(3)	C

(4)

(3)	C

(4)

(3)

	EV charging station	A

(9)	A

(9)	A

(9)	A

(9)	A

(9)	A

(9)	A

(9)	A

(9)	A

(9)	A

(9)	A

(9)	A

(9)	A

(9)	A

(9)	A

(9)	A

(9)	A

(9)	A

(9)	A

(9)	A

(9)	A

(9)	A

(9)	A

(9)	A

(9)	A

(9)	A

(9)

	Rapid charging station	A

(10)	A

(10)	A

(10)	A

(10)	A

(10)	A

(10)	A

(10)	A

(10)	A

(10)	A

(10)	A

(10)	A

(10)	A

(10)	 	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A

(Ord. No. 3439, § 2, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 3470, § 6, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3543, § 4, 2-20-01; Ord. No. 3600, § 3, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3612, § 3, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 3770, § 7, 11-15-05; Ord. No. 3976, § 2, 10-19-10; Ord. No. 4011, § 10, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 4151, § 2, 5-19-15; Ord. No. 4166, § 4, 9-1-15; Ord. No. 4174, § 9, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 4325, § 5, 6-4-19; Ord. No. 4355, § 6 (Exh. F), 3-3-20)




15.04.065 Transportation, public, and utilities land use development conditions.

1. For WTF towers 90 feet or less for a single user and up to 120 feet for two or more users.

2. For WTF towers that are within the allowable building height for the district in which they are located.

3. All WTFs are subject to applicable portions of KCC 15.08.035.

4. A conditional use permit for a WTF is required if it is greater than 90 feet for a single user or 120 feet for two or more users.

5. A conditional use permit is required if the WTF exceeds the allowable building height of the district.

6. Includes rail-truck transfer uses, except classification yards in the category of “hump yards.”

7. [Reserved].

8. If on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the city or other government entity subject to KCC 15.08.035(I).

9. Level 1 and 2 charging only.

10. Only as part of a general conditional use identified in KCC 15.08.030.

11. High capacity transit facilities shall be consistent with Chapter 15.15 KCC.

12. A conditional use permit is required for high capacity transit facilities that cross multiple zoning districts. No other transportation and transit facilities are allowed in the MHP zoning district.

13. Accessory structures composed of at least two walls and a roof, not including accessory uses or structures customarily appurtenant to agricultural uses, are subject to the provisions of KCC 15.08.160.

(Ord. No. 3439, § 2, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 3600, § 3, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3612, § 3, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 3976, § 2, 10-19-10; Ord. No. 4151, § 3, 5-19-15; Ord. No. 4166, § 4, 9-1-15; Ord. No. 4174, § 10, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 4325, § 6, 6-4-19)




15.04.070 Wholesale and retail land uses.  Revised 5/20

	 	Zoning Districts

	Key

P = Principally Permitted Uses

S = Special Uses

C = Conditional Uses

A = Accessory Uses

 

 	A-10 	AG 	SR-1	SR-3 	SR-4.5 	SR-6 	SR-8 	MR-D	MR-T12	MR-T16 	MR-G	MR-M 	MR-H	MHP 	NCC	CC 	DC 	DCE	MTC-1	MTC-2 	MCR	CM	GC 	I1 	I2 	I3 

	Bakeries and confectioneries 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Wholesale bakery	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P

(28)	P

(28)	P

(28)

	Bulk retail 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P	P	P

(28)	P

(28)	P

(28)

	Recycling centers	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C

	Retail sales of lumber, tools, and other building materials, including preassembled products	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	 	P	P	P

(28)	P

(28)	P

(28)

	Hardware, paint, tile, and wallpaper (retail)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P

(11)	P	P	P	P	P	P	P

(28)	P

(28)	P

(28)

	Farm equipment	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P

(2)

(28)	P

(2)

(28)	P

(2)

(28)

	General merchandise: dry goods, variety, and department stores (retail)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P

(11)	P	P	P	P	P	P	P

(28)	P

(28)	P

(28)

	Food and convenience stores (retail)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P

(11)	P	P	P	P	P	P	P

(28)	P

(28)	P

(28)

	Automobile, aircraft, motorcycle, boat, and recreational vehicles sales (retail)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P

(2)

(28)	P

(2)

(28)	P

(2)

(28)

	Automotive, aircraft, motorcycle, and marine accessories (retail)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	 	P	 	P	P	P	P

(2)

(28)	P

(2)

(28)	P

(2)

(28)

	Gasoline service stations	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S

(6)	S

(6)	 	 	S

(6)	 	 	S

(6)	S

(6)	S

(6)	S

(6)	S

(6)

	Apparel and accessories (retail)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P

(11)	P	P	P	P	P	P	P

(28)	P

(28)	P

(28)

	Furniture, home furnishing (retail)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P

(11)	P	P	P	P	P	P	P

(28)	P

(28)	P

(28)

	Eating and drinking establishments (no drive-through)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P

(11)	P	P	P	P	P	P	P

(28)	P

(28)	P

(28)

	Eating and drinking establishments (with drive-through)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S

(6)

(20)	 	C

(7)

(20)	 	 	 	 	S

(6)

(20)	P

(20)

(28)	P

(20)

(28)	P

(20)

(28)

	Eating facilities for employees 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	 	 	P

(28)	P

(28)	P

(28)

	Drive-through/drive-up businesses (commercial/retail – other than eating/drinking establishments)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C

(22)	P

(20)	 	P

(20)	P

(24)	 	P

(24)	P

(20)	P

(20)	P

(20)

(28)	P

(20)

(28)	P

(20)

(28)

	Miscellaneous retail: drugs, antiques, books, sporting goods, jewelry, florist, photo supplies, video rental, computer supplies, etc.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P

(11)	P	P	P	P	P	P	P

(28)	P

(28)	P

(28)

	Liquor store	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P

(11)	P	P	P	P	P	P	P

(28)	P

(28)	P

(28)

	Farm supplies, hay, grain, feed, fencing, etc. (retail)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P

(2)

(28)	P

(2)

(28)	P

(2)

(28)

	Nurseries, greenhouses, garden supplies, tools, etc.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	 	P	 	 	P	P	P

(2)

(28)	P

(2)

(28)	P

(2)

(28)

	Pet shops (retail and grooming)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P	P	P

(28)	P

(28)	P

(28)

	Computers and electronics (retail)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	 	P	 	P	P	P	P

(28)	P

(28)	P

(28)

	Hotels and motels	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(11)	P	P	P

(25)	P	P	P	P	 	 

	Complexes which include combinations of uses, including a mixture of office, light manufacturing, storage, and commercial uses	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P

(28)	P

(28)	P

(28)

	Outdoor storage (including truck, heavy equipment, and contractor storage yards as allowed by development standards, KCC 15.04.190 and 15.04.195)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(19)	A

(19)	A

(2)

(19)	A

(2)

(19)	A

(2)

(19)

	Accessory uses and structures customarily appurtenant to a permitted use	A	A	A

(9)

(27)	A

(27)	A

(27)	A

(27)	A

(27)	A	A	A	A	A	A	 	A

(16)	A

(16)	A

(17)	A

(17)	A

(17)	A

(17)	A

(17)	A

(16)	A

(16)	A	A	A

	Agriculturally related retail	 	C

(21)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(2)

(28)	P

(2)

(28)	P

(2)

(28)

	Battery exchange station	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	S

(23)	S

(23)	A

(23)	A

(23)	A

(23)	A

(23)	A

(23)	S

(23)	S

(23)	S

(23)	S

(23)	A

(23)

(Ord. No. 3439, § 2, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 3470, § 7, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3543, § 5, 2-20-01; Ord. No. 3600, § 3, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3612, § 3, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 3648, § 1, 7-1-03; Ord. No. 3770, § 8, 11-15-05; Ord. No. 3976, § 2, 10-19-10; Ord. No. 4011, § 11, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 4166, § 4, 9-1-15; Ord. No. 4174, § 11, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 4199, § 1, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 4355, § 6 (Exh. F), 3-3-20)


15.04.080 Wholesale and retail land use development conditions. Revised 5/20

1. [Reserved].

2. Outside storage or operations yards in the I1, I2, and I3 districts shall be permitted only as accessory uses. Such uses are incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the property or structure. Outdoor storage is limited to 15 percent of the total site area in the I1 district, 30 percent of the total site area in the I2 district, and 50 percent of the total site area in the I3 district.

3. [Reserved].

4. [Reserved].

5. [Reserved].

6. Special uses must conform to the development standards listed in KCC 15.08.020.

7. Drive-through restaurants, only if located in a building having at least two stories.

8. Accessory uses are only allowed in cases where development plans demonstrate a relationship between these uses and the principal uses of the property.

9. Other accessory uses and buildings customarily appurtenant to a permitted use, except for onsite hazardous waste treatment and storage facilities, which are not permitted in residential zones.

10. [Reserved].

11. The ground level or street level portion of all buildings in the pedestrian overlay of the DC district, set forth in the map below, must be retail or pedestrian-oriented. Pedestrian-oriented development shall have the main ground floor entry located adjacent to a public street and be physically and visually accessible by pedestrians from the sidewalk, and may include the following uses:

a. Retail establishments, including but not limited to convenience goods, department and variety stores, specialty shops such as apparel and accessories, gift shops, toy shops, cards and paper goods, home and home accessory shops, florists, antique shops, and book shops;

b. Personal services, including but not limited to barber shops, beauty salons, and dry cleaning;

c. Repair services, including but not limited to television, radio, computer, jewelry, and shoe repair;

d. Food-related shops, including but not limited to restaurants (including outdoor seating areas and excluding drive-in restaurants) and taverns;

e. Copy establishments;

f. Professional services, including but not limited to law offices and consulting services; and

g. Any other use that is determined by the economic and community development director to be of the same general character as the above permitted uses and in accordance with the stated purpose of the district, pursuant to KCC 15.09.065, Interpretation of uses.


[IMAGE]


12. Retail convenience grocery sales are allowed in conjunction with a gasoline service station as a special permit use subject to the development standards listed in KCC 15.08.020.

13. [Reserved].

14. [Reserved].

15. [Reserved].

16. Includes incidental storage facilities and loading/unloading areas.

17. Includes incidental storage facilities, which must be enclosed, and loading/unloading areas.

18. [Reserved].

19. Reference KCC 15.07.040(B), outdoor storage landscaping.

20. Whenever feasible, drive-up/drive-through facilities shall be accessed from the rear of a site and run along an interior lot line or building elevation. Landscaping, sufficient to soften the visual impact of vehicle stacking areas, may be required.

21. Retail use must be for sale of agricultural or horticultural products, at least 25 percent of the gross sales value of which are grown within Washington State. Up to 50 percent of the gross sales value may be for seed, gardening equipment and products, private label foods, and locally hand-made products. Any structures must be designed to maintain or enhance the agricultural appearance of the area.

22. Any drive-up/drive-through facility shall be accessory to the principal use to which it is attached.

23. All battery exchange activities and associated storage shall take place within an enclosed building. The development standards listed in KCC 15.08.020(B) shall apply, except that KCC 15.08.020(B)(3) shall not apply.

24. Drive-through/drive-up businesses are permitted only under the following conditions:

a. The development must be within a strip-mall or shopping center.

25. The ground floor or street level must be retail or pedestrian-oriented following the Midway Design Guidelines. The main ground floor entry shall open to a public street with accessory retail uses accessible by pedestrians.

 

26. [Reserved].

27. Accessory structures composed of at least two walls and a roof, not including accessory uses or structures customarily appurtenant to agricultural uses, are subject to the provisions of KCC 15.08.160.

28. In the I1, I2, and I3 districts, commercial, office, and retail uses are allowed, but shall be limited to 30,000 square feet per occupancy.

(Ord. No. 3439, § 2, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 3600, § 3, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3612, § 3, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 3648, § 2, 7-1-03; Ord. No. 3976, § 2, 10-19-10; Ord. No. 4011, § 12, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 4166, § 4, 9-1-15; Ord. No. 4174, § 12, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 4355, § 6 (Exh. F), 3-3-20)


15.04.090 Service land uses. Revised 5/20

 

	 	Zoning Districts

	Key

P = Principally Permitted Uses

S = Special Uses

C = Conditional Uses

A = Accessory Uses

 

 	A-10 	AG 	SR-1	SR-3 	SR-4.5 	SR-6 	SR-8 	MR-D 	MR-T12	MR-T16 	MR-G 	MR-M	MR-H	MHP 	NCC	CC	DC 	DCE 	MTC-1 	MTC-2 	MCR 	CM	GC 	I1	I2 	I3 

	Finance, insurance, real estate services	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(22)	P	P

(1)

(12)	P	P	P	P	P	P	P

(2)	P

(2)	P

(2)

	Personal services: laundry, dry cleaning, barber, salons, shoe repair, launderettes	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(22)	P	P

(12)	P	P	P	P	P	P	P

(2)	P

(2)	P

(2)

	Mortuaries	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(12)	 	P	 	 	P	P	 	 	 

	Home day-care	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	 	 	 

	Day-care center	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P

(2)	P

(2)	 

	Business services, duplicating and blue printing, travel agencies, and employment agencies	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(12)	P	P	P	P	P	P	P

(2)	P

(2)	P

(2)

	Building maintenance and pest control	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	 	P	P	P

(2)	P

(2)	P

(2)

	Outdoor storage (including truck, heavy equipment, and contractor storage yards as allowed by development standards, KCC 15.04.190 and 15.04.195)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	A	A

(9)

(11)	A

(9)

(11)	A

(9)

(11)

	Rental and leasing services for cars, trucks, trailers, furniture, and tools	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	 	P	P	P

(2)

(9)	P

(2)

(9)	P

(2)

(9)

	Auto repair and washing services (including body work)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	 	P	 	 	P	P	P

(2)

(9)	P

(2)

(9)	P

(2)

(9)

	Repair services: watch, TV, electrical, electronic, upholstery	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P

(12)	P	P	 	 	P	P	P

(2)	P

(2)	P

(2)

	Professional services: medical, clinics, and other health care-related services	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(20)	P	 	P	P	P	P	P	P	P

(2)	P

(2)	P

(2)

	Opiate substitution treatment facility	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C

(3)	C

(3)	 

	Contract construction service offices: building construction, plumbing, paving, and landscaping	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(16)	 	 	P 	P

(16)	P

(2)

(9)	P

(2)

(9)	P

(2)

(9)

	Educational services: vocational, trade, art, music, dancing, barber, and beauty	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	P	P	P

(2)

(5)	P

(2)

(5)	P

(2)

(5)

	Churches	S

(4)	 	S

(4)	S

(4)	S

(4)	S

(4)	S

(4)	S

(4)	S

(4)	S

(4)	S

(4)	S

(4)	 	 	S

(4)	S

(4)	 	S

(4)	S

(4)	S

(4)	S

(4)	S

(4)	S

(4)	S

(4)	S

(4)	 

	Administrative and professional offices – general	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P

(12)	P	P	P	P	P	P	P

(2)	P

(2)	P

(2)

	Municipal uses and buildings	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(13)	P

(13)	 	P	P

(13)	P

(13)	P

(13)	P

(13)	P

(13)	P

(2)

(13)	P

(2)

(13)	P

(2)

(13)

	Research, development, and testing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	P	P	P	P	P	P

	Accessory uses and structures customarily appurtenant to a permitted use	A	A	A

(7)

(24)	A

(24)	A

(24)	A

(24)	A

(24)	A	A	A	A	A	A	 	A

(18)

 	A

(18)

 	A

(19)

 	A

(19)

 	A

(19)

 	A

(19)

 	A

(19)	A

(18)

 	A

(18)

 	A	A	A

	Boarding kennels, pet day care, and breeding establishments	 	C	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	 	 	C	P

(2)	P

(2)	P

(2)

	Veterinary clinics and veterinary hospitals	 	C	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(8)	 	 	P

(8)	 	P

(8)	P

(8)	P

(8)	P

(2)	P

(2)	P

(2)

	Administrative or executive offices associated with an industrial operation	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(2)	P

(2)	P

(2)

	Offices incidental and necessary to the conduct of a principally permitted use	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	A	A	A	A	A	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(2)	P

(2)	P

(2)

(Ord. No. 3439, § 2, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 3470, § 8, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3543, § 6, 2-20-01; Ord. No. 3600, § 3, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3612, § 3, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 3647, § 1, 7-1-03; Ord. No. 3648, § 3, 7-1-03; Ord. No. 3699, § 1, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 3770, § 9, 11-15-05; Ord. No. 3977, § 1, 10-19-10; Ord. No. 4011, § 13, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 4166, § 4, 9-1-15; Ord. No. 4174, § 13, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 4193, § 2, 4-19-16; Ord. No 4199, § 2, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 4355, § 6 (Exh. F), 3-3-20)


15.04.100 Service land use development conditions. Revised 5/20

1. Banks and financial institutions (excluding drive-through).

2. Service uses in the I1, I2, and I3 zoning districts are allowed, but shall be limited to 30,000 square feet per occupancy.

3. Opiate substitution treatment facilities are permitted only with a conditional use permit, within the area depicted in the map below, and must provide indoor waiting areas of at least 15 percent of the total floor area. In addition to the general requirements of KCC 15.08.030, all applications shall contain and be approved by the city based on the following information:
[IMAGE]


a. A detailed written description of the proposed and potential services to be provided, the source or sources of funding, and identification of any applicable public regulatory agencies;

b. A written statement of need, in statistical or narrative form, for the proposed project currently and over the following 10-year period;

c. An inventory of known, existing or proposed facilities, by name and address, within King County, or within the region, serving the same or similar needs as the proposed facility;

d. An explanation of the need and suitability for the proposed facility at the proposed location;

e. An analysis of the proposed facility’s consistency with the City of Kent Comprehensive Plan and development regulations, and plans and policies of other affected jurisdictions, including but not limited to the King County Countywide Planning Policies;

f. Documentation of public involvement efforts to date, including public and agency comments received, and plans for future public participation; and

g. A proposed “good faith” agreement for neighborhood partnership. This agreement shall state the goals of the partnership and address loitering prevention steps the facility owner/operator will take as well as frequency of planned maintenance and upkeep of the exterior of the facility (including, but not limited to, trash and litter removal, landscape maintenance, and graffiti). The agreement shall serve as the basis for a partnership between the city, the facility, and local businesses, and will outline steps partners will take to resolve concerns.

No opiate substitution treatment facility may be located within 500 feet of an existing opiate substitution treatment facility.

4. Special uses must conform to the development standards listed in KCC 15.08.020.

5. Specialized training facilities or satellite campuses offering industrial workforce training programs are not subject to the 30,000 square foot limitation.

6. [Reserved].

7. Other accessory uses and buildings customarily appurtenant to a permitted use, except for onsite hazardous waste treatment and storage facilities, which are not permitted in residential zones.

8. Veterinary clinics and animal hospitals when located no closer than 150 feet to any residential use, provided the animals are housed indoors, with no outside runs, and the building is soundproofed. Soundproofing must be designed by competent acoustical engineers.

9. Outside storage or operations yards in the I1, I2, and I3 districts shall be permitted only as accessory uses. Such uses are incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the property or structure. Outdoor storage is limited to 15 percent of the total site area in the I1 district, 30 percent of the total site area in the I2 district, and 50 percent of the total site area in the I3 district.

10. [Reserved].

11. Reference KCC 15.07.040(B), outdoor storage landscaping.

12. The ground level or street level portion of all buildings in the pedestrian overlay of the DC district, set forth in the map below, must be pedestrian-oriented. Pedestrian-oriented development shall have the main ground floor entry located adjacent to a public street and be physically and visually accessible by pedestrians from the sidewalk, and may include the following uses:

a. Retail establishments, including but not limited to convenience goods, department and variety stores, specialty shops such as apparel and accessories, gift shops, toy shops, cards and paper goods, home and home accessory shops, florists, antique shops, and book shops;

b. Personal services, including but not limited to barber shops, beauty salons, and dry cleaning;

c. Repair services, including but not limited to television, radio, computer, jewelry, and shoe repair;

d. Food-related shops, including but not limited to restaurants (including outdoor seating areas and excluding drive-in restaurants) and taverns;

e. Copy establishments;

f. Professional services, including but not limited to law offices and consulting services; and

g. Any other use that is determined by the economic and community development director to be of the same general character as the above permitted uses and in accordance with the stated purpose of the district, pursuant to KCC 15.09.065, Interpretation of uses.


[IMAGE]


13. Except for such uses and buildings subject to KCC 15.04.150.

14. [Reserved].

15. [Reserved].

16. Contract construction services office use does not include contractor storage yards, which is a separate use listed in KCC 15.04.040.

17. Outside storage or operations yards are permitted only as accessory uses. Such uses are incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the property or structure.

18. Includes incidental storage facilities and loading/unloading areas.

19. Includes incidental storage facilities, which must be enclosed, and loading/unloading areas.

20. Shall only apply to medical and dental offices and/or neighborhood clinics.

21. [Reserved].

22. Any associated drive-up/drive-through facility shall be accessory and shall require a conditional use permit.

23. [Reserved].

24. Accessory structures composed of at least two walls and a roof, not including accessory uses or structures customarily appurtenant to agricultural uses, are subject to the provisions of KCC 15.08.160.

(Ord. No. 3439, § 2, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 3600, § 3, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3612, § 3, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 3647, § 2, 7-1-03; Ord. No. 3648, § 4, 7-1-03; Ord. No. 3977, § 2, 10-19-10; Ord. No. 4166, § 4, 9-1-15; Ord. No. 4174, § 14, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 4193, § 3, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 4355, § 6 (Exh. F), 3-3-20)


15.04.110 Cultural, entertainment, and recreation land uses. Revised 5/20

 

	 	Zoning Districts

	Key

P = Principally Permitted Uses

S = Special Uses

C = Conditional Uses

A = Accessory Uses

 

 	A-10	AG 	SR-1	SR-3 	SR-4.5 	SR-6 	SR-8 	MR-D 	MR-T12 	MR-T16 	MR-G	MR-M 	MR-H	MHP 	NCC 	CC 	DC 	DCE 	MTC-1	MTC-2 	MCR 	CM	GC 	I1 	I2	I3

	Performing and cultural arts uses, such as art galleries/studios	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(3)	P	P	P	P	P	P	P

(8)	P

(8)	P

(8)

	House-banked card rooms	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

C

(1)	 	 	 	 	 	P

(1)	P

C

(1)	P

(4)

(8)	P

(4)

(8)	P

(4)

(8)

	Historic and monument sites	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P

(8)	P

(8)	P

(8)

	Public assembly (indoor): sports facilities, arenas, auditoriums and exhibition halls, bowling alleys, dart-playing facilities, skating rinks, community clubs, athletic clubs, recreation centers, theaters (excluding school facilities)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	C	 	C	P	P	P

(8)	P

(8)	P

(8)

	Public assembly (outdoor): fairgrounds and amusement parks, tennis courts, athletic fields, miniature golf, go‑cart tracks, drive‑in theaters, etc.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	P	P	P

(8)	P

(8)	P

(8)

	Open space use: cemeteries, parks, playgrounds, golf courses, and other recreation facilities, including buildings or structures associated therewith	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	 	C	C	P

(6)

C	P

(6)

C

 	C

(9)	C

(9)	C

(9)	P

(7)

C

 	P

(7)

C	C	C	C

	Employee recreation areas	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(8)	P

(8)	P

(8)

	Private clubs, fraternal lodges, etc.	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	 	C	C	C	C	P

(5)

C	C	P

(5)

C	C	P

(5)

C	P

(8)	P

(8)	P

(8)

	Recreational vehicle parks	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	 	 

	Accessory uses and structures customarily appurtenant to a permitted use	A	 	A

(10)	A

(10)	A

(10)	A

(10)	A

(10)	A	A	A	A	A	A	 	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A

	Recreational buildings in MHP	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	A	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

(Ord. No. 3435, §1, 1-5-99; Ord. No. 3439, § 2, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 3470, § 9, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3543, § 7, 2-20-01; Ord. No. 3600, § 3, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3612, § 3, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 3770, § 10, 11-15-05; Ord. No. 4011, § 14, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 4166, § 4, 9-1-15; Ord. No. 4174, § 15, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 4199, § 3, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 4257, § 15, 11-21-17; Ord. No. 4355, § 6 (Exh. F), 3-3-20)


15.04.120 Cultural, entertainment, and recreation land use development conditions. Revised 5/20

1. House-banked card rooms are not allowed in areas zoned GC-MU (general commercial – mixed use) or CC-MU (community commercial – mixed use) unless authorized by a conditional use permit. House-banked card rooms are not allowed in areas designated urban center on the land use plan map. Should any court of competent jurisdiction find that the city zoning for house-banked card rooms is unconstitutional or illegal, the city elects to permit a legally existing card room to continue operation as a nonconforming legal use and otherwise bans card rooms.

2. [Reserved].

3. The ground level or street level portion of all buildings in the pedestrian overlay of the DC district, set forth in the map below, must be retail or pedestrian oriented. Pedestrian-oriented development shall have the main ground floor entry located adjacent to a public street and be physically and visually accessible by pedestrians from the sidewalk, and may include the following uses:

a. Retail establishments, including but not limited to convenience goods, department and variety stores, specialty shops such as apparel and accessories, gift shops, toy shops, cards and paper goods, home and home accessory shops, florists, antique shops, and book shops;

b. Personal services, including but not limited to barber shops, beauty salons, and dry cleaning;

c. Repair services, including but not limited to television, radio, computer, jewelry, and shoe repair;

d. Food-related shops, including but not limited to restaurants (including outdoor seating areas and excluding drive-in restaurants) and taverns;

e. Copy establishments;

f. Professional services, including but not limited to law offices and consulting services; and

g. Any other use that is determined by the economic and community development director to be of the same general character as the above permitted uses and in accordance with the stated purpose of the district, pursuant to KCC 15.09.065, use interpretations.


[IMAGE]


4. Should any court of competent jurisdiction find that the city zoning for house-banked card rooms is unconstitutional or illegal, the city elects to permit a legally existing house-banked card room to continue operation as a nonconforming legal use and otherwise bans house-banked card rooms.

5. Business, civic, social, and fraternal associations and service offices are principally permitted uses.

6. Principally permitted uses are limited to parks and playgrounds.

7. Principally permitted uses are limited to golf driving ranges.

8. In the I1, I2, and I3 districts, cultural, entertainment, and recreational uses are allowed but shall be limited to 30,000 square feet per occupancy in the I1, I2, and I3 zoning districts.

9. Conditionally permitted uses are limited to parks and playgrounds.

10. Accessory structures composed of at least two walls and a roof, not including accessory uses or structures customarily appurtenant to agricultural uses, are subject to the provisions of KCC 15.08.160.

(Ord. No. 3439, § 2, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 3600, § 3, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3612, § 3, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 4011, § 15, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 4166, § 4, 9-1-15; Ord. No. 4174, § 16, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 4257, § 16, 11-21-17; Ord. No. 4355, § 6 (Exh. F), 3-3-20)


15.04.130 Resource land uses. Revised 5/20

 

	 	Zoning Districts

	Key

P = Principally Permitted Uses

S = Special Uses

C = Conditional Uses

A = Accessory Uses

 

 	A-10 	AG 	SR-1 	SR-3 	SR-4.5 	SR-6 	SR-8 	MR-D 	MR-T12 	MR-T16 	MR-G 	MR-M 	MR-H 	MHP 	NCC 	CC	DC	DCE 	MTC-1 	MTC-2 	MCR 	CM	GC 	I1 	I2 	I3 

	Agricultural uses such as planting and harvesting of crops, animal husbandry (including wholesale nurseries and greenhouses)	P	P	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Crop and tree farming	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P

	Storage, processing, and conversion of agricultural products (not including slaughtering or meat packing)	 	P	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P

(5)

(6)	P

(5)

(6)	P

(5)

(6)

	Accessory uses and structures customarily appurtenant to a permitted use	A	A	A

(1)

(4)	A

(4)	A

(4)	A

(4)	A

(4)	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A	A

	Roadside stands	A

(3)	A

(2)	A

(3)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

(Ord. No. 3439, § 2, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 3470, § 10, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3543, § 8, 2-20-01; Ord. No. 3600, § 3, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3612, § 3, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 3770, § 11, 11-15-05; Ord. No. 4011, § 16, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 4166, § 4, 9-1-15; Ord. No. 4174, § 17, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 4355, § 6 (Exh. F), 3-3-20)


15.04.140 Resource land use development conditions. Revised 5/20

1. Other accessory uses and buildings customarily appurtenant to a permitted use, except for onsite hazardous waste treatment and storage facilities, which are not permitted in residential zones.

2. Roadside stand not exceeding 400 square feet in floor area exclusively for agricultural products grown on the premises.

3. Roadside stands not exceeding 400 square feet in floor area, and not over 20 lineal feet on any side, primarily for sale of agricultural products on the premises.

4. Accessory structures composed of at least two walls and a roof, not including accessory uses or structures customarily appurtenant to agricultural uses, are subject to the provisions of KCC 15.08.160.

5. Outside storage or operations yards in the I1, I2, and I3 districts shall be permitted only as accessory uses. Such uses are incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the property or structure. Outdoor storage is limited to 15 percent of the total site area in the I1 district, 30 percent of the total site area in the I2 district, and 50 percent of the total site area in the I3 district.

6. Reference KCC 15.07.040(B), outdoor storage landscaping.

(Ord. No. 3439, § 2, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 3600, § 3, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3612, § 3, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 4166, § 4, 9-1-15; Ord. No. 4174, § 18, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 4355, § 6 (Exh. F), 3-3-20)


15.04.150 Special use combining district, SU. Revised 5/20

It is the purpose of the SU district to provide for special controls for certain uses which do not clearly fit into other districts, which may be due to technological and social changes, or which are of such unique character as to warrant special attention in the interest of the city’s optimum development and the preservation and enhancement of its environmental quality. A special use combining district is imposed on an existing zoning district, permitting the special use as well as uses permitted by the underlying zone. The combining district becomes void if substantial construction has not begun within a one-year period, and the district reverts to its original zoning designation. It is the intent of the special use combining regulations to provide the city with adequate procedures for controlling and reviewing such uses and to discourage application for speculative rezoning.

A. Uses subject to special use combining district regulations. The following list is illustrative of the types of uses subject to special use combining district regulations and is not intended to be exclusive:

1. Uses which occupy or would occupy large areas of land.

2. Uses which would involve the construction of buildings or other structures of unusual height or mass.

3. Uses which house, employ, or serve large numbers of people.

4. Uses which generate heavy traffic.

5. Uses which have unusual impact on environmental quality of the area.

6. Any use which does not lend itself to an interpretation of substantial similarity to other uses identified or described in this title.

7. Uses which, in the judgment of the planning manager, warrant review by the land use and planning board and the city council.

8. Examples of uses subject to review as described in this subsection would include but are not limited to the following:

a. Commercial uses: sports stadiums, rodeos, fairgrounds, exhibition or convention halls, merchandise marts, and drive-in theaters.

b. Special environmental problems posed by: refineries, nuclear power generating plants, airports, heliports, sanitary landfills, extractive industries, solid waste incinerators, or energy/resource recovery facilities.

B. Application procedures. The application procedure for a special use combining district shall be the same as for an amendment to this title as provided in KCC 15.09.050, except that development plan approval is concurrent with the combining district.

C. Documentation required. Required documentation is as follows:

1. A vicinity map drawn to a scale not smaller than 1,000 feet to the inch showing the site in relation to its surrounding area, including streets, roads, streams, or other bodies of water, the development characteristics and zoning pattern of the area, and a scale and north arrow. The vicinity map may be in sketch form but shall be drawn with sufficient accuracy to reasonably orient the reader to the vicinity, and to adequately convey the required information.

2. A map or drawing of the site drawn to a scale acceptable to the planning services, generally 100 feet to the inch. The map or drawing shall show the following information:

a. Dimensions and names of streets bounding or touching the site.

b. Such existing or proposed features as streams or other bodies of water, rights-of-way, easements, and other physical or legal features which may affect or be affected by the proposed development.

c. Existing and proposed topography at contour intervals of not more than five feet in areas having slopes exceeding three percent, and not more than two feet in areas having slopes of less than three percent.

d. Accurate legal description of the property.

e. Existing and proposed structures or buildings, including the identification of types and proposed use of the structures. All uses must be compatible with the major use.

f. Off-street parking and loading facilities.

g. Dimensions of the site, distances from property lines, and space between structures.

h. Tentative routing of domestic water lines, storm drains, sanitary sewers, and other utilities, including an identification of planned disposal or runoff.

i. Elevations, perspective renderings, or such other graphic material or evidence to illustrate effect on the view enjoyed by and from other properties in the vicinity, if required by the planning department.

j. Architectural renderings of buildings.

k. A written statement providing the following information:

i. Program for development, including staging or timing.

ii. Proposed ownership pattern upon completion of development.

iii. Basic content of restrictive covenants, if any.

iv. Provisions to ensure permanence and maintenance of open space through means acceptable to the city.

v. Statement or tabulation of number of persons to be employed, served, or housed in the proposed development.

vi. Statement describing the relationship of the proposed development to the city comprehensive plan.

vii. Statement indicating availability of existing or proposed sanitary sewers.

3. Such other data or information as the planning department may require.

D. Development standards. In reviewing and approving proposed developments falling under the purview of this section, the hearing examiner and city council shall make the following findings:

1. That the location for the proposed use is reasonable.

2. That existing or proposed trafficways are adequate to serve new development.

3. That setback, height, and bulk of buildings are acceptable for the proposed use and for the vicinity in which it is located.

4. That landscaping and other site improvements are comparable to the highest standards set forth for other developments as set out in this title.

5. That the performance standards pertaining to air and water pollution, noise levels, etc., are comparable to the highest standards specified for other uses as set out in this title.

6. That the proposed development is in the public interest and serves a need of community-wide or regional importance. In reviewing and approving special uses, the hearing examiner and the city council may impose such conditions as they deem necessary in the interest of the welfare of the city and the protection of the environment.

E. Period of validity. Any special use combining district shall remain effective only for one year unless the use is begun within that time or construction has commenced. If not in use or construction has not commenced within one year of the granting of the special use combining district, the combining district shall become invalid, and the original zoning designation of the land shall apply.

F. Minor and major adjustments.

1. If minor adjustments are made following the adoption of the final development plan and approval of the combining district, such adjustments shall be approved by the planning manager prior to the issuance of a building permit. Minor adjustments are those which may affect the precise dimensions or siting of buildings approved in the final plan, or the density of the development or open space provided.

2. Major adjustments are those which, as determined by the planning director, substantially change the basic design, density, open space uses, or other similar requirements or provisions. Authorization for major adjustments shall be made by the city council.

3. The provisions of this subsection pertaining to minor and major adjustments shall apply to various parts of a staged development.

(Ord. No. 3439, § 2, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 3600, § 3, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3612, § 3, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 4166, § 4, 9-1-15; Ord. No. 4355, § 6 (Exh. F), 3-3-20)


15.04.160 Development standards.

The development standards tables in KCC 15.04.170 and 15.04.190 determine the specific development standards for a zoning district. The development standards are located on the horizontal rows and the zoning districts are located on the vertical columns of these tables. The minimum dimensional requirements are located in the box at the intersection of the column and the row. The parenthetical numbers in the boxes identify specific requirements applicable either to a special use or the entire zone. The parenthetical numbers correspond to numbers in the subsection immediately following each table.

(Ord. No. 3439, § 2, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 3600, § 3, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3612, § 3, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 4166, § 4, 9-1-15)


15.04.170 Agricultural and residential zone development standards. Revised 8/19 Revised 5/20

 

	 	Zoning Districts

	A-10 Agricultural	SR-1 Residential Agricultural	SR-3 Single-Family Residential	SR-4.5 Single-Family Residential	SR-6 Single-Family Residential	SR-8 Single-Family Residential	MR-D Duplex Multifamily Residential	MR-T12 Multifamily Residential Townhouse	MR-T16 Multifamily Residential Townhouse	MR-G Low Density Multifamily Residential	MR-M Medium Density Multifamily Residential	MR-H High Density Multifamily Residential	MHP Mobile Home Park Combining

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	SF	Duplex	SF	Duplex	MF	SF	Duplex	MF	SF	Duplex	MF	SF	Duplex	MF	SF	Duplex	MF	 

	Maximum density: dwelling units per acre	1 du/

10 ac	1 du/ac	3.63 dus/ac	4.53 dus/ac	6.05 dus/ac	8.71 dus/ac	8.71 dus/ac	10.89 dus/ac	12.0 dus/ac	 	12.0 dus/ac	16.0 dus/ac	 	16.0 dus/ac	16.0 dus/ac	 	16.0 dus/ac	23.0 dus/ac	 	23.0 dus/ac	40.0 dus/ac	 	40.0 dus/ac	 

	Minimum lot area: square feet or acres, as noted	10 ac	34,700 sq ft	9,600 sq ft	7,600 sq ft (37)	5,700 sq ft (37)	4,000 sq ft (37)	4,000 sq ft	8,000 sq ft	none	8,000 sq ft	8,500/ 3,500 sq ft (27)	none	8,000 sq ft (35)	8,500/3,500 sq ft (35)	none	8,000 sq ft	8,500/ 2,500 sq ft (1)	none	8,000 sq ft	8,500/ 1,600 sq ft

(2)	none	8,000 sq ft	8,500/ 900 sq ft (3)	 

	Minimum lot width: feet (4)	60 ft 	60 ft 	50 ft	50 ft

(37)	50 ft

(37)	40 ft

(37)	25 ft	80 ft	25 ft	80 ft	80 ft	25 ft	80 ft	80 ft	25 ft	80 ft	80 ft	25 ft	80 ft	80 ft	25 ft	80 ft	80 ft	 

	Maximum site coverage: percent of site	30%	30%	45%  (5)	45%  (5)	50%  (5)	55%  (5)	55% (5)	40% (5)	55%  (5)	40% (5)	45% (5)	55%  (5)	40% (5)	45% (5)	55%  (5)	40% (5)	45%	55%  (5)	40% (5)	45%	55%  (5)	40% (5)	50%	 

	Minimum yard requirements: feet		(22)

	Front yard 	20 ft  (6)	20 ft (6)	10 ft  (6) (8) (9)	10 ft  (6) (8) (9)	10 ft  (6) (8) (9)	10 ft  (6) (8) (9)	10 ft  (6) (8) (9)	10 ft  (6) (8) (9)	10 ft  (6) (8) (9)	10 ft  (6) (8) (9)	10 ft	10 ft  (6) (8) (9)	10 ft  (6) (8) (9)	10 ft 	10 ft  (6) (8) (9)	10 ft  (6) (8) (9)	10 ft	10 ft  (6) (8) (9)	10 ft  (6) (8) (9)	10 ft	10 ft  (6) (8) (9)	10 ft  (6) (8) (9)	10 ft	 

	Side yard	15 ft 	15 ft 	5 ft	5 ft	5 ft	5 ft	5 ft (30)	5 ft	5 ft (30)	5 ft	(11)	5 ft (30)	5 ft	(11)	5 ft (30)	5 ft	(11)	5 ft (30)	5 ft	(11)	5 ft (30)	5 ft	(11)	 

	Side yard on flanking street of a corner lot	20 ft	20 ft 	10 ft (9)	10 ft (9)	10 ft (9)	10 ft (9)	10 ft (9)	10 ft (9)	10 ft (9)	10 ft (9)	15 ft	10 ft (9)	10 ft (9)	15 ft	10 ft (9)	10 ft (9)	15 ft	10 ft (9)	10 ft (9)	15 ft	10 ft (9)	10 ft (9)	15 ft	 

	Rear yard	20 ft	15 ft	5 ft	10 ft	10 ft	10 ft	5 ft	8 ft	5 ft	8 ft	20 ft	5 ft	8 ft	20 ft	5 ft	8 ft	20 ft	5 ft	8 ft	20 ft	5 ft	8 ft	20 ft	 

	Additional setbacks/distances between buildings	(12)	(12)	 	 	 	 	 	 	(32)	(32)	(14) (15)

(32)	(31)

(32)	(31)

(32)	(14) (15)

(31)

(32)	(31)	(31)	(14) (15)

(31)	 	 	(14) (15)	 	 	(14) (15)	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	SF	Duplex	SF	Duplex	MF	SF	Duplex	MF	SF	Duplex	MF	SF	Duplex	MF	SF	Duplex	MF	 

	Height limitation: in stories/not to exceed in feet	2.5 stry/  35 ft (16)	2.5 stry/  35 ft	2.5 stry/  35 ft	2.5 stry/ 35 ft	2.5 stry/  35 ft	2.5 stry/  35 ft	2.5 stry/  35 ft	2.5 stry/  35 ft	2.5 stry/  35 ft	2.5 stry/  35 ft	3 stry/ 40 ft	2.5 stry/  35 ft	2.5 stry/  35 ft	3 stry/ 40 ft	2.5 stry/  35 ft	2.5 stry/  35 ft	3 stry/ 40 ft	2.5 stry/  35 ft	2.5 stry/  35 ft	3 stry/ 40 ft	2.5 stry/  35 ft	2.5 stry/ 

35 ft	4 stry/ 50 ft	 

	Maximum impervious surface: percent of total parcel area	40%  (19)	40%  (19)	50%  (23)	60%  (23)	70%  (23)	75%  (23)	75%  (19)	70%  (19)	75%  (19)	70%  (19)	70%  (19)	75%  (19)	70%  (19)	70%  (19)	75%  (19)	70%  (19)	 	75%  (19)	70%  (19)	 	75%  (19)	70%  (19)	 	 

	Zero lot line and clustering (24)	The provisions in KCC 15.08.300, 15.08.310, 15.08.320, and 15.08.330 shall apply.	 

	Signs	The sign regulations of Chapter 15.06 KCC shall apply.	 

	Off-street parking	The off-street parking requirements of Chapter 15.05 KCC shall apply.	 

	Landscaping	The landscaping requirements of Chapter 15.07 KCC shall apply.	 

	Design review	 	(26)

(39)

(40)	(25)

(26)

(39)

(40)	(25)

(26)

(39)

(40)	(25)

(26)

(39)

(40)	(25)

(26)

(39)

(40)	(25)(40)	(26)(40)	(26)(34)(40)	(25)(26)(40)	(25)(26)(34)(40)	(25)(26)(40)	 

	Additional standards	Additional standards for specific uses are contained in Chapters 15.08 and 15.09 KCC.	 

	(20)

(41)	(31)

(33)

(36)

(41)	(33)

(36)	(33)

(36)

(41)	(33)

(36)	(33)

(36)

(41)	(36)	(36)	 	(28)

(29)

(36)	 	 	(28)

(29)

(36)	 	(36)

(41)	(36)

(41)	(36)

(41)	(36)

(41)	(36)

(41)	(36)

(41)	(36)	(36)	(36)	(36)

(Ord. No. 3439, § 2, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 3470, § 11, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3508, § 1, 5-2-00; Ord. No. 3521, § 1, 8-15-00; Ord. No. 3523, § 1, 9-19-00; Ord. No. 3551, § 12, 3-20-01; Ord. No. 3600, § 3, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3612, § 3, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 3663, § 7, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 3742, § 1, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 3770, § 12, 11-15-05; Ord. No. 3792, § 2, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 3830, § 16, 3-6-07; Ord. No. 4003, § 1, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 4166, § 4, 9-1-15; Ord. No. 4225, § 8, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 4257, § 17, 11-21-17; Ord. No. 4329, § 6, 7-16-19; Ord. No. 4355, § 6 (Exh. F), 3-3-20)


15.04.180 Agricultural and residential land use development standard conditions. Revised 5/20

1. Minimum lot area is 8,500 square feet for the first two dwelling units, and 2,500 square feet for each additional dwelling unit.

2. Minimum lot area is 8,500 square feet for the first two dwelling units, and 1,600 square feet for each additional dwelling unit.

3. Minimum lot area is 8,500 square feet for the first two dwelling units, and 900 square feet for each additional dwelling unit.

4. To determine minimum lot width for irregular lots, a circle of applicable diameter (the minimum lot width permitted) shall be scaled within the proposed boundaries of the lot; provided, that an access easement to another lot is not included within the circle.

5. Interior yards shall not be computed as part of the site coverage.

6. Porches and private shared courtyard features may be built within the front building setback line.

7. For properties abutting on West Valley Highway, the frontage on West Valley Highway shall be considered the front yard.

8. Proposed front yards less than 20 feet in depth are subject to approval by the planning manager, based on review and recommendation from the public works department relative to the existing and future traffic volumes and right-of-way requirements as specified in the city comprehensive transportation plan and city construction standards.

9. At least 20 linear feet of driveway shall be provided between any garage, carport, or other primary parking area and the street property line with the exception of an alley property line.

10. An aggregate side yard of 30 feet shall be provided. A minimum of 10 feet shall be provided for each side yard. On a corner lot the side yard setback shall be a minimum of 20 feet from the property line.

11. Each side yard shall be a minimum of 10 percent of the lot width; however, regardless of lot width, the yard width need not be more than 30 feet. For multifamily townhouse developments that attach three units or less, in the MRT-12 or MRT‑16 zoning districts, the aggregate yard width need not be more than 30 feet, but in no case shall a yard be less than 10 feet.

12. Structures for feeding, housing, and care of animals, except household pets, shall be set back 50 feet from any property line.

13. Additional setbacks for the agricultural general AG zoning district.

a. Structures for feeding, housing, and care of animals shall be set back 50 feet from any property line.

b. Transitional conditions shall exist when an AG district adjoins a residential district containing a density of two dwelling units or more per acre or a proposed residential area indicated on the city comprehensive plan. Such transitional conditions shall not exist where the separation includes an intervening use such as a river, railroad main line, major topographic differential, or other similar conditions, or where the industrial properties face on a limited access surface street on which the housing does not face. When transitional conditions exist as defined in this subsection, a yard of not less than 50 feet shall be provided.

c. Setbacks, Green River. Industrial development in the AG district abutting the Green River, or Russell Road or Frager Road where such roads follow the river bank, shall be set back from the ordinary high-water mark of the river a minimum of 200 feet. Such setbacks are in accordance with the city comprehensive plan and in accordance with the high quality of site development typically required for the industrial park areas of the city and in accordance with the State Shoreline Management Act of 1971, and shall be no more or less restrictive than the Shoreline Management Act.

14. An inner court providing access to a double-row building shall be a minimum of 20 feet.

15. The distance between principal buildings shall be at least one-half the sum of the height of both buildings; provided, however, that in no case shall the distance be less than 12 feet. This requirement shall also apply to portions of the same building separated from each other by a court or other open space.

16. The height limitations shall not apply to barns and silos; provided, that they are not located within 50 feet of any lot line.

17. Beyond this height, to a height not greater than either four stories or 60 feet, there shall be added one additional foot of yard for each additional foot of building height.

18. The planning manager shall be authorized to approve a height greater than four stories or 60 feet, provided such height does not detract from the continuity of the area. When a request is made to exceed the building height limit, the planning manager may impose such conditions, within a reasonable amount of time, as may be necessary to reduce any incompatibilities with surrounding uses.

19. Except for lots used for agricultural practices, the maximum impervious surface area allowed shall be 10,000 square feet when the lot is greater than one acre.

20. The following uses are prohibited:

a. The removal of topsoil for any purpose.

b. Grade and fill operations; provided, that limited grade and fill may be approved as needed to construct permitted buildings or structures.

c. All subsurface activities, including excavation for underground utilities, pipelines, or other underground installations, that cause permanent disruption of the surface of the land. Temporarily disrupted soil surfaces shall be restored in a manner consistent with agricultural uses.

d. Dumping or storage of nonagricultural solid or liquid waste, or of trash, rubbish, or noxious materials.

e. Activities that violate sound agricultural soil and water conservation management practices.

21. Outdoor storage for industrial uses shall be located at the rear of a principally permitted structure and shall be completely fenced.

22. Mobile home park combining district, MHP. The standards and procedures of the city mobile home park code shall apply. General requirements and standards for mobile home park design, KCC 12.04.055; mobile home parks, Chapter 12.05 KCC.

23. Except for lots used for agricultural practices, the maximum impervious surface area allowed shall be 10,000 square feet.

24. Minimum lot width, building setbacks, and minimum lot size regulations may be modified consistent with provisions for zero lot line and clustering housing development.

25. Assisted living facilities, independent senior living facilities, and residential facilities with health care are subject to multifamily design review as provided for in KCC 15.09.045(D), except when located within downtown or along Meeker Street from 64th Avenue South to Kent-Des Moines Road, where development is subject to downtown design review pursuant to KCC 15.09.046.

26. The requirements of KCC 15.09.045(D) for multifamily design review shall apply to any multifamily dwelling or transitional housing of three or more units, including triplex townhouse structures, except when located within downtown or along Meeker Street from 64th Avenue South to Kent-Des Moines Road (where development is subject to downtown design review pursuant to KCC 15.09.046), or when located in a single-family plat or short plat, where residential design review applies pursuant to KCC 15.09.045(C).

27. Minimum lot area is 8,500 square feet for the first two dwelling units, and 3,500 square feet for each additional dwelling unit.

28. The following zoning is required to be in existence on the entire property to be rezoned at the time of application of a rezone to an MR-T zone: SR-8, MR-D, MR-G, MR-M, MR-H, NCC, CC, GC, DC, or DCE.

29. All multifamily townhouse developments in the MR-T zone shall be townhouses with ownership interest only.

30. As an option to the five-foot side yard requirement for single-family development in all multifamily zoning districts as set forth in KCC 15.04.170, a side yard width of no less than three feet may be utilized under the following conditions:

a. Fire hydrants for the development, as required by the fire code set forth in KCC Title 13, will be placed a maximum of 300 feet in separation;

b. The required fire hydrants shall have a minimum fire flow of 1,500 gallons per minute; and

c. Emergency vehicle access roads shall be provided to the development, which include an improved road accessible within 150 feet of all portions of the exterior first floor of the structure.

This option is subject to the approval of the Washington State Building Council. Application of this option shall be effective upon receipt by the city of Kent of such approval.

31. Where lands are located wholly or partially within the urban separator, as designated on the city of Kent comprehensive land use plan map, dwelling units shall be required to be clustered, subject to the provisions of Chapter 12.04 KCC, Subdivisions, Binding Site Plans, and Lot Line Adjustments. The density in a cluster subdivision shall be no greater than the density that would be allowed on the parcel as a whole, including all critical areas (creeks, wetlands, geological hazard areas) and buffers, using the maximum density provisions of the zoning district in which it is located.

The common open space in a cluster subdivision shall be a minimum of 50 percent of the nonconstrained area of the parcel. The nonconstrained area of the parcel includes all areas of the parcel, minus critical areas, as defined in RCW 36.70A.030(5) as currently and hereinafter amended, and buffers. The remainder of the nonconstrained area of the parcel shall be the buildable area of the parcel. The common open space tracts created by clustering shall be located and configured in the manner that best connects and increases protective buffers for environmentally sensitive areas, connects and protects area wildlife habitat, creates connectivity between the open space provided by the clustering and other adjacent open spaces as well as existing or planned public parks and trails, and maintains scenic vistas. Critical areas and buffers shall not be used in determining lot size and common open space requirements in a cluster subdivision. All natural features (such as streams and their buffers, significant stands of trees, and rock outcroppings), as well as sensitive areas (such as steep slopes and wetlands and their buffers), shall be preserved as open space in a cluster subdivision.

Future development of the common open space shall be prohibited. Except as specified on recorded documents creating the common open space, all common open space resulting from lot clustering shall not be altered or disturbed in a manner that degrades adjacent environmentally sensitive areas, rural areas, agricultural areas, or resource lands; impairs scenic vistas and the connectivity between the open space provided by the clustered development and adjacent open spaces; degrades wildlife habitat; and impairs the recreational benefits enjoyed by the residents of the development. Such common open spaces may be retained under ownership by the owner or subdivider, conveyed to residents of the development, conveyed to a homeowners’ association for the benefit of the residents of the development, conveyed to the city with the city’s consent and approval, or to another party upon approval of the city of Kent.

The minimum lot size of individual lots within a clustered subdivision is 2,500 square feet, and the minimum lot width is 30 feet. In the event that common open space prohibits development of one single-family residence on the parcel, the common open space will be reduced by the amount necessary to meet the minimum 2,500-square-foot lot size. New lots created by any subdivision action shall be clustered in groups not exceeding eight units. There may be more than one cluster per project. Separation between cluster groups shall be a minimum of 120 feet. Sight-obscuring fences are not permitted along cluster lot lines adjacent to the open space area.

32. For multifamily townhouse developments that attach three units, the minimum building-to-building separation shall be 10 feet. For duplex and single-family condominium townhouse developments, the minimum building-to-building separation shall be established through the International Building Code (IBC) or International Residential Code (IRC), as may be applicable.

33. Where lands are located wholly outside the urban separator, as designated on the city of Kent comprehensive land use plan map, dwelling units may be clustered, subject to the applicable provisions of Chapter 12.04 KCC.

34. The downtown design review requirements of KCC 15.09.046 shall apply for all development within downtown or along Meeker Street from 64th Avenue South to Kent-Des Moines Road.

35. Minimum lot area requirements do not apply to multifamily development in the Kent downtown planning area identified in KCC 15.09.046.

36. Cargo containers proposed to be located in a residential zone must be located completely within a stick-built structure with a peaked roof and building materials similar to that of the principal residence on the site. No containers greater than 10 feet by 20 feet may be placed in residential districts. This restriction does not apply to containers collecting debris or accepting household goods for moving that are located on residential property for less than 72 hours. Additionally, institutional uses are exempt from these requirements except when a shipping container is proposed to be located adjacent to or within sight of a residential use.

37. For subdivisions and short subdivisions created after March 22, 2007, or altered to comply with zoning and subdivision code amendments effective after March 22, 2007, the minimum lot size shall be 3,000 square feet. Minimum lot width shall be measured by scaling a 30-foot-diameter circle within the boundaries of the lot; provided, that easement areas may not be included in the required 30-foot-diameter circle. The lot frontage along private or public streets shall be a minimum 20 feet in width. Minimum driveway separation shall be 10 feet. Shared driveways are permitted.

38. [Reserved].

39. The residential design review standards of KCC 15.09.045(C) shall apply.

40. Duplexes are subject to the residential design review standards of KCC 15.09.045(C), except when located within downtown or along Meeker Street from 64th Avenue South to Kent-Des Moines Road, where they are subject to downtown design review pursuant to KCC 15.09.046.

41. Development adjacent to a regional trail is subject to the following regional trail corridor development standards:

a. Regional trails for the purposes of this section shall include scenic and recreational roads and the Green River Trail, Interurban Trail, and Puget Power Trail.

b. Regional trail access. No building or lot shall be constructed or created within 500 feet of a regional trail without providing public access to the regional trail via public sidewalks or a trail system dedicated for public use by a public access easement. Such sidewalks or private trail systems shall connect to regional trails at intervals of 500 feet or less, and shall be accomplished with minimal street crossings.

c. All public access points shall have standard city of Kent signage indicating trail access.

d. No street connections to scenic and recreational roads shall be permitted unless no other vehicle access is practical.

(Ord. No. 3439, § 2, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 3470, § 12, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 3523, § 2, 9-19-00; Ord. No. 3551, § 13, 3-20-01; Ord. No. 3600, § 3, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3612, § 3, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 3663, § 8, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 3690, § 18, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3742, § 2, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 3761, § 3, 9-6-05; Ord. No. 3792, § 3, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 3830, § 17, 3-6-07; Ord. No. 4003, § 1, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 4166, § 4, 9-1-15; Ord. No. 4225, § 9, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 4257, § 18, 11-21-17; Ord. No. 4355, § 6 (Exh. F), 3-3-20)


15.04.190 Commercial and industrial zone development standards. Revised 5/20

 

	 	Zoning Districts	 

	NCC	CC 	DC 	DCE	MTC-1	MTC-2	MCR	CM	GC 	I1 	I2	I3 	AG

	Minimum lot area: square feet or acres, as noted	10,000 sq ft	10,000 sq ft	5,000 sq ft

(1)

(66)	5,000 sq ft

(66)	7,500 sq ft	7,500 sq ft	7,500 sq ft	10,000 sq ft	10,000 sq ft

(66)	10,000 sq ft	15,000 sq ft	15,000 sq ft	1 acre

	Maximum site coverage: percent of site	40%	40%	100%	100%	80%	100%	80%	50%	40%	60%	65%	75%	60%

	Minimum yard requirements: feet	 

	Front yard 	10 ft	15 ft 	(2)	(3)	20 ft	(68)	20 ft	15 ft	20 ft 	15 ft	15 ft	25 ft	(5)

	Side yard	(8)	(9)	(2)	(3)	(68)

(10)	(68)

(10)	(68)

(10)	(10)	(10)	10 ft	10 ft	15 ft	(12)

	Side yard on flanking street of corner lot	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	15 ft	15 ft	20 ft	 

	Rear yard	(8)	20 ft 	(2)	(3)	(68)

(19)	(68)

(19)	(68)

(19)	(19)	(19)

(2)	(20)	(20)

(21)	(20)

(21)	(20)

(21)

	Yards, transitional conditions	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	(24)	(24)	(24)	(24)

	Additional setbacks	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	(29)	(29)	(29)	(29)

	Height limitation: in stories/not to exceed in feet	2 stry/ 35 ft 	3 stry/ 40 ft

(30)	4 stry/ 60 ft	(32)	7 stry/65 ft

(69)

(70)	16 stry/200 ft

(70)	16 stry/200 ft

(70)	2 stry/ 35 ft

(30)	2 stry/ 35 ft

(30)	8 stry/ 85 ft	8 stry/ 85 ft	8 stry/ 85 ft	2 stry/ 35 ft

(35)

	Landscaping	The landscaping requirements of Chapter 15.07 KCC shall apply.

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	(52)	 	 	(52)

	Outdoor storage	(39)	(39)	 	 	 	 	 	(40)

(41)	(40)	15% of site area

(43)

(44)	30% of site area

(43)

(44)	50% of site area

(43)

(45)	(43)

	Signs	The sign regulations of Chapter 15.06 KCC shall apply.

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Vehicle drive-through, drive-in, and service bays	(46)	(46)	 	(46)	(46)	 	(46)	(46)	(46)	(46)	(46)	(46)	 

	Loading areas	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	(47)

(48)	(47)

(48)	(47)

(48)	(47)

	Off-street parking	The off-street parking requirements of Chapter 15.05 KCC shall apply.

	 	(57)	(57)	 	 	 	 	 	(57)	(57)	(57)	(57)	(57)	(57)

	Design review	 	(4)(11)

(15)	(31)	(31)	(71)	(71)	(71)	(4)(72)	(4)(11)

(15)

(72)	(73)	(73)	(73)	 

	Additional standards	(50)

(56)

(62)

(63)

(64)

(65)	(50)

(56)	(50)

(56)	(50)

(56)

(67)	(50)

(56)	(50)

(56)	(50)

(56)	(50)

(56)	(50)

(56)	(50)

(54)

(55)

(56)

(59)

(63)

(16)	(50)

(54)

(55)

(56)

(59)

(63)	(50)

(54)

(55)

(56)

(59)

(63)	(50)

(53)

(54)

(55)

(56)

(59)

(Ord. No. 3439, § 2, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 3543, § 9, 2-20-01; Ord. No. 3600, § 3, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3612, § 3, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 3648, § 5, 7-1-03; Ord. No. 3742, § 3, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 3988, § 3, 1-4-11; Ord. No. 4003, § 2, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 4011, § 17, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 4093, § 3, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 4166, § 4, 9-1-15; Ord. No. 4225, § 10, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 4257, § 19, 11-21-17; Ord. No. 4320, § 5, 4-2-19; Ord. No. 4355, § 6 (Exh. F), 3-3-20)


15.04.195 Commercial and industrial land use development standard conditions. Revised 5/20

1. Minimum lot of record or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less.

2. None, except as required by landscaping, or if off-street parking is provided onsite. See the downtown design review criteria outlined in KCC 15.09.046.

3. No minimum setback is required. If a rear and/or side yard abuts a residential district, a 20-foot setback may be required for any yard abutting a residential district. See the downtown design review criteria outlined in KCC 15.09.046.

4. Independent senior living facilities, assisted living facilities, and residential facilities with health care are subject to the requirements of KCC 15.09.045(D) for multifamily design review, unless they are located within downtown or along Meeker Street from 64th Avenue South to Kent-Des Moines Road, where they are subject to downtown design review pursuant to KCC 15.09.046.

5. [Reserved].

6. [Reserved].

7. [Reserved].

8. No side or rear yard is required, except when abutting a district other than NCC, in which case the yard shall be not less than five feet in width; provided, however, that if the abutting district or use is residential, then the yard shall be 10 feet in width and fully landscaped.

9. No side yard is required, except when abutting a more restrictive district, in which case the side yard shall be not less than 20 feet in width.

10. No side yard is required, except when abutting a residential district, in which case the side yard shall be not less than 20 feet in width.

11. All projects along Meeker Street from 64th Avenue South to Kent-Des Moines Road are subject to KCC 15.09.046 for downtown design review.

12. [Reserved].

13. [Reserved].

14. [Reserved].

15. Design review for mixed use development is required as provided for in KCC 15.09.045(F); see KCC 15.04.200 for mixed use development standards.

16. In the I1 zoning district only, the following dock-high door to building footprint square footage ratios shall apply, and shall be cumulative such that first tier applies to the first 30,000 square feet of larger buildings, the second tier applies to the square footage above 30,000 square feet and below 100,000 square feet, and so on. Square footage refers to the building footprint; each building shall be allotted a number of doors available based on size of building and presence of enhanced options within the project. Enhanced options are described in the industrial design guidelines adopted in KCC 15.09.047. Allotted doors may be reapportioned amongst any building within the project after the total project allotment has been determined. Decimals shall be rounded up.

	Building Footprint Square Footage Tier	Possible Building Footprint Square Footage Available	Number of Enhanced Options in Project	Applicable Ratio	Total Doors Available per Tier

	1	0 – 30,000 sf	Up to 30,000 sf	Any	1:3,000 sf	Up to 10

	2	30,000 sf to 100,000 sf	Up to 70,000 sf	0	1:15,000 sf	Up to 5

	1	1:10,000 sf	Up to 7

	2 or more	1:7,500 sf	Up to 9

	3	100,000 sf to 200,000 sf	Up to 100,000 sf	0 or 1	1:20,000 sf	Up to 5

	2	1:15,000 sf	Up to 7

	3 or more	1:10,000 sf	Up to 10

	4	200,000 sf or more	No cap	0 or 1	1:30,000 sf	No cap

	2	1:20,000 sf

	3	1:15,000 sf

	4 or more	1:10,000 sf

17. [Reserved].

18. [Reserved].

19. No rear yard is required, except when abutting a residential district, in which case the rear yard shall be not less than 20 feet in width.

20. No rear yard is required, except as may be required by other setback provisions of this section.

21. No rear yard is required, except as may be required by transitional conditions.

22. [Reserved].

23. [Reserved].

24. Transitional conditions shall exist when an AG, I1 or I3 district adjoins a residential district containing a density of two dwelling units or more per acre or a proposed residential area indicated on the city comprehensive plan. Such transitional conditions shall not exist where the separation includes an intervening use such as a river, freeway, railway main line, major topographic differential, or other similar conditions, or where the industrial properties face on a limited access surface street on which the housing does not face. When transitional conditions exist as defined in this subsection, a yard of not less than 50 feet shall be provided between the uses.

25. [Reserved].

26. [Reserved].

27. [Reserved].

28. [Reserved].

29. Development abutting the Green River, or Russell Road or Frager Road where such roads follow the river bank, shall be set back from the ordinary high-water mark of the river a minimum of 200 feet. Such setbacks are in accordance with the state Shoreline Management Act of 1971, and shall be no more or less restrictive than the Shoreline Management Act.

30. The economic and community development director shall be authorized to grant one additional story in height, if during development plan review it is found that this additional story would not detract from the continuity of the area. More than one additional story may be granted by the land use and planning board.

31. The downtown design review requirements of KCC 15.09.046 shall apply.

32. No maximum height limit is required, except for parcels located within a downtown commercial enterprise – transitional overlay (DCE-T), where the height limit is 35 feet. See also the downtown design review criteria outlined in KCC 15.09.046.

33. [Reserved].

34. [Reserved].

35. Beyond this height, to a height not greater than either four stories or 60 feet, there shall be added one additional foot of yard for each one foot of additional building height. The economic and community development director shall be authorized to approve one additional story, provided such height does not detract from the continuity of the area, and may impose such conditions as may be necessary to reduce any incompatibility with surrounding uses. Any additional height increase may be granted by the land use and planning board.

36. [Reserved].

37. [Reserved].

38. [Reserved].

39. Outdoor storage areas are prohibited.

40. Outdoor storage areas shall be fenced for security and public safety by a sight-obscuring fence unless it is determined through the development plan review that a sight-obscuring fence is not necessary.

41. Any unfenced outdoor storage areas shall be paved with asphaltic concrete, cement, or equivalent material to be approved by the city engineer.

42. [Reserved].

43. Outside storage or operations yards in the I1, I2 and I3 districts shall be permitted only as accessory uses. Such uses are incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the property or structure. Outdoor storage is limited to 15 percent of the total site area in the I1 district, 30 percent of the total site area in the I2 district, and 50 percent of the total site area in the I3 district.

44. Outside storage or operations yards shall be confined to the area to the rear of a line which is an extension of the front wall of the principal building, and shall be reasonably screened from view from any street by appropriate walls, fencing, earth mounds, or landscaping.

45. Outside storage or operations areas shall be fenced for security and public safety at the property line.

46. Wherever feasible, drive-up/drive-through facilities shall be accessed from the rear of a site and run along an interior lot line or building elevation. Landscaping, sufficient to soften the visual impact of vehicle stacking areas, may be required.

47. Truck courts and loading areas must be located in such a manner that no loading, unloading, or maneuvering of trucks associated therewith takes place on public rights-of-way.

48. Earth berms and landscaping shall be provided along street frontages as necessary to screen dock-high loading areas from public rights-of-way. Berms shall be a minimum of 36 inches and a maximum of 42 inches in height. Landscaping located on the berm shall conform to Type III landscaping as described in KCC 15.07.050.

49. [Reserved].

50. Development plan approval is required as provided in KCC 15.09.010.

51. [Reserved].

52. Where building walls face adjacent streets and are unfenestrated for more than 40 feet at any point along the facade, additional landscaping shall be required to reduce visual impacts. In such circumstances, Type II landscaping, as defined in KCC 15.07.050, shall be required; provided, that evergreen trees shall be at least 10 feet in height and deciduous trees shall be a minimum of two-inch caliper at the time of planting.

53. [Reserved].

54. Multitenant buildings shall be permitted.

55. All required yards, parking areas, storage areas, operations yards, and other open uses on the site shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner appropriate for the district at all times. The economic and community development director shall be authorized to reasonably pursue the enforcement of this subsection where a use is in violation, and to notify the owner or operator of the use in writing of such noncompliance. The property owner or operator of the use shall be given a reasonable length of time to correct the condition.

56. The performance standards as provided in KCC 15.08.050 shall apply.

57. Off-street parking may be located in required yards except in areas required to be landscaped.

58. [Reserved].

59. Development within 500 feet of a regional trail is subject to the following regional trail corridor development standards:

a. Regional trails for the purposes of this section shall include scenic and recreational roads and the Green River Trail, Interurban Trail, and Puget Power Trail.

b. Regional trail access. No building or lot shall be constructed or created within 500 feet of a regional trail without providing public access to the regional trail via public sidewalks or a trail system dedicated for public use by a public access easement. Such sidewalks or private trail systems shall connect to regional trails at intervals of 500 feet or less, and shall be accomplished with minimal street crossings.

c. All public access easements shall be no less than 20 feet wide.

d. All public access points shall have standard city of Kent signage indicating trail access.

e. No street connections to scenic and recreational roads shall be permitted unless no other vehicle access is practical.

f. Additional requirements for buildings in Regional Trail Corridors with footprint areas greater than 75,000 square feet are included in KCC 15.09.047, Industrial design review.

60. [Reserved].

61. [Reserved].

62. Parking should be located either next to or behind the building. Parking should not be placed between the street and the building.

63. A direct pedestrian connection shall be provided from the street to the building at intervals of no more than 500 feet. If the property abuts a public park or trail a direct pedestrian connection shall be provided from the park or trail to the building.

64. Screening by either an enclosure and/or evergreen landscaping shall be provided for mechanical equipment, service doors, and garbage areas. Rooftop equipment shall be enclosed with a parapet or similar design feature.

65. Structures shall be designed to maintain the residential character of the surrounding neighborhood. Modulating the building mass, adding dormer windows, covered entryways, or porches are ways to enhance the human scale and provide a residential dimension to structures.

66. Minimum lot area requirements do not apply to multifamily development in the Kent downtown planning area identified in KCC 15.09.046.

67. Within the downtown commercial enterprise-transitional overlay (DCE-T), downtown design review guidelines regarding balconies and/or upper floor setbacks (sections III.B and III.C) are required elements, not optional elements.

68. No yard, except as required by landscaping, or if surface parking is provided onsite. See the Midway Design Guidelines and KCC 15.09.045.

69. The height limitation of new construction in MTC-1 zoning district abutting a residential district shall be 35 feet in height within 20 feet from the residential district and 45 feet in height within 40 feet from the residential district.

70. New construction shall conform to applicable Federal Aviation Administration regulations, including 14 C.F.R. Part 77, as presently constituted or as may be subsequently amended.

71. The transit-oriented community design review requirements of KCC 15.09.045(G) shall apply.

72. Transitional housing with three or more families outside of downtown is subject to multifamily design review as provided in KCC 15.09.045(D).

73. Development in the I1, I2, and I3 districts shall be subject to KCC 15.09.047, Industrial design review.

(Ord. No. 3439, § 2, 2-2-99; Administratively renumbered 6/99; Ord. No. 3600, § 3, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3612, § 3, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 3648, § 6, 7-1-03; Ord. No. 3742, § 4, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 3988, § 3, 1-4-11; Ord. No. 4011, § 18, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 4093, § 4, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 4166, § 4, 9-1-15; Ord. No. 4175, § 1, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 4225, § 11, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 4320, § 6, 4-2-19; Ord. No. 4355, § 6 (Exh. F), 3-3-20)


15.04.200 Mixed use overlay development standards.

 

	 	Overlay Districts 

	 	GC-MU	CC-MU

	Floor area ratio	Not applicable	0.40 for commercial uses.

0.50 for commercial uses combined with residential uses; provided, that commercial floor area may be increased by one square foot for each square foot of residential floor area provided up to a maximum commercial FAR of 0.5.

1.0 for residential uses; provided, that residential FAR may be increased by 0.5 if parking is provided below grade, up to a maximum of 1.5.

	Site coverage	40 percent for commercial uses.

60 percent for commercial uses with residential uses; provided, that five percent of the gross floor area is commercial use, except within the downtown area (as defined in KCC 15.09.046), where 25 percent of the gross floor area must be commercial use.	40 percent for commercial uses.

60 percent for commercial uses with residential uses; provided, that 25 percent of the gross floor area is residential use.

	Height	65 feet.	25 feet; provided, that basic heights may be increased up to the maximum height of 40 feet. (1)

	Front yard	Zero feet; provided, that some setback may be required in the front yard to accommodate a sidewalk which shall be at least 10 feet in width.	Zero feet; provided, that some setback may be required in the front yard to accommodate a sidewalk which shall be at least 10 feet in width.

	Rear and side yard	Zero feet; provided, that setbacks of at least 20 feet will be required in any rear or side yards that are adjacent to a residential zoning district.	Zero feet; provided, that setbacks of at least 20 feet will be required in any rear or side yards that are adjacent to a residential zoning district.

	Off-street parking	The off-street parking requirements of Chapter 15.05 KCC shall apply.	Retail/office uses: four spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area. (2)

Residential uses. (3)

	Design review	Design review requirements of KCC 15.09.045(F) shall apply for all mixed use development in GC-MU zones, except for the following:

a.    Developments along Meeker Street from 64th Avenue South to Kent-Des Moines Road and in downtown are subject to downtown design review requirements of KCC 15.09.046.

b.    Independent senior living facilities, assisted living facilities, residential facilities with health care or transitional housing of three or more families located outside of downtown and Meeker Street from 64th Avenue South to Kent-Des Moines Road are subject to multifamily design review as provided for in KCC 15.09.045(D).	Design review requirements of KCC 15.09.045(F) shall apply for all mixed use development in CC-MU zones, except for the following:

a.    Developments along Meeker Street from 64th Avenue South to Kent-Des Moines Road and in downtown are subject to downtown design review requirements of KCC 15.09.046.

b.    Independent senior living facilities, assisted living facilities, residential facilities with health care or transitional housing of three or more families located outside of downtown and Meeker Street from 64th Avenue South to Kent-Des Moines Road are subject to multifamily design review as provided for in KCC 15.09.045(D).



(Ord. No. 3439, § 2, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 3440, § 6, 2-16-99; Ord. No. 3600, § 3, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3612, § 3, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 4093, § 5, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 4132, § 2, 12-9-14; Ord. No. 4166, § 4, 9-1-15; Ord. No. 4175, § 2, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 4225, § 12, 12-13-16)


15.04.205 Mixed use land use development standard conditions.

1. The following height modifications shall apply:

a. Five-foot increases for developments containing residential uses; provided, that 25 percent of gross floor area is in residential use.

b. Five-foot increases for parking under the building.

c. Five-foot increases for using a pitched roof form.

d. Five-foot increase for stepping back from the top floor (minimum of five feet).

2. The first 300 square feet of retail or office space that is a part of an individual residential unit is exempt.

3. The following parking requirements shall apply:

a. Studio: 0.75 per dwelling unit (du) without commercial uses; 0.50/du with commercial uses; provided, that 25 percent of overall gross floor area is in commercial uses.

b. One-bedroom: 1.5/du without commercial uses; 1.0/du with commercial uses; provided, that 25 percent of overall gross floor area is in commercial uses.

c. Two-bedroom: 2.0/du without commercial uses; 1.25/du with commercial uses; provided, that 25 percent of overall gross floor area is in commercial uses.

(Ord. No. 3439, § 2, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 3600, § 3, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3612, § 3, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 4166, § 4, 9-1-15)


Chapter 15.05 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS* Revised 5/20

Sections:

15.05.010    Purpose.

15.05.020    Categories of uses and conditions of uses covered by chapter. Revised 5/20

15.05.030    Location of off-street parking.

15.05.040    Parking standards for specific activities. Revised 5/20

15.05.050    Drive-in businesses.

15.05.060    Loading space.

15.05.070    Off-street parking regulations for downtown commercial and downtown commercial enterprise districts.

15.05.080    Size and design standards.

15.05.090    Overhang exception, landscaping, paving, wheel stops, drainage, lighting, and curbing.

15.05.100    Off-street parking plans.

15.05.110    Electric vehicle charging station spaces.

*Cross reference(s) – Parking regulations, ch. 9.38.


15.05.010 Purpose.

A. It is the purpose of this chapter to specify the off-street parking and loading requirements for all uses permitted in this title, and to describe design standards and other required improvements.

B. The planning director shall have the authority to waive or modify specific requirements of this chapter or to impose additional off-street parking requirements in unique circumstances to ensure that the intent of this chapter is met and to allow for flexibility and innovation in design. Unique circumstances may include, but are not limited to the following:

1. Proximity to transit stations, transfer points, or transit stops;

2. Flexible work hour scheduling for employees;

3. Documentation of parking patterns and demand of employees and patrons;

4. Physical circumstances of the site such as topography, lot size/shape, and environmentally sensitive areas.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 39, 7-7-98)




15.05.020 Categories of uses and conditions of uses covered by chapter. Revised 5/20

A. New construction. New construction is covered by this chapter as follows:

1. Buildings constructed or enlarged.

2. Other structures or use areas constructed or enlarged.

3. Parking lots constructed or enlarged as follows:

a. If new or adding the equivalent of 50 percent or more of the existing parking lot area, the entire parking facility must meet the standards of this title.

b. If adding less than 50 percent of the existing parking lot area, only the new portion must meet the standards of this title.

B. Change in use. When the occupancy of any land use, structure, or building, or any part of a building, structure, or land use, is changed to another use, parking shall be provided to meet the parking requirements of the new use, with the following exceptions:

1. Change of use from warehousing and distribution to manufacturing uses.

2. Change of use from warehousing and distribution to complexes which include a combination of uses, including a mixture of office, storage, commercial, and manufacturing uses.

3. Change of use from warehousing and distribution to research, development, and testing.

(Ord. No. 4355, § 7 (Exh. G), 3-3-20)


15.05.030 Location of off-street parking.

A. Single-family dwellings. Required parking for a single-family dwelling shall be located on the same lot as the building it is to serve.

B. Multifamily dwellings. Required parking for multifamily dwellings may be on a contiguous lot if located within five hundred (500) feet of the dwelling units. The lot shall be legally encumbered by an easement or other appropriate means to ensure continuous use of the parking facilities. Documentation shall require review and approval of the city attorney.

C. Other uses. For uses other than those described in subsections (A) and (B) of this section, required parking may be in areas other than on the premises if the additional required amount of parking area is set aside for a particular use in another lot located within five hundred (500) feet of the premises. The lot or area to be utilized shall be legally encumbered by an easement or other appropriate means to ensure continuous use of the parking facilities. Documentation shall require review and approval of the city attorney.

(Ord. No. 4043, § 1, 8-21-12)


15.05.040 Parking standards for specific activities. Revised 5/20

A. Standards for the number of parking spaces for specific activities are indicated in the following chart:

	SPECIFIC LAND USE	PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENT

	Living activities

	Single-family	Two parking spaces per single-family dwelling.

	Duplex	Two parking spaces per dwelling unit.

	Multifamily1, 2, 3, 4	One parking space per unit for efficiency apartments in all sized developments; two parking spaces for each dwelling unit for developments with 49 or less dwelling units; one and eight-tenths parking spaces per dwelling unit for developments of 50 or more dwelling units. 

	Accessory dwelling unit	One off-street parking space per accessory unit is required in addition to the required parking for the single-family home. The planning director may waive this requirement where there are special circumstances related to the property and its location. The surface of a required ADU off-street parking space shall comply with KCC 15.05.090(E).

	Boardinghouses and lodging houses	One parking space for the proprietor, plus one space per sleeping room for boarders or lodging use, plus one additional space for each four persons employed on the premises.

	Mobile and manufactured home parks	Two parking spaces for each mobile home site.

	Recreational vehicle park	One parking space for each site.

	Hotels5	One parking space for each guest room, plus two parking spaces for each three employees.

	Commercial activities

	Banks6	One parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area, except when part of a shopping center.

	Professional and business offices6	One parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area, except when part of a shopping center.

	Shopping centers7	Four and one-half spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross leaseable area (GLA) for centers having GLA of less than 400,000 square feet, and five spaces per 1,000 square feet of GLA for centers having a GLA of over 400,000 square feet.

	Restaurants, nightclubs, taverns and lounges8	One parking space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area, except when part of a shopping center.

	Retail stores, supermarkets, department stores and personal service shops9	One parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area, except when located in a shopping center.

	Other retail establishments; furniture, appliance, hardware stores, household equipment service shops, clothing or shoe repair shops10	One parking space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area, except when located in a shopping center.

	Drive-in business11	One parking space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area, except when located in a shopping center.

	Uncovered commercial area, new and used car lots, plant nursery	One parking space for each 5,000 square feet of retail sales area in addition to any parking requirements for buildings, except when located in a shopping center.

	Motor vehicle repair and services	One parking space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area, except when part of a shopping center.

	Industrial showroom and display	One parking space for each 500 square feet of display area.

	Bulk retail stores	One parking space for each 350 square feet of gross floor area.

	Industrial activities

	Manufacturing and industrial uses, including warehouses, storage buildings, and speculative warehouse and industrial buildings with multiple use or tenant potential	One parking space for each 1,000 square feet for 90% of the gross floor area, and one parking space per 250 square feet for 10% of the gross floor area. When total of uses other than manufacturing and industrial exceeds 10% of the gross floor area, the parking requirements for those uses shall apply.

	Recreation-amusement activities

	Auditoriums, theaters, places of public assembly, stadiums, and outdoor sports areas12	One parking space for each four fixed seats, or one parking space for each 100 square feet of floor area of main auditorium or of principal place of assembly not containing fixed seats, whichever is greater.

	Bowling alleys13	Five spaces for each alley, except when located in a shopping center.

	Dance halls and skating rinks14	One parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area, except when located in a shopping center.

	Golf driving ranges	One parking space for each driving station.

	Miniature golf courses	One parking space for each hole.

	Recreational buildings, whether independent or associated with a multifamily complex	One parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area. Such spaces shall be located adjacent to the building and shall be designated for visitors by signing or other special markings.

	Educational activities

	Senior high schools, public, parochial, and private	One space for each employee plus one space for each 10 students enrolled. In addition, if buses for the transportation of children are kept at the school, one off-street parking space shall be provided for each bus, of a size sufficient to park each bus.

One additional parking space for each 100 students shall be provided for visitors in the vicinity of or adjacent to the administration portion of the building or complex. Such parking spaces shall be so designated by signing or other special marking as approved by the traffic engineer.

	Colleges and universities and business and vocational schools15	Two and one-half parking spaces for each employee, plus one space for each three students residing on campus, plus one space for each five day students not residing on campus. In addition, if buses for transportation of students are kept at the school, one off-street parking space shall be provided for each bus, of a size sufficient to park each bus.

One additional parking space for each 100 students shall be provided for visitors in the vicinity of or adjacent to the administration portion of the building or complex. Such parking spaces shall be so designated by signing or other special marking as approved by the traffic engineer.

	Elementary and junior high	One parking space for each employee, plus one parking space for every 50 student capacity (Capacity means the designed capacity of the school, even if actual enrollment varies by year). In addition, if buses for transportation of students are kept at the school, one off-street parking space shall be provided for each bus, of a size sufficient to park each bus. Consideration for student loading/unloading and pick-up/drop-off areas shall be integrated in the site plan.

	Libraries and museums	One parking space for each 250 square feet in office and public use.

	Day-care centers	One parking space for each employee, plus loading and unloading areas.

	Medical activities

	Medical and dental offices16	One parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area, except when located in a shopping center.

	Convalescent, nursing, and health institutions	One parking space for each two employees, plus one parking space for each three beds.

	Hospitals	One parking space for each three beds, plus one parking space for each staff doctor, plus one parking space for each three employees.

	Religious activities

	Churches, religious institutions, or other places of worship17	One space for each five seats in the main auditorium/ gathering place; provided, that the spaces for any institution shall not be less than 10. One seat is equivalent to seven square feet, for institutions that do not have seats in the main gathering place. For all existing institutions enlarging the seating capacity of their auditoriums, one additional parking space shall be provided for each five additional seats provided by the new construction. For all existing institutions making structural alterations or additions which do not increase the seating capacity of the auditorium, no additional parking need be provided.

	Mortuaries or funeral homes	One parking space for each 100 square feet of floor area of assembly rooms.

	Other uses	For uses not specifically identified in this section, the amount of parking required shall be determined by the planning department, based on staff experience, parking required for similar uses, and, if appropriate, documentation provided by the applicant.

1. Where enclosed garages are utilized to provide parking required by this title, an 18-foot stacking space shall be provided in front of such garage units; provided, however, the planning director shall have the authority to approve alternative plans where the developer can assure that such garage units will continue to be available for parking purposes and will not cause onsite parking or circulation problems. These assurances include but are not limited to: (a) covenants that run with the land or homeowners’ association that require garages to be utilized for the storage of vehicles, (b) maintenance of drive aisle widths of 26 feet in front of each garage unit, and (c) maintenance of minimum clearances for fire lanes on the site. Special parking for recreational vehicles will not be required as long as the facility does not permit recreational vehicles other than campers or vehicles that will fit into a normal-sized parking stall. If recreational vehicles are to be permitted on the development, they must be screened and fenced.

2. Exceptions for senior citizen apartments in multifamily buildings:

a. The multifamily parking requirement may be reduced as determined by the planning director. The planning director shall base his/her decision on a parking study that supports one or more of the following:

i. Availability of private, convenient, regular transportation services to meet the needs of the tenants;

ii. Accessibility to and frequency of public transportation;

iii. Pedestrian access to health, medical, and shopping facilities;

iv. Minimum age requirement to reside in subject apartments;

v. Special support services offered by the facility;

vi. Other documentation or standards that support a permanent reduction of parking stalls.

3. In MTC-1, MTC-2, and MCR zoning districts, a minimum of three-fourths parking space per dwelling unit, or conduct a parking feasibility study to determine need. No spaces provided for recreation vehicles.

4. In MTC-1, MTC-2, and MCR zoning districts, one parking space for every four dwelling units, or conduct a parking feasibility study to determine need.

5. In MTC-1, MTC-2, and MCR zoning districts, one parking space for each guest room, plus two parking spaces for every five employees, or conduct a parking feasibility study to determine need.

6. In MTC-1 and MCR zoning districts, one parking space for every 400 square feet of gross floor area, except when part of a shopping center, or conduct a parking feasibility study to determine need; in MTC-2 zoning district, one parking space for every 500 square feet of gross floor area, or conduct a parking feasibility study to determine need.

7. In MTC-1 and MCR zoning districts, one parking space for every 400 square feet of gross floor area, or conduct a parking feasibility study to determine need.

8. In MTC-1 and MCR zoning districts, one parking space for every 200 square feet of gross floor area, or conduct a parking feasibility study to determine need; in MTC-2 zoning district, a minimum of one parking space for every 300 square feet of gross floor area, or conduct a parking feasibility study to determine need. No parking is required if use is 3,000 square feet or less and with a parking supply of at least 20 spaces within 500 feet or 1,000 feet of a public garage.

9. In MTC-1 and MCR zoning districts, one parking space for every 400 square feet of gross floor area, or conduct a parking feasibility study to determine need; in MTC-2 zoning district, one parking space for every 500 square feet of gross floor area, or conduct a parking feasibility study to determine need. No parking is required if use is 800 square feet or less and with a parking supply of at least 20 spaces within 500 feet or 1,000 feet of a public garage.

10. In MTC-1, MTC-2, and MCR zoning districts, one parking space for every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, or conduct a parking feasibility study to determine need. No parking is required if use is 800 square feet or less and with a parking supply of at least 20 spaces within 500 feet or 1,000 feet of a public garage.

11. In MTC-1 and MCR zoning districts, one parking space for every 400 square feet of gross floor area, except when located in a shopping center.

12. In MTC-1 and MCR zoning districts, conduct a parking feasibility study to determine need.

13. In MTC-1 and MCR zoning districts, three parking spaces for each alley, except when located in a shopping center.

14. In MTC-1 and MCR zoning districts, one parking space for every 500 square feet of gross floor area, or conduct a parking feasibility study to determine need.

15. In MTC-1, MTC-2, and MCR zoning districts, conduct a parking feasibility study to determine need.

16. In MTC-1, MTC-2, and MCR zoning districts, a minimum of one parking space for every 400 square feet of gross floor area, or conduct a parking feasibility study to determine need.

17. In MTC-1, MTC-2, and MCR zoning districts, one parking space for every 10 seats in the main auditorium; provided, that the spaces for any church shall not be less than 10. For all existing churches enlarging the seating capacity, one additional parking space shall be provided for every 10 seats provided by the new construction.

B. Mixed occupancies or mixed use if one occupancy. In the case of two or more uses in the same building, the total requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be the sum of the requirements for the several uses computed separately; except in shopping centers, and except as provided in the mixed use overlay, KCC 15.04.200. Off-street parking facilities for one use shall not be considered as providing required parking facilities for any other use, except as permitted in subsection (C) of this section pertaining to joint use.

C. Joint use. The minimum amount of off-street parking required by subsection (A) of this section may be reduced by the planning director when shared parking facilities for two or more uses are proposed if:

1. The total parking area exceeds 5,000 square feet;

2. The parking facilities are designed and developed as a single onsite common parking facility, or as a system of onsite and offsite facilities if all facilities are connected with improved pedestrian facilities and located within 500 feet of the buildings or use areas they are intended to serve;

3. The amount of reduction in off-street parking does not exceed 10 percent per use unless it is documented that the peak parking demand hours of two or more uses are separated by at least one hour;

4. The subject properties are legally encumbered by an easement or other appropriate means which provide for continuous joint use of the parking facilities. Documentation shall require review and approval by the city attorney; and

5. The total number of parking spaces in the shared parking facility is not less than the minimum required by any single use.

D. Employee parking. Where employee parking will be maintained separately and in addition to parking for the general public, the regulations of this subsection shall apply:

1. Minimum parking stall sizes, aisle widths, and percentage of compact car stalls shall be as per other requirements in this chapter.

2. Employee parking must be clearly identified as such and not become parking for the general public.

3. If the employee parking is changed to parking for the general public, the normal regulations for off-street parking shall be in force.

4. Employee parking shall not be in lieu of parking requirements per activity as stated in this section.

E. Temporary parking facilities. Temporary parking facilities may be permitted by the planning director when it has been shown that:

1. The existing use of the subject property has adequate legal nonconforming parking or that existing parking conforms to the applicable standards of this title.

2. The temporary parking facility is primarily intended to serve the public at large and not the existing use on the property.

3. The temporary parking facility serves a public need.

4. The temporary facility meets the following minimum standards:

a. There shall be a minimum of 285 square feet gross area per stall.

b. The pavement section shall be a minimum of four inches of five-eighths-inch minus C.R. crushed rock with bituminous surface treatment, subject to engineering department review.

c. Onsite drainage control and detention shall be provided per the drainage ordinance.

d. Ingress and egress and interior circulation and perimeter control shall be subject to traffic engineer approval.

F. Compact car parking.

1. Parking stall size shall be a minimum of eight feet by 16 feet. Aisle width shall be per the requirements of KCC 15.05.080 and Diagram No. 1 following KCC 15.05.100.

2. Compact car parking spaces shall be clearly identified by signing or other marking as approved by the city engineer.

3. Compact car parking spaces shall not exceed 30 percent of the total required parking, and shall be distributed throughout the entire parking area. For parking lots of more than 20 stalls, up to 50 percent of the total required parking may be compact car parking spaces. Compact stalls cannot be located along a fire lane in lots where the percentage of compact stalls exceeds 30 percent, unless approved by the fire marshal. 

4. See KCC 15.05.080 and diagram No. 1 following KCC 15.05.100 for typical compact car stall arrangements.

G. Transit and rideshare provisions.

1. The planning director may reduce the minimum number of off-street parking stalls for businesses which have a commute trip reduction program filed with the city. Based upon a review of this program and input from other staff members, a reduction of up to 20 percent of the minimum standard may be approved. Any reduction in the amount of required parking is only valid for as long as the approved CTR program is in effect. An invalidated program or a change in use or operations would result in the application of the underlying standards per subsection (A) of this section.

2. The planning director may reduce the number of required off-street parking stalls for businesses which do not have a commute trip reduction program by one stall for every two car pool stalls, and/or one stall for every one van pool stall if:

a. Reserved rideshare parking is located convenient to the primary employee entrance;

b. Reserved areas are clearly marked by signs for use by approved and qualified rideshare vehicles;

c. The use of reserved areas for rideshare parking is actively enforced by the employer; and

d. The total reduction in the number of parking stalls does not exceed 10 percent of the required stalls.

(Ord. No. 2942, § 2, 9-4-90; Ord. No. 3050, § 5, 7-7-92; Ord. No. 3175, § 3, 7-19-94; Ord. No. 3251, § 11, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 3279, § 1, 3-5-96; Ord. No. 3333, § 2, 1-22-97; Ord. No. 3409, § 40, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 3439, § 3, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 4011, § 19, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 4043, § 2, 8-21-12; Ord. No. 4355, § 7 (Exh. G), 3-3-20)


15.05.050 Drive-in businesses.

All banks, savings and loan associations, cleaning establishments, food dispensing establishments, and other businesses which maintain drive-in facilities which are intended to serve customers who remain in their motor vehicles during the business transactions, or are designed in such a manner that customers must leave their automobiles temporarily in a driving line located adjacent to the facility, shall provide stacking space for the stacking of motor vehicles as follows:

A. Stacking space. The drive-in facility shall be so located that sufficient stacking space is provided for the handling of motor vehicles using such facility during peak business hours of such a facility.

B. Driveway location. Entrances and exits shall not be so located as to cause congestion in any public right-of-way.

C. Businesses located in shopping centers. When located in a shopping center, drive-in facilities shall provide sufficient stacking space to handle peak business demands and shall not in any way obstruct the normal circulation pattern of the shopping center.


15.05.060 Loading space.

For all buildings hereafter erected, reconstructed, or enlarged, adequate permanent off-street loading space shall be provided if the activity carried on is such that the building requires deliveries to it or shipments from it of people or merchandise. Such space shall be shown on a plan and submitted for approval by the planning department and the city engineer. No portion of a vehicle taking part in loading, unloading, or maneuvering activities shall project into a public street, alley, or interior pedestrian area. Loading space or maneuvering areas shall be in addition to required off-street parking spaces.

A. Relationship of loading space to residential areas. Loading berths shall be located not closer than fifty (50) feet to any residential district, unless wholly enclosed within a building, or unless screened from such residential area by a wall or uniformly painted fence not less than six (6) feet in height.

B. Relationship to open space. Space for loading berths may occupy all or any part of any required setback or open space as long as the loading berth is uncovered. A covered loading area shall comply with the minimum setback requirements for the district.

C. Types of uses for which loading space shall be provided. Loading space shall be provided for the following types of buildings or businesses: warehouses, supermarkets, department stores, office buildings with a floorspace in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, industrial or manufacturing establishments, freight terminals, railroad yards, mortuaries, and such other commercial and industrial buildings which, in the judgment of the planning director, are similar in nature in regard to loading space requirements.

D. Required maneuvering areas.

1. For buildings with dock-high loading doors. Buildings which utilize dock-high loading doors shall provide a minimum of one hundred (100) feet of clear maneuvering area in front of each door. See the following diagram:


[IMAGE]


2. Maneuvering area for buildings with ground-level loading doors. Buildings which utilize ground-level service or loading doors shall provide a minimum of forty-five (45) feet of clear maneuvering area in front of each door. See the following diagram:


[IMAGE]


3. The maneuvering area shall be designed to accommodate the maximum length of vehicle to be served, as identified on a vehicle maneuvering diagram or other site plan measurements, and shall show no encroachment of maneuvering into a public street, opposing lane of a two-way driveway, or within three (3) feet of any required parking stalls. The following standards and minimum distances shall also apply (see Diagram 2):

a. When dock-high doors of one building face dock-high doors of another building, the minimum distance between buildings shall be one hundred sixty-four (164) feet; 

b. When dock-high doors of one building face ground-level doors of another building, the minimum distance between buildings shall be one hundred twenty-six (126) feet;

c. When ground-level doors of one building face ground-level doors of another building, the minimum distance between buildings shall be sixty-five (65) feet;

d. A joint access and maneuvering easement is required;

e. The maneuvering area is measured from face of building to face of building. Except for trucks parked at the loading dock, no parking, landscaping, or other obstruction shall be located within the maneuvering area;

f. The fire lane shall be at least twenty-six (26) feet wide and marked and striped per requirements in the fire code, Chapter 13.01 KCC, as amended. 

E. Driveways. Ingress and egress points from public rights-of-way (driveways) shall be designed and located in such a manner as to preclude offsite or on-street maneuvering of vehicles.

(Ord. No. 4043, § 3, 8-21-12)


15.05.070 Off-street parking regulations for downtown commercial and downtown commercial enterprise districts.

It is the purpose of this section to recognize the pedestrian-oriented nature of downtown activities while also recognizing the need for off-street parking facilities to eliminate traffic congestion. For the purpose of regulating off-street parking, there shall be two (2) divisions of the downtown commercial enterprise district, one (1) for the area west of the Burlington Northern Railroad tracks, and one (1) for the area east of the tracks.

A. Downtown commercial district. No off-street parking shall be required in this district, excepting that one (1) parking space per unit is required for multifamily residential development. No more than three (3) off-street surface parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area are permitted for nonresidential development. This parking maximum does not apply to structured parking. The downtown commercial district is the core area of downtown which should be pedestrian-oriented. In addition, the property owners in the downtown commercial district have provided off-street parking through local improvement district assessments.

B. Downtown commercial enterprise district – West of the Burlington Northern Railroad tracks. Off-street parking shall be provided and shall be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, except there may be a fifty (50) percent reduction from the parking standard requirements contained in KCC 15.05.040 and except that those properties in the downtown commercial enterprise zone who paid into parking local improvement district 260 shall be exempt from off-street parking requirements. One (1) parking space per unit is required for all multifamily residential development, except multifamily residential development for senior citizens may be further reduced as allowed by KCC 15.05.040(A)(2). No more than three (3) off-street surface parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area are permitted for nonresidential development except that this surface parking maximum does not apply to either structured parking or properties located in the “west frame district” of the Kent downtown planning area described in KCC 15.09.046, which shall have a maximum of four and one-half (4.5) off-street surface parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area for nonresidential development. 

C. Downtown commercial enterprise district – East of the Burlington Northern Railroad tracks. Off-street parking shall be provided and shall be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter except there may be a twenty-five (25) percent reduction from the parking standard requirements contained in KCC 15.05.040. One and one-half (1.5) parking spaces per unit are required for multifamily residential development, except multifamily residential development for senior citizens may be further reduced as allowed by KCC 15.05.040(A)(2). No more than three (3) off-street parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area are permitted for nonresidential development except that this surface parking maximum does not apply to either structured parking or properties located in the “east frame district” of the Kent downtown planning area described in KCC 15.09.046, which may have a maximum of four and one-half (4.5) off-street surface parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area for nonresidential development if at least twenty-five (25) percent of the overall project gross floor area is comprised of residential development. 

(Ord. No. 3050, § 4, 7-7-92; Ord. No. 3742, § 5, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 4043, § 4, 8-21-12)


15.05.080 Size and design standards.

A. Parking stall size. Parking stall size shall be as follows:

Standard    8.5 feet by 18 feet (1) (3)

Compact    8 feet by 16 feet (2) (3)

Parallel    9 feet by 23 feet 

Notes:

1. Dimensions may include overhang. See KCC 15.05.090(H) for exceptions.

2. See Diagram No. 1 following this chapter for typical compact stall placement.

3. Parking stall length may be reduced by a maximum of two (2) feet with corresponding increases in aisle width.

B. Minimum design standards and typical parking stall arrangements. For minimum design standards and typical parking stall arrangements, see the diagrams at the end of this chapter.

C. Units of measurement.

1. Benches. In stadiums, sports arenas, churches, and other places of assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews, or other similar seating facilities, each twenty (20) inches of width of such seating facilities shall be counted as one (1) seat for the purpose of determining requirements for off-street parking facilities under this title.

2. Fractions. When a unit of measurement determining the number of required parking spaces results in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to but not including one-half (1/2) shall be disregarded and fractions one-half (1/2) and over shall require one (1) parking space.

(Ord. No. 4043, § 5, 8-21-12)


15.05.090 Overhang exception, landscaping, paving, wheel stops, drainage, lighting, and curbing.

A. Landscaping generally. The landscaping requirements of Ch. 15.07 KCC shall apply with respect to off-street parking facilities.

B. Landscape islands. Landscape islands with a minimum size of one hundred (100) square feet shall be located in the following areas to protect vehicles and to enhance the appearance of parking areas:

1. At the ends of all parking rows.

2. Where loading doors or maneuvering areas are in close proximity to parking areas or stalls.

C. Additional parking lot landscaping. Parking, maneuvering, and loading areas of over twenty thousand (20,000) square feet shall have a minimum of ten (10) percent of the parking area, maneuvering area, and loading space landscaped as a means to reduce the barren appearance of the lot and to reduce the amount of stormwater runoff. Perimeter landscaping, required adjacent to property lines, shall not be calculated as part of the ten (10) percent figure.

D. Low impact design (LID) stormwater management facilities, in accordance with the LID Technical Guidance Manual for Puget Sound (current edition) and applicable city codes, are encouraged to be integrated with parking lot landscaping. Clustering of landscaping is permitted to encourage larger planting areas for LID. 

E. Paving. 

1. All vehicular maneuvering areas, including but not limited to off-street parking areas, truck and mobile equipment loading, unloading, storage, and maneuvering areas, and related accesses to and from public right-of-way shall be paved with asphalt or equivalent material, to be approved by the city engineer or his/her designee. Where it is not otherwise required by codes, ordinances, and standards, permeable surfacing is encouraged where site and soil conditions make LID feasible, as determined by the city.

2. The planning director may waive the paving requirement for areas used primarily for the storage and operation of heavy equipment, tracked vehicles, trucks, and other large-tire vehicles, where such areas are not generally used for regular deliveries or access by the general public.

3. Single-family residential driveways shall be paved from the edge of pavement or back of sidewalk on the street serving the driveway to either the front face of the carport or garage, or the first forty (40) feet, whichever is less. All parking areas in the front yard must also be paved in accordance with subsection (E)(1) of this section.

4. Permeable pavement for surfacing above the minimum. All parking spaces and associated access driveways that are above the minimum number of spaces required by this chapter shall be constructed of permeable surfacing unless site and soil conditions make permeable surfacing infeasible, as determined by the city. Permeable surfacing shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the LID Technical Guidance Manual for Puget Sound (current edition), the manufacturer’s recommendation, and any applicable city codes and standards. Single-family residential development is exempt from this requirement. Permeable paving is not appropriate in the following circumstances:

a. Fire lanes, unless the developer provides certification from the manufacturer that the material is capable of meeting fire access requirements;

b. Gas stations, truck stops, industrial chemical storage areas, or other locations where concentrated pollutant spills are a hazard; 

c. Parking lot surfaces with a slope more than five (5) percent;

d. Where excessive sediment is likely to be deposited on the surface, such as construction and landscaping material storage areas, or where an erosion prone area is upslope of the permeable surface;

e. Where seasonally high ground water creates prolonged saturation at or near the surface, or where soils can become instable when saturated; and

f. In any other situation or application where, based on accepted engineering practice or standards, the city determines that permeable paving is inappropriate. 

F. Wheel stops. Wheel stops, a minimum of two (2) feet from any obstruction or the end of the parking stall, shall be required in the following locations:

1. Where the parking stall abuts a building or where vehicles may overhang a property line.

2. Where the parking stall abuts a pedestrian walkway of less than six (6) feet in width.

3. Where a parking stall abuts any physical object which may be impacted (i.e., light standards, fire hydrants, fences, power vaults, utility poles, etc.).

4. Where a hazardous grade difference exists between the parking area and the abutting property.

5. Where other hazardous situations may exist as determined by the city engineer.

G. Lighting. Any lighting of a parking lot or storage area shall illuminate only the parking lot or storage area. All lighting shall be designed and located so as to avoid undue glare or reflection of light onto adjoining properties or public rights-of-way. 

Light standards shall not be located so as to interfere with parking stalls, maneuvering areas, or ingress and egress areas.

H. Vehicle overhang exception. Where sufficient area is available to allow safe and efficient overhang of a vehicle, the planning department may permit the standard parking stall length to be reduced by two (2) feet with corresponding increase in adjacent walkway or landscaping width. A corresponding increase in adjacent landscaping is not necessary if the landscaping is at least ten (10) feet in width.

I. Concrete curb placement. In addition to wheel stop requirements as provided in subsection (F) of this section, all landscape areas within or abutting parking areas shall be separated from the paved area by concrete curbing or other acceptable method as approved by the planning director and the city engineer.

J. Parking structures. Multiple level parking structures, developed either as a single use structure or as parking incorporated into a structure, shall be designed and laid out in accordance with the dimensional and numeric requirements of this chapter.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 41, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 4043, § 6, 8-21-12)


15.05.100 Off-street parking plans.

A. Off-street parking plans shall be subject to review and approval by planning services and the city engineer or his/her designee. Planning services shall review plans for compliance with the requirements of this title. The city engineer shall review plans based upon the following criteria:

1. Safety and efficiency of interior circulation.

2. Safety of ingress and egress points.

3. Effects of access on public streets with regard to street capacity, congestion, and delay.

4. Compliance with construction standards relating to stormwater runoff.

Diagram 1. Minimum Parking Design Standards 

	Parking Space Dimensions

	 	A (angle)	B (stall width)	C (stall depth)	D (aisle width, one-way)	E (aisle width, two-way)

	Standard	0° (parallel)	9'	23'	12'	20'

	Standard

Compact	30°	8.5'

8'	18'

16'	12'

12.5'	20'

20'

	Standard

Compact	45°	8.5'

8'	18'

16'	14.5'

14.5'	20'

20'

	Standard

Compact	60°	8.5'

8'	18'

16'	17'

17'	20'

20'

	Standard

Compact	90°	8.5'

8'	18'

16'	24'

24'	24'

24'


[IMAGE]


Diagram 2. Loading And Maneuvering Areas Between Loading Doors
[IMAGE]
 

(Ord. No. 3409, § 42, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 4003, § 3, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 4043, § 7, 8-21-12)


15.05.110 Electric vehicle charging station spaces.

A. Purpose. This section applies to all public electric vehicle charging stations located in parking lots or garages.

B. Number. No minimum number of charging station spaces is required.

C. Minimum Parking Requirements. An electric vehicle charging station space may be included in the calculation for minimum required parking spaces that are required pursuant to other sections of this chapter.

D. Location and Design Criteria. The provision of electric vehicle parking will vary based on the design and use of the primary parking lot. The following required and additional locational and design criteria are provided in recognition of the various parking lot layout options:

1. Where provided, parking for electric vehicle charging purposes shall include the following:

a. Signage. Each charging station space shall be posted with signage indicating the space is only for electric vehicle charging purposes. Days and hours of operation shall be included if time limits or tow away provisions are to be enforced. Refer to the 2009 Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) for electric vehicle and parking signs, specifically D9-11b, D9-11bP, R7-2, and R7-108. The following are examples of signage and appropriate sizes:

	
[IMAGE]
	
[IMAGE]
	
[IMAGE]


	12" x 12"	12" x 18"	12" x 18"

b. Maintenance. Charging station equipment shall be maintained in all respects, including the functioning of the charging equipment. A phone number or other contact information shall be provided on the charging station equipment for reporting when the equipment is not functioning or other problems are encountered.

c. Accessibility. Where charging station equipment is provided within an adjacent pedestrian circulation area, such as a sidewalk or accessible route to the building entrance, the charging equipment shall be located so as not to interfere with accessibility requirements of WAC 51-50-005.

d. Lighting. Where charging station equipment is installed, adequate site lighting shall exist, unless charging is for daytime purposes only.

e. Charging Station Equipment. Charging station outlets and connector devices shall be no less than 36 inches and no higher than 48 inches from the surface where mounted, and shall contain a retraction device or a place to hang permanent cords and connectors sufficiently above the ground or paved surface.

f. Charging Station Equipment Protection. Except for parallel parking stalls, adequate equipment protection, such as wheel stops or concrete-filled steel bollards, shall be used. Curbing may be used in lieu of wheel stops or bollards, if equipment is set back a minimum of 24 inches from the face of the curb.

2. Parking for electric vehicles should also consider the following:

a. Notification. Information on the charging station, identifying voltage and amperage levels and any time of use, fees, or safety information.

b. Signage. Installation of directional signs at the parking lot entrance and at appropriate decision points to effectively guide motorists to the charging station space(s). Refer to the 2009 Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) for electric vehicle and directional signs, specifically D9-11b, D9-11bP and M6-1. The following are examples of signage and appropriate sizes:

	
[IMAGE]
	12" x 12"	
[IMAGE]
	12" x 12"

	
[IMAGE]
	12" x 6"	
[IMAGE]
	12" x 6"

(Ord. No. 3976, § 3, 10-19-10)


Chapter 15.06 SIGN REGULATIONS* Revised 1/20 Revised 5/20

Sections:

15.06.010    Purpose.

15.06.020    Scope.

15.06.030    Prohibited signs. Revised 1/20

15.06.040    General restrictions and limitations for all districts. Revised 1/20 Revised 5/20

15.06.050    Regulations for specific districts. Revised 1/20 Revised 5/20

15.06.060    Regulations for public places and city right-of-way. Revised 1/20

15.06.070    Structural safety and maintenance of signs. Revised 1/20

15.06.080    Administrative procedures. Revised 1/20

*Cross reference(s) – Building code, ch. 14.01.


15.06.010 Purpose.

A. The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations for signs in order to promote the public health, safety and general welfare. It is further the intention of this chapter to harmonize the legitimate private purposes of signs, that is, the identification and promotion of the seller to the buyer, with public purposes. Public purposes include considerations of traffic safety and economic and aesthetic welfare. Unregulated signs may divert the driver’s attention from the road, causing a traffic hazard. In addition, conflicts between private signs and traffic control signs result in unsafe traffic conditions. The economic base of the city is, to some extent, dependent upon maintaining an attractive area, both as to natural and manmade features, in which to visit, live, and work.

B. Regulation of signs also serves to promote the private purposes of signs. Signs have become larger, more numerous and more expensive as a result of competition for attention. This competition of signs has, in some cases, defeated the very purposes for which they were created. The elimination of destructive competition between signs thus enhances the private purposes of signs as well as promotes the public health, safety and general welfare.


15.06.020 Scope.

This chapter applies to all existing and future signs within the corporate boundaries of the city, but does not apply to signs located within a building or structure.


15.06.030 Prohibited signs. Revised 1/20

The following signs are prohibited in all districts within the municipal boundaries of the city, except as specifically allowed as temporary signs:

A. Banners, streamers, pennants, and balloons.

B. Any sign using the words “stop,” “look,” or “danger,” or any other word, symbol, or character which might confuse traffic or detract from any legal traffic control devices.

C. Stationary motor vehicles, trailers, and related devices used to circumvent the intent of this chapter.

D. Signs which are pasted or attached to utility poles, trees, fences, or other signs, or to rocks or natural features.

E. Signs within 75 feet of the public right-of-way which are revolving more than eight revolutions per minute, blinking or flashing, except public service signs such as those which give the time, temperature, and humidity.

F. Roof signs.

G. All lighted signs which are adjacent to and directed toward a residential district and which detract from the welfare of the residential district.

(Ord. No. 4340, § 6, 11-19-19)


15.06.040 General restrictions and limitations for all districts. Revised 1/20 Revised 5/20

A. Sign material. All signs must be made of durable and weather-resistant wood, stone, masonry, metal, or plastic material.

B. Electronic messaging center sign. Electronic messaging centers are allowed in any nonresidential zone, except as provided by KCC 15.06.050(A)(4), subject to the allowed sign area for each property. Electronic message centers shall not contain video, animation, blinking or flashing messages or images, and shall not change message more than eight times per minute.

C. Signs in street right-of-way or future street right-of-way. No sign shall be located in or project into the present or future right-of-way of any public street unless such location or projection is specifically authorized by other provisions of this section.

D. Signs interfering with sight distance. No sign shall be so designed or constructed as to interfere with the sight distance of motorists proceeding on or approaching adjacent streets, alleys, driveways, or parking areas, or of pedestrians proceeding on or approaching adjacent sidewalks or pedestrian ways.

E. Signs over driveways. No sign suspended over or projecting into the area above a driveway located on private property shall be situated at a height of less than 15 feet above the surface of the driveway.

F. Signs over public sidewalks and pedestrian ways. No sign suspended over or projecting into the area above a public sidewalk or pedestrian way shall be situated at a height of less than eight and one-half feet above the surface of the sidewalk or pedestrian way, and no sign may project more than 75 percent of the distance between the property line and the curbline except for signs attached to the underside of a canopy or other architectural projection.

G. Directional signs. Directional signs and signs indicating entrances, exits, service areas, and parking areas shall be excluded from the sign provisions of this title, and may be erected on private property upon approval of the planning director. These signs shall not contain advertising or promotional information, and may be restricted in size.

H. Removal of signs on closure of business. Upon the closure and vacation of business or activity, the owner of the business or activity shall have 120 calendar days from the date of closure to remove all signs related to the business or activity.

I. Window signs. Window signs shall be considered as a sign and computed as part of the aggregate sign area and number of signs. Any painted-over window shall be considered as a wall. The following signs, if used in the specified manner, are not computed as part of the aggregate sign area and do not require a permit:

1. Decals indicating credit cards honored.

2. Banners or posters on the inside of windows. Such signs may be used in conjunction with national advertising programs, or as weekly marketing specials, or as decorations customary for special holidays.

J. Painted signs. Signs painted on exterior wall, window, or structure of any kind shall be computed as part of the aggregate sign area and number of signs.

K. Barber poles. In addition to any other signs authorized by the provisions of this chapter, any barbershop shall be entitled to display a barber pole. The design of the pole and its location and manner of erection shall be subject to the approval of the planning director.

L. Credit card signs. Signs indicating credit cards honored may be displayed in window areas only. Such signs are not computed as part of the aggregate sign area and do not require a permit.

M. Gate or entrance sign. Gate or entrance signs may be permitted, and may be located in public rights-of-way, if approved by the public works department.

N. Community bulletin board. Subdivisions and residential communities may be allowed to erect a permanent structure as a community bulletin board if approved by the planning director.

O. Business hours signs. Signs stating business hours shall be excluded from the provisions of this title, and may be erected upon private property if approved by the planning director. These signs shall not contain advertising or promotional information. Maximum number permitted shall be one per entrance, with a maximum size of four square feet.

P. Public service signs. Nonadvertising or nonpromotional signs may be erected as a public service to the community by public service clubs or other nonprofit organizations. Such signs may be located in any zone upon approval by the planning director.

Q. Real estate signs. Real estate signs are permitted as follows. No sign permit is required.

1. Residential uses.

a. Single-family dwellings and duplexes. One real estate sign shall be permitted for each street frontage of a lot. The sign may have two faces, shall not exceed a height of five feet above the surface of the street unless placed in a window, shall not exceed an area of four square feet per face, and shall be unlighted.

b. Multiple-family dwellings. One real estate sign shall be permitted for each street frontage of a development. The sign shall not exceed an area of 12 square feet, shall be attached flat against a principal building, shall not project above the eave of the roof or the top of the parapet of the building, and shall be unlighted.

2. Commercial and industrial uses. One real estate sign shall be permitted for each public entrance, but there shall not be more than four signs per lot. The sign shall not exceed an area of eight square feet, shall be attached flat against the building or freestanding, shall not project above the eave of the roof or the top of the parapet of the building, and shall be unlighted.

3. Unimproved acreage. One real estate sign shall be permitted for each lot. The sign shall not exceed an area of one-fourth square foot for each foot of lot frontage and shall not in any event exceed 50 square feet. The sign shall not exceed a height of 10 feet above the surface of the nearest street, and shall be unlighted.

4. Portable signs. Portable signs are allowed for limited duration sales events such as open houses, on the premises for sale, and in the right-of-way pursuant to KCC 15.06.060. Owners of the signs shall be responsible for their removal within seven calendar days following the last date of the sales event.

R. Temporary signs. Temporary signs may be authorized by the planning department for a time period specified for each type of temporary sign.

1. Temporary subdivision or apartment signs. A temporary real estate sign declaring a group of lots, dwellings, or occupancies within a subdivision or apartment complex for sale or rent shall be permitted subject to the following conditions:

a. One such sign shall be permitted for each street frontage of the premises being sold or leased. The sign shall be located on the premises being sold or leased.

b. The area of such signs shall not exceed an area of 25 square feet each.

c. The signs shall not exceed a height of 10 feet above the level of the street.

d. The signs shall be unlighted.

e. The signs shall not interfere with the sight distance of pedestrians and motorists proceeding on or approaching adjacent streets.

f. The signs may remain as long as the project remains unsold or unleased, or for one year, whichever period shall be lesser; provided, however, that the planning director shall have the authority to extend the time period one year.

2. Construction signs. One sign identifying a project under construction shall be permitted for each street frontage of the building or structure under construction. The sign shall be permitted during the period of construction, and shall not exceed a total of 50 square feet for all faces.

3. Grand openings and special events signs. Special permits may be issued by the planning department for a period not to exceed 30 calendar days for banners and streamers for special events such as carnivals, outdoor affairs and sales, grand openings, and events of a similar nature.

4. Portable signs. Portable signs may be placed on private property without a permit only as follows:

a. A portable sign shall be made of weather-resistant wood, metal, or plastic and shall be no greater than 36 inches wide by 36 inches tall. Canvas, fabric, cardboard, and paper signs are prohibited.

b. Not more than two portable signs may be utilized per business. No commercial uses are allowed offsite portable signs in residential zones, except as allowed by subsection (Q)(4) of this section and KCC 15.06.060.

c. Portable signs shall not be placed within 10 feet of a driveway, wheelchair ramp, crosswalk, or situated in such a way as to constitute a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the public.

d. Owners of signs related to a limited duration event shall be responsible for their removal within seven calendar days after the termination of the event.

e. Portable signs advertising a property actively for sale are governed by subsection (Q)(4) of this section.

S. Off-premises signs.

1. Authorized. The total number of off-premises sign structures allowed within the city of Kent shall not exceed the total number of off-premises sign structures in existence as of March 5, 2000, the date the ordinance originally establishing this section became effective. Off-premises sign structures shall be inventoried by the city. In order to assist the city in its inventory, the owner of any off-premises sign located within the city shall, to the best of its ability, provide the city with information as to the dates of installation, repair, or alteration of the owner’s off-premises signs within the city and no repair, alteration, or replacement of any such off-premises sign may occur until such information is provided to the city. Subject to any permitting requirements, any person, firm, or corporation who owns or maintains off-premises sign structures within the city of Kent shall be authorized to alter, repair, maintain, and relocate their off-premises sign structures in existence as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this subsection. As unincorporated areas are annexed to the city of Kent, the total number of off-premises sign structures in the area annexed will constitute an addition to the number authorized in the city of Kent and shall be added to the inventory and shall be eligible to be relocated.

To the extent the provisions of KCC 15.08.100(F) are inconsistent with this subsection (S)(1), the provisions of this subsection shall prevail.

2. Districts where permitted. Off-premises signs are permitted in I1, I2, and I3 districts. Off-premises signs not in one of the above zones shall be categorized as legal nonconforming signs. A sign structure authorized to be relocated pursuant to subsection (S)(1) of this section may only be relocated to an I1, I2, or I3 zoning district. The owner of an off-premises sign shall have two years to relocate an inventoried off-premises sign that has been removed under the authority of a demolition permit. A one-year extension may be granted by the city planning director in instances where relocation cannot be undertaken due to circumstances beyond the control of the owner of the off-premises sign to be relocated.

3. Standards.

a. Maximum size. As of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this subsection, the maximum size per sign face is 300 square feet.

b. Maximum height. Maximum height is 35 feet.

c. Distance from any intersection. Off-premises signs shall be located a distance of 300 feet from any intersection.

d. Double-faced signs. An off-premises sign structure may contain up to two sign faces arranged either back-to-back or in a V-shape arrangement. The use of tri-vision panels on a sign face shall not in itself constitute additional sign faces.

e. Spacing. Not more than four sign structures per 1,000 lineal feet are permitted.

 4. Permits. Off-premises signs shall not be altered with regard to size, shape, orientation, height, or location without the prior issuance of a building permit. Ordinary maintenance shall not require building permits. Off-premises sign copy replacement may occur at any time and is exempt from the requirement for building permits.

5. Tri-vision panels. Subject to applicable permitting requirements, the allowable faces on off-premises sign structures listed on the official city of Kent off-premises sign inventory may contain tri-vision panels which rotate, subject to KCC 15.06.030(E). Tri-vision panels are the only type of moving parts authorized on off-premises signs.

6. Unpermitted signs. Owners of off-premises signs that have unpermitted tri-vision panels as of the date of the ordinance codified in this subsection shall have one year from the effective date of the ordinance enacting this provision to apply for and obtain permits for such.

7. Electronic video signs prohibited. Off-premises signs that contain electronic video displays similar to or otherwise depicting a television screen are prohibited.

8. Hazard or nuisance. All off-premises signs, together with all of their supports, braces, guys, and anchors, shall be kept in good repair and in a proper state of preservation and safety. If an off-premises sign is determined by the Kent building official to be in a state of disrepair so as to constitute a safety hazard or a nuisance as defined by the building code or Kent City Code, the building official may initiate enforcement proceedings pursuant to KCC 15.10.070.

9. Enforcement. Any violation of the provisions of this subsection (S) shall be subject to enforcement pursuant to KCC 15.10.070.

T. Stadium signs. One double-faced freestanding or wall identification sign is allowed for each street frontage. The sign may have an aggregate area of one square foot for each 10 lineal feet of street frontage, up to a maximum sign area of 200 square feet per display face. However, each stadium is guaranteed a minimum sign area of 12 square feet per display face regardless of street frontage. The sign may be illuminated. The sign may include on each regulated display face advertising on up to 40 percent of the total square footage for that display face. The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be 20 feet.

U. Motorist information follow through signs. Motorist information follow through signs may be located in the public right-of-way when permitted pursuant to KCC 6.07.050(A).

(Ord. No. 3093, § 1, 2-16-93; Ord. No. 3501, § 2, 2-1-00; Ord. No. 3706, § 3, 8-17-04; Ord. No. 4095, § 4, 12-10-13; Ord. No. 4340, § 7, 11-19-19; Ord. No. 4355, § 8 (Exh. H), 3-3-20)


15.06.050 Regulations for specific districts. Revised 1/20 Revised 5/20

In all districts the planning director shall have the option to waive sign type requirements in unique and special cases where, due to building design or other special circumstance, the development is unable to conform to stated standards.

A. Signs permitted in residential districts.

1. Identification signs for single-family dwellings and duplexes. One identification sign shall be permitted for each occupancy. The sign shall not exceed an area of three square feet, shall not exceed a height of six feet above the surface of the street, shall be attached directly to a building, fence, standard, or mailbox, and shall be unlighted or provided with indirect illumination. Home occupations shall not be allowed additional sign area.

2. Identification signs for multifamily dwellings. One identification sign shall be permitted for each development, except that multifamily dwellings with more than one street frontage may be allowed an additional sign for each street frontage of such lot. Each sign shall not exceed an area of 25 square feet, may be a wall or freestanding sign, shall be unlighted or indirectly lighted, and shall not exceed a height of six feet above the ground if freestanding.

3. Farm product identification signs. No permit is required, but such signs may not be located in the public right-of-way.

4. Institutional signs. For institutional uses allowed in single-family zones, one double-faced freestanding or wall identification sign is permitted for each street frontage. The sign may have an aggregate area of one square foot for each 10 lineal feet of street frontage. However, each use is guaranteed a minimum sign area of 25 square feet per display face regardless of street frontage. The sign shall be unlighted or indirectly illuminated. The sign may be an electronic messaging center subject to the restrictions of KCC 15.06.040(B). Freestanding symbols of sculpture used as identification may be permitted with the approval of the planning and building divisions. Freestanding signs and symbols of sculpture shall not exceed the maximum height of the underlying zoning district. Wall signs, lettering, or symbols may also be approved by the planning department.

B. Signs permitted in community commercial, general commercial, and commercial manufacturing districts. The aggregate sign area for any lot shall not exceed one and one-half square feet for each foot of street frontage. Aggregate sign area for corner lots shall not exceed one square foot for each foot of street frontage. The permitted signs enumerated in this subsection shall be subject to the total aggregate sign area.

1. Identification signs for occupancies. Each business establishment may have one freestanding sign for each street frontage if not located in a shopping center, and three additional signs.

a. Freestanding sign. The freestanding sign shall not exceed a height of 30 feet. The maximum sign area permitted is 200 square feet for the total of all faces. No one face shall exceed 100 square feet. The sign may be illuminated.

b. Additional signs. Three additional signs shall be permitted subject to the following restrictions:

i. The total area of all signs, graphics, or other advertising shall not be more than 10 percent of the building facade to which they are attached or on which they are displayed.

ii. On properties where a pole sign cannot be erected due to setback requirements or building placement, a projecting sign may be allowed in lieu of the permitted freestanding sign. The projecting sign may not exceed 15 square feet in outside dimension.

2. Identification signs for shopping centers. One freestanding identification sign, which may list the names of the occupants of the shopping center, shall be permitted for each street frontage of each shopping center. The maximum sign area permitted for a freestanding sign is 200 square feet for the total of all faces. No one face shall exceed 100 square feet. A freestanding sign shall not exceed a height of 30 feet, and may be illuminated.

3. Automobile service station signs. The aggregate sign area for any corner lot shall not exceed one square foot for each foot of lot frontage, and the aggregate sign area for any interior lot shall not exceed one and one-half square feet for each foot of lot frontage; and the permitted signs enumerated in this subsection shall be subject to the total aggregate sign area.

a. Freestanding signs. One freestanding lighted double-faced identification sign, not exceeding 200 square feet for the total of all faces, with no such face exceeding 100 square feet, is permitted. Such sign shall not exceed a height of 30 feet. If on a corner lot, two monument signs not exceeding 100 square feet per sign for the total of all faces are permitted. Such monument signs shall not exceed a height of 15 feet. Freestanding signs shall be lighted during business hours only.

b. Additional signs. Three additional signs shall be permitted subject to the following restrictions: The total area of all signs, graphics, or other advertising shall not be more than 10 percent of the building facade to which they are attached or on which they are displayed.

c. Fuel price signs. Fuel price signs shall be included in the aggregate sign area.

4. Farm product identification signs. No permit is required, but such signs may not be located in the public right-of-way.

C. Signs permitted in downtown commercial and downtown commercial enterprise districts. The aggregate sign area for any lot shall not exceed one and one-half square feet for each foot of street frontage. The aggregate sign area for corner lots shall not exceed one square foot for each foot of street frontage. The permitted signs enumerated in this subsection shall be subject to the total aggregate sign area.

1. Identification signs for multitenant buildings.

a. Wall sign. Each multitenant building may have one identification wall sign for the building’s identification for each street frontage. The sign shall not exceed a total of five percent of the facade to which it is attached. The sign shall not name or advertise the individual tenants of the building. Aggregate sign area shall apply. A multitenant building will have the option of the sign described in this subsection (C)(1)(a) or the identification sign described in subsection (C)(1)(b) of this section.

b. Freestanding sign. Each building may have one freestanding sign on each street frontage. The sign may not exceed 15 feet in height. The maximum sign area permitted for the freestanding sign is 100 square feet for the total of all faces. No one face shall exceed 50 square feet. Multitenant freestanding signs shall not name or advertise the individual tenants of the building.

2. Identification signs for occupancies. Each occupant of a multitenant building shall be permitted two wall signs. Such signs shall not exceed 10 percent of the facade of the individual business unit. Aggregate sign area shall not apply.

3. Identification signs for single-tenant buildings.

a. Each building may have one freestanding sign for each street frontage. The sign may not exceed a height of 15 feet. The maximum sign area permitted for the freestanding sign is 100 square feet for the total of all faces. No one face shall exceed 50 square feet.

b. Three additional signs shall be permitted. All signs are subject to the aggregate sign area allowed. The total area of all signs, graphics, or other types of signs shall not exceed 10 percent of the facade to which they are attached or on which they are displayed.

D. Signs permitted in midway transit community-1 district. The aggregate sign area for any lot shall not exceed one square foot for each linear foot of street frontage. Aggregate sign area for corner lots shall not exceed three-fourths of a square foot for each linear foot of street frontage. The permitted signs enumerated in this subsection shall be subject to the total aggregate sign area and may be permitted subject to Midway Design Guidelines.

1. Identification signs for occupancies. Each single business property may have one freestanding monument sign per street frontage or one projecting sign per street frontage if located along or at the intersections of SR 99, SR 516, South 240th Street, South 246th Street, or South 272nd Street, if not located in a multitenant building, and one wall sign and one suspended sign per street frontage.

a. Freestanding monument signs. Freestanding monument signs shall not exceed a height of 20 feet. The maximum sign area permitted is 100 square feet for the total of all faces. No one face shall exceed 50 square feet. The sign may be internally illuminated; provided, that it shall be constructed using individual letters/characters, or sign cabinets with an opaque field or background so that only the individual letters/characters are illuminated. Freestanding monument signs shall not rotate, blink, flash, or be animated. Freestanding monument signs shall include landscaping and curbing around the base of the sign to prevent vehicles hitting the structure and improve the visual appearance of the sign structure. Landscaping shall be in proportion to the structure, with a minimum of one-half square foot of landscaping for each square foot of sign area, and shall be maintained throughout the life of the sign.

b. Projecting or suspended signs. Projecting or suspended signs shall not protrude less than eight feet above the surface of the sidewalk. The following are recognized projecting signs:

i. Blade signs. Blade signs shall be double-faced, may be nonilluminated, internal or internal indirect illuminated, or neon tube illuminated. Internal illumination shall be constructed using individual letters/characters, or sign cabinets with an opaque field or background so that only the individual letters/characters are illuminated. The maximum sign area permitted is 80 square feet. No one face shall exceed 40 square feet. The maximum sign height permitted is 20 feet. Blade signs shall not rotate, blink, flash, or be animated.

ii. Hanging signs. Hanging signs shall be double-faced and shall be nonilluminated.

c. Wall signs. Wall signs shall not exceed an area of 10 percent of the building first floor facade to which they are attached, or 24 square feet, whichever is greater. Wall signs shall be attached flat against the building, and placement shall not exceed 35 feet above median sidewalk grade measured from the top of the sign. Wall signs may be nonilluminated, internally or indirectly illuminated. Internal illumination shall be constructed using individual letters/characters, or sign cabinets with an opaque field or background so that only the individual letters/characters are illuminated.

2. Identification signs for multitenant buildings. Each multitenant property may have one freestanding monument sign per street frontage or one projecting sign per street frontage if located along or at the intersections of SR 99 and SR 516, South 240th Street, South 246th Street, or South 272nd Street and each occupancy may have one wall sign and one suspended sign per occupancy, except the anchor tenants with a business frontage of at least 100 linear feet shall be allowed two wall signs. The aggregate wall sign area shall not exceed 10 percent of the first floor building facade to which the signs are attached.

a. Freestanding monument signs. Each multitenant property may have one freestanding monument sign on each street frontage. The sign may not exceed a height of 20 feet. The maximum sign area permitted is 100 square feet for the total of all faces. No one face shall exceed 50 square feet. The sign may be internally illuminated; provided, that it shall be constructed using individual letters/characters, or sign cabinets with an opaque field or background so that only the individual letters/characters are illuminated. Freestanding monument signs shall not rotate, blink, flash, or be animated. Freestanding monument signs shall include landscaping and curbing around the base of the sign to prevent vehicles hitting the structure and improve the visual appearance of the sign structure. Landscaping shall be in proportion to the structure, with a minimum of one-half square foot of landscaping for each square foot of sign area, and shall be maintained throughout the life of the sign.

b. Wall signs. Each multitenant building may have one identification wall sign for the building’s identification for each street frontage. The sign shall not exceed a total of five percent of the first floor facade to which it is attached. The sign shall not name or advertise the individual tenants of the building. The sign may be internally illuminated; provided, that it shall be constructed using individual letters/characters, or sign cabinets with an opaque field or background so that only the individual letters/characters are illuminated. Aggregate sign area shall apply. A multitenant building shall have the option of the sign described in this subsection (D)(2)(b) or the identification sign described in subsection (D)(2)(c) of this section.

c. Identification signs for occupancies. Each occupant of a multitenant building with street frontage shall be permitted two wall signs and one projecting or suspended sign. Each occupancy shall be allowed at least 24 square feet of sign area. The aggregate wall sign area shall not exceed 10 percent of the first floor facade to which the signs are attached. The wall sign may be internally illuminated. Internal illumination shall be constructed using individual letters/characters, or sign cabinets with an opaque field or background so that only the individual letters/characters are illuminated. The projecting or suspended sign shall be nonilluminated.

3. Freestanding signs, exceptions. The director may permit freestanding signs other than monument-type freestanding signs within the MTC-1 zoning district along the SR-99 street frontage to a maximum sign area of 150 square feet for the total of all faces, and a maximum height of 20 feet, where the applicant demonstrates all of the following:

a. No single cabinet face is greater than 40 square feet;

b. Creativity in design that creates visual interest for motorists and pedestrians consistent with the goals of the Midway Subarea Plan and Design Guidelines. Examples include sculptural signs or multi-cabinet signs with variation in face shape, size, and height;

c. The sign’s support structure(s) is (i) ornamented for pedestrian-level visual interest, or (ii) screened from view at the pedestrian eye level using landscaping or other creative screening element;

d. The subject property has at least 200 linear feet of frontage on SR-99 where the sign is to be located; 

e. The proposed signage will not adversely impact or detract from the welfare of nearby residences;

f. The proposed sign location will not obstruct or otherwise interfere with pedestrian movement, the location of pedestrian facilities within the public right-of-way, or on the private development site; and

g. A projecting or suspended sign would not achieve the intended purpose of such signage.

E. Signs permitted in midway transit community-2 district. The aggregate sign area for any lot shall not exceed one square foot for each linear foot of street frontage. Aggregate sign area for corner lots shall not exceed three-fourths of a square foot for each linear foot of street frontage. The permitted signs enumerated in this subsection shall be subject to the total aggregate sign area and may be permitted subject to Midway Design Guidelines.

1. Identification signs for occupancies. Each single business property may have one freestanding monument sign per street frontage or one projecting sign per street frontage, if not located in a multitenant building, and two wall signs and one suspended sign per street frontage.

a. Freestanding monument signs. Freestanding monument signs shall not exceed a height of five feet. The maximum sign area permitted is 30 square feet for the total of all faces. No one face shall exceed 15 square feet. The sign may be illuminated indirectly. Freestanding monument signs shall include landscaping and curbing around the base of the sign to prevent vehicles hitting the structure and improve the visual appearance of the sign structure. Landscaping shall be in proportion to the structure, with a minimum of one-half square foot of landscaping for each square foot of sign area, and shall be maintained throughout the life of the sign.

b. Projecting or suspended signs. Projecting or suspended signs shall not protrude less than eight feet above the surface of the sidewalk. The following are recognized projecting signs:

i. Blade signs. Blade signs shall be double-faced, may be nonilluminated, indirectly illuminated, or neon tube illuminated. The maximum sign area permitted is 30 square feet. No one face shall exceed 15 square feet. The maximum sign height permitted is 15 feet. Blade signs shall not rotate, blink, flash, or be animated.

ii. Hanging signs. Hanging signs shall be double-faced and shall be nonilluminated.

c. Wall signs. Wall signs shall not exceed an area of five percent of the building first floor facade to which they are attached, or 24 square feet, whichever is greater. Wall signs shall be attached flat against the building, and placement shall not exceed 15 feet above median sidewalk grade measured from the top of the sign. If a single business building is greater than 65 feet in height, one building identification wall sign for each street frontage may be placed on the parapet. Wall signs may be nonilluminated, internally or indirectly illuminated, or neon tube illuminated. Internal illumination shall be constructed using individual letters/characters, or sign cabinets with an opaque field or background so that only the individual letters/characters are illuminated. Wall signs shall not blink, flash, or be animated.

2. Identification signs for multitenant buildings. Each multitenant property may have one freestanding monument sign or one projecting sign and each occupancy with street frontage may have two wall signs and one suspended sign. The aggregate wall sign area shall not exceed five percent of the first floor building facade to which the signs are attached.

a. Freestanding monument signs. Each multitenant property may have one freestanding monument sign on each street frontage. The sign may not exceed a height of five feet. The maximum sign area permitted is 30 square feet for the total of all faces. No one face shall exceed 15 square feet. The sign may be illuminated indirectly. Freestanding monument signs shall include landscaping and curbing around the base of the sign to prevent vehicles hitting the structure and improve the visual appearance of the sign structure. Landscaping shall be in proportion to the structure, with a minimum of one-half square foot of landscaping for each square foot of sign area, and shall be maintained throughout the life of the sign.

b. Projecting or suspended signs. Projecting or suspended signs shall not protrude less than eight feet above the surface of the sidewalk. The following are recognized projecting signs:

i. Blade signs. Blade signs shall be double-faced, may be nonilluminated, internal indirect illuminated, or neon tube illuminated. The maximum sign area permitted is 30 square feet. No one face shall exceed 15 square feet. The maximum sign height permitted is 15 feet. Blade signs shall not rotate, blink, flash, or be animated.

ii. Hanging signs. Hanging signs shall be double-faced and shall be nonilluminated.

c. Wall signs. Each multitenant building may have one identification wall sign for the building’s identification for each street frontage. The sign shall not exceed a total of five percent of the first floor facade to which it is attached, or 24 square feet, whichever is greater. Wall signs shall be attached flat against the building, and placement shall not exceed 15 feet above median sidewalk grade measured from the top of the sign. If the multitenant building is greater than 65 feet in height, one building identification wall sign for each street frontage may be placed on the parapet. The sign shall not name or advertise the individual tenants of the building. Wall signs may be nonilluminated, internally or indirectly illuminated, or neon tube illuminated. Internal illumination shall be constructed using individual letters/characters, or sign cabinets with an opaque field or background so that only the individual letters/characters are illuminated. Wall signs shall not blink, flash, or be animated. Aggregate sign area shall apply. A multitenant building shall have the option of the sign described in this subsection (E)(2)(c) or the identification sign described in subsection (E)(2)(d) of this section.

d. Identification signs for occupancies. Each occupant of a multitenant building with street frontage shall be permitted two wall signs and one projecting or suspended sign. Each occupancy with street frontage shall be allowed at least 24 square feet of sign area. The aggregate wall sign area shall not exceed five percent of the first floor facade to which the signs are attached. The wall sign may be internally illuminated. Internal illumination shall be constructed using individual letters/characters, or sign cabinets with an opaque field or background so that only the individual letters/characters are illuminated. The projecting or suspended sign shall be nonilluminated. Wall signs shall not blink, flash, or be animated.

F. Signs permitted in midway commercial/residential district. The aggregate sign area for any lot shall not exceed one square foot for each linear foot of street frontage. Aggregate sign area for corner lots shall not exceed three-fourths of a square foot for each linear foot of street frontage. The permitted signs enumerated in this subsection shall be subject to the total aggregate sign area and may be permitted subject to Midway Design Guidelines.

1. Identification signs for occupancies. Each single business property may have one freestanding monument sign per street frontage or one projecting sign per street frontage, if not located in a multitenant building, and two wall signs and one suspended sign per street frontage.

a. Freestanding monument signs. Freestanding monument signs shall not exceed a height of 15 feet. The maximum sign area permitted is 80 square feet for the total of all faces. No one face shall exceed 40 square feet. The sign may be internally illuminated; provided, that it shall be constructed using individual letters/characters, or sign cabinets with an opaque field or background so that only the individual letters/characters are illuminated. Freestanding monument signs shall not rotate, blink, flash, or be animated. Freestanding monument signs shall include landscaping and curbing around the base of the sign to prevent vehicles hitting the structure and improve the visual appearance of the sign structure. Landscaping shall be in proportion to the structure, with a minimum of one-half square foot of landscaping for each square foot of sign area, and shall be maintained throughout the life of the sign.

b. Projecting or suspended signs. Projecting or suspended signs shall not protrude less than eight feet above the surface of the sidewalk. The following are recognized projecting signs:

i. Blade signs. Blade signs shall be double-faced, may be nonilluminated, internal or internal indirect illuminated, or neon tube illuminated. Internal illumination shall be constructed using individual letters/characters, or sign cabinets with an opaque field or background so that only the individual letters/characters are illuminated. The maximum sign area permitted is 80 square feet. No one face shall exceed 40 square feet. The maximum sign height permitted is 20 feet. Blade signs shall not rotate, blink, flash, or be animated.

ii. Hanging signs. Hanging signs shall be double-faced and shall be nonilluminated.

c. Wall signs. Wall signs shall not exceed an area of 10 percent of the building first floor facade to which they are attached, or 24 square feet, whichever is greater. Wall signs shall be attached flat against the building, and placement shall not exceed 35 feet above median sidewalk grade measured from the top of the sign. Wall signs may be nonilluminated, internally or indirectly illuminated. Internal illumination shall be constructed using individual letters/characters, or sign cabinets with an opaque field or background so that only the individual letters/characters are illuminated.

2. Identification signs for multitenant buildings. Each multitenant property may have one freestanding monument sign or one projecting sign and each occupancy with street frontage may have two wall signs and one suspended sign per street frontage, except the anchor tenants with a business frontage of at least 100 linear feet shall be allowed three wall signs. The aggregate wall sign area shall not exceed 10 percent of the first floor building facade to which the signs are attached.

a. Freestanding monument signs. Each multitenant property may have one freestanding monument sign on each street frontage. The sign may not exceed a height of 15 feet. The maximum sign area permitted is 80 square feet for the total of all faces. No one face shall exceed 40 square feet. The sign may be internally illuminated; provided, that it shall be constructed using individual letters/characters, or sign cabinets with an opaque field or background so that only the individual letters/characters are illuminated. Freestanding monument signs shall not rotate, blink, flash, or be animated. Freestanding monument signs shall include landscaping and curbing around the base of the sign to prevent vehicles hitting the structure and improve the visual appearance of the sign structure. Landscaping shall be in proportion to the structure, with a minimum of one-half square foot of landscaping for each square foot of sign area, and shall be maintained throughout the life of the sign.

b. Wall signs. Each multitenant building may have one identification wall sign for the building’s identification for each street frontage. The sign shall not exceed a total of five percent of the first floor facade to which it is attached. The sign shall not name or advertise the individual tenants of the building. The sign may be internally illuminated; provided, that it shall be constructed using individual letters/characters, or sign cabinets with an opaque field or background so that only the individual letters/characters are illuminated. Aggregate sign area shall apply. A multitenant building will have the option of the sign described in this subsection (F)(2)(b) or the identification sign described in subsection (F)(2)(c) of this section.

c. Identification signs for occupancies. Each occupant of a multitenant building with street frontage shall be permitted two wall signs and one projecting or suspended sign. Each occupancy shall be allowed at least 24 square feet of sign area. The aggregate wall sign area shall not exceed 10 percent of the first floor facade to which the signs are attached. The wall sign may be internally illuminated. Internal illumination shall be constructed using individual letters/characters, or sign cabinets with an opaque field or background so that only the individual letters/characters are illuminated. The projecting or suspended sign shall be nonilluminated.

G. Signs permitted in neighborhood convenience commercial districts.

1. Generally. One freestanding double-faced identification sign shall be permitted for each lot. The sign shall not exceed a maximum area of 50 square feet for the total of all faces. No one face shall exceed 25 square feet. A freestanding sign shall not exceed a height of 15 feet and shall be unlighted or provided with indirect illumination.

2. Identification signs for buildings. One identification sign shall be permitted for each principal building. The sign shall not exceed an area of five percent of the facade to which it is attached, shall be attached flat against the building, shall not project above the eave of the roof or the top of the parapet, and shall be unlighted or provided with indirect illumination. Such signs shall not advertise or name individual tenants of the building.

3. Identification signs for occupancies. Signs not exceeding a total of five percent of the facade of the business unit to which they are attached shall be permitted for each occupancy in a multitenant building when the occupancy has outside frontage.

H. Signs permitted in industrial districts.

1. Aggregate sign area. The aggregate sign area for lots in the AG district shall not exceed one-half square foot for each foot of street frontage. The aggregate sign area for lots in the I1, I2, and I3 districts shall not exceed one square foot for each foot of street frontage. In no case shall the aggregate sign area on either street frontage exceed one square foot for each foot of street frontage on a corner lot. The permitted signs enumerated in this subsection shall be subject to the total aggregate sign area.

a. Identification signs for buildings. One identification sign shall be permitted for each lot on each street frontage, which may be a freestanding sign or a wall sign. The maximum sign area permitted for a freestanding sign is 400 square feet for the total of all faces. No one face shall exceed 200 square feet. If the sign is a wall sign, its size shall not exceed 20 percent of the building facade. A freestanding sign shall not exceed a height of 20 feet. The sign may be illuminated.

b. Identification signs for occupancies. One identification sign shall be permitted for each occupancy on each street frontage and shall be a wall sign. The maximum size of the sign shall be 10 percent of the building facade. This sign may be illuminated. If the identification sign permitted under subsection (H)(1)(a) of this section is a wall sign, an additional wall sign may be permitted on a building facade not facing a street frontage.

2. Farm product identification signs. No permit is required, but the sign may not be located in the public right-of-way.

I. Signs permitted in planned unit developments, special use combining districts, and mobile home park districts and for conditional uses. All signs in planned unit developments, special use combining districts, and mobile home parks and for conditional uses shall be incorporated as part of the developmental plan and approved with the developmental plan. Subsequent changes which conform to the adopted signing program may be granted by the planning director.

J. Signs permitted in shopping centers. The aggregate sign area for each occupant of a shopping center shall not exceed 20 percent of the front facade of the unit. Wall signs are permitted on each exterior wall of the individual business unit. A minimum of 30 square feet shall be permitted for any occupancy. No combination of signs shall exceed 10 percent of the facade to which they are attached. If there is an attached canopy or overhang, a 10-square-foot sign may be attached to the canopy or overhang in addition to the other permitted signs. Such sign shall be at least eight feet above any pedestrian walkway.

(Ord. No. 2810, § 1, 11-1-88; Ord. No. 3050, §§ 6, 7, 7-7-92; Ord. No. 3142, § 1, 11-2-93; Ord. No. 3162, § 1, 4-5-94; Ord. No. 3409, § 43, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 3439, § 4, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 3543, § 10, 2-20-01; Ord. No. 3612, § 4, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 3648, § 7, 7-1-03; Ord. No. 4011, § 20, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 4166, § 5, 9-1-15; Ord. No. 4273, § 1, 3-20-18; Ord. No. 4340, § 8, 11-19-19; Ord. No. 4355, § 8 (Exh. H), 3-3-20)


15.06.060 Regulations for public places and city right-of-way. Revised 1/20

Signs may be placed on a public place without a permit only as follows:

A. Portable signs. Portable signs as defined herein may be placed on a public place without a permit upon the following conditions:

1. The location of the sign shall not reduce or obstruct pedestrian passage on the sidewalk to less than four feet to the nearest street trees, utility poles, traffic control signs and devices, parking meters, fire hydrants, buildings and other similar devices and structures. Furthermore, such placement shall be consistent with any applicable standards established by the Americans with Disabilities Act and shall not obstruct vehicular traffic or parking or the use of any crosswalk, wheelchair ramp, bus, or taxi zone.

2. No portable signs shall be installed or placed upon power poles, telephone poles, street light standards, sign posts, trees, traffic controllers, markers, on any railing, fence, bridge, overpass, street, crosswalk, public building, or lawn or open area surrounding any public building.

3. No portable sign shall be placed within 10 feet of a driveway, wheelchair ramp, crosswalk, or intersection or placed or situated on a public place in such a way as to constitute a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public or interfere with the use of the public place. Such signs shall not obstruct sight distance per KCC 15.06.040(D).

4. Portable signs shall be installed so that the top of the sign does not exceed an elevation of 36 inches higher than the height of the sidewalk, bike path or walkway. Where these improvements do not exist, the 36-inch height limitation shall be measured from the highest edge of the street, alley or driveway. Signs may also not exceed a width of 36 inches and shall not be installed in locations where the width of the sign would impede safe travel.

5. Portable signs shall be constructed of weather-resistant wood, metal or plastic. Canvas, cardboard and paper signs are prohibited.

6. Attachment of paper, plastic, balloons, or cardboard to a sign is not permitted if such attachment extends the approved height or width of the sign.

7. Portable signs shall not be weighted down, or otherwise attached to public property in such a way as to resist impact by a traveling vehicle, bicycle or pedestrian.

B. Banners. Banners may be placed on a public place only by permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

C. Other. All other signs are prohibited on public places for private purposes and on any equipment, facilities and structures located upon public places, including, but not limited to, power poles, telephone poles, street light standards, sign posts, trees, traffic controllers, markers, railings, bridges, overpasses, and public buildings.

D. Removal. Owners of signs and banners displayed for temporary events shall be responsible for their removal within seven calendar days following the last date of the event or the activity for which the signs were displayed. Signs that are faded, torn, broken or otherwise in a state of disrepair shall be removed by the owner immediately.

(Ord. No. 4340, § 9, 11-19-19)


15.06.070 Structural safety and maintenance of signs. Revised 1/20

All parts, portions, units, and materials composing a sign, together with the frame, background, supports, or anchorage thereto, shall be maintained in a proper state of safety and repair and a proper state of preservation. The surface of all signs shall be kept neatly painted. Signs that are faded, torn, broken or otherwise in a state of disrepair shall be removed by the owner immediately or repaired within 14 calendar days of notification by the city.

(Ord. No. 4340, § 10, 11-19-19)


15.06.080 Administrative procedures. Revised 1/20

A. Permits. To ensure compliance with the regulations of this chapter, a permit shall be required for all signs hereafter installed or altered within the corporate boundaries of the city, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. No sign shall be erected, installed, applied, affixed, altered, or relocated without a permit from the building department and the planning department. The sign permit shall certify that the sign, as represented by plans, drawings, or statements, is in conformance with the regulations of this chapter.

B. Fees and deposits. Fees shall be governed by the fee schedule contained in the fee resolution adopted by the city.

C. The planning director shall make the final decision on a sign permit application submitted pursuant to this chapter. Any appeal from the final decision of the planning director shall be to the hearing examiner pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 2.32 KCC and the appeal provisions of Chapter 12.01 KCC.

D. Abatement of illegal signs. Any sign that violates the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and shall be in lien against the property on which the sign was maintained and a personal obligation against the property owner. The property owner shall first be served with a notice to abate the nuisance, except in the case of portable signs. Illegal portable signs may be immediately removed by the city, and the owner shall be given notice that the sign will be destroyed if not claimed within 10 calendar days. Appeal of the abatement notice may be made to the hearing examiner. If, after such a hearing, the hearing examiner orders agents of the city to remove the nuisance, they shall have authority to enter upon private property to remove the nuisance.

E. Variances.

1. A sign variance is categorized as a Process III application and shall be subject to the requirements of Chapter 12.01 KCC. Variances from the terms of this chapter may be granted by the hearing examiner upon proper application. Variances may be granted when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, the strict interpretation of the regulations of this chapter deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classifications.

2. The variance shall not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with a limitation upon uses of other properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is situated.

(Ord. No. 3424, § 29, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 4340, § 11, 11-19-19)


Chapter 15.07 LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS* Revised 5/20

Sections:

15.07.010    Purpose.

15.07.020    Landscape plan approval.

15.07.030    Failure to complete required landscaping – Inspection.

15.07.040    General landscape requirements for all zones.

15.07.050    Types of landscaping.

15.07.060    Regulations for specific districts. Revised 5/20

15.07.070    Maintenance of landscaping.

*Cross reference(s) – Street trees, ch. 6.10; building codes, ch. 14.01.


15.07.010 Purpose.

A. The provisions of this chapter are to provide minimum standards for landscaping in order to maintain and protect property values and enhance the general appearance of the city. It is also the purpose of this chapter to encourage low impact development (LID) through the use of soil amendments and integration of landscape areas and LID stormwater management facilities. Landscaping shall be designed as an integral part of the overall site plan with the purpose of enhancing building design, public views, and spaces, and providing buffers, transitions, and screening.

B. The planning director shall have the authority to waive specific requirements or impose additional requirements in unique or special circumstances to ensure the fulfillment of the stated purposes of this chapter and to allow for flexibility and innovation of design. Special circumstances or unique conditions shall be reviewed with the planning director prior to submittal of a landscape plan. Examples of what might constitute unique or special circumstances include:

1. Preservation of unique wildlife habitat.

2. Preservation of natural or native areas.

3. Compliance with special easements.

4. Renovation of existing landscaping.

5. Unique site uses.

This list is for illustrative purposes only, and is not intended to be exhaustive.

(Ord. No. 3612, § 5, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 4074, § 1, 2-19-13)


15.07.020 Landscape plan approval.

A. A building permit shall not be issued until the landscape plan has been approved.

B. At the time of development plan review, planning services shall review specific landscape requirements with the owner or applicant.

C. Landscape plan review shall be required in the following instances:

1. New construction. New construction is covered by this chapter as follows:

a. Buildings constructed or enlarged.

b. Other structures or use areas constructed or enlarged.

c. Landscaped areas constructed or enlarged as follows:

i. If constructing new landscaped area or adding the equivalent of fifty (50) percent or more of the existing landscaped area, the entire site must meet the standards of this title.

ii. If adding less than fifty (50) percent of the existing landscaped area, only the new portion must meet the standards of this title.

2. Change in use. When change of use permit is required, landscaping shall be provided to meet the standards in this title.

(Ord. No. 4074, § 2, 2-19-13)


15.07.030 Failure to complete required landscaping – Inspection.

A. Failure to complete all of the required landscaping or any part of it within six (6) months of the building occupancy, issuance of the certificate of occupancy, or issuance of the temporary certificate of occupancy shall constitute a code violation, subject to abatement under Chapter 1.04 KCC.

B. It shall be the responsibility of the project manager or business owner to contact planning services upon completion of the landscaping work and request an inspection.

C. Planning services may inspect the landscaping upon request of the project manager or business owner or at any time after the six (6) month expiration date as described in subsection (A) of this section.

(Ord. No. 4074, § 3, 2-19-13)


15.07.040 General landscape requirements for all zones.

A. Landscape development standards.

1. All ingress or egress easements that provide corridors to a subject lot, and are not adjacent to a public right-of-way, shall be considered the same as a public right-of-way. Landscape requirements for easement corridors shall be the same as those required for areas adjacent to public rights-of-way.

2. All portions of a lot not devoted to building, future building, parking, storage, or accessory uses shall be landscaped in a manner appropriate to the stated purposes of this chapter.

3. All required landscaping areas shall extend to the curbline or to the street edge. A crushed rock path in lieu of landscaping shall be required where appropriate, as determined by planning services. Landscaping located in a right-of-way does not satisfy the landscape requirements.

4. Required landscape areas that are not appropriate for landscaping, due to the existence of rail lines or other features, shall be relocated. Relocation shall be another lot line of the subject lot, if appropriate; if inappropriate, relocation shall be to an equal-sized area in another portion of the lot, to be determined by planning services upon review with the owner or developer.

5. Landscaping shall not conflict with the safety of those using adjacent sidewalks, or with traffic safety. Safety features of landscaping shall be discussed at the time of development plan review, if necessary. Crime prevention through environmental design (CPTED) principles shall be used in the development and landscape plan to identify and incorporate design features that reduce opportunities for criminal activity to occur.

6. Required landscaping may be integrated with LID stormwater management facilities, where feasible. LID facilities shall not compromise the purpose or intent of required landscaping, and landscaping shall not result in the disruption of the function of the LID facilities. LID facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the LID Technical Guidance Manual for Puget Sound (2005 edition, or as subsequently amended) and any applicable city codes and standards.

7. The configuration and plant species of landscape areas on a site shall be designed so as to not disrupt the functions of stormwater systems.

B. Landscape requirements for parking areas, buffers, and screening.

1. All parking, maneuvering, and loading areas of over twenty thousand (20,000) square feet shall have a minimum of ten (10) percent of the parking area, maneuvering area, and loading space landscaped with Type V landscaping as a means to reduce the barren appearance of the lot and to reduce the amount of stormwater runoff. Perimeter landscaping, required adjacent to property lines, shall not be calculated as part of the ten (10) percent figure.

2. The perimeter of all parking lots that abut residential zones or uses shall be landscaped in a manner that shields residential zones or uses from lights and provides aesthetic separation between uses. This shall include minimum depth of five (5) feet of Type II landscaping and appropriate fencing (six (6) foot high solid wood fence or equivalent), unless otherwise provided by this chapter, or otherwise approved by the planning director.

3. All property abutting Highway 167 or Interstate 5 shall be landscaped with Type III landscaping to a minimum depth of ten (10) feet unless a larger area is required elsewhere in this chapter.

4. All property abutting East Valley Highway between South 180th Street on the north to the SR167 overpass on the south shall be landscaped with Type III landscaping to a minimum depth of fifteen (15) feet unless a larger area is required elsewhere in this chapter.

5. All trash containers shall be screened from abutting properties and streets by a one hundred (100) percent sight-obscuring fence or wall and appropriate landscape screen (Type II or III, minimum three (3) feet wide) that allows for aesthetic improvement without compromising site safety.

6. All outside storage areas shall be screened by fencing and landscaping a minimum of five (5) feet in depth unless it is determined by development plan review that such screening is not necessary, due to storage area location, existing fencing or landscaping, or because stored materials are not visually obtrusive.

7. Landscaping shall be placed outside of sight-obscuring fences, or one hundred (100) percent sight-obscuring fences, unless it is determined by planning services that such arrangement would be detrimental to the stated purposes of this chapter or would compromise site safety.

8. The perimeter of all stormwater detention ponds shall be landscaped to a minimum depth of ten (10) feet of Type II landscaping. If perimeter fencing is required based on public works department standards, it shall be constructed of vinyl-coated chainlink or sold screen fencing. The fencing shall be located between the pond and the landscape area.

C. Landscape planting requirements.

1. Bark mulch, gravel, or other nonvegetative material shall only be used in conjunction with landscaping to assist vegetative growth and maintenance or to visually complement plant material. Nonvegetative material is not a substitute for plant material.

2. Required landscape areas shall be provided with adequate drainage. All new landscape areas shall incorporate soil amendments as follows: the uppermost twelve (12) inches of soil shall be tilled and two (2) inches of composted material shall be fully incorporated into the tilled soil; or to specifications as otherwise provided in the Stormwater Management Manual of Western Washington, Department of Ecology, dated August 2012, or as subsequently amended. Compaction of landscaping areas from vehicles and heavy equipment shall be avoided after tilling.

3. Slopes shall not exceed a three (3) to one (1) ratio (width to height), in order to decrease erosion potential and assist in ease of maintenance.

4. Quantity, arrangement, and types of plants installed shall be appropriate to the size of the required landscape areas and purpose of planting area as noted in KCC 15.07.050 pertaining to types of landscaping.

5. Landscape plans shall include a diversity of native, native adapteds, and drought tolerant, low water use plant species, and shall promote native wildlife habitat where feasible.

6. Irrigation systems incorporated into a landscaping area shall include rain sensors to promote water conservation.

(Ord. No. 2786, § 5, 6-21-88; Ord. No. 3409, § 44, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 3830, § 18, 3-6-07; Ord. No. 4043, § 8, 8-21-12; Ord. No. 4074, § 4, 2-19-13)


15.07.050 Types of landscaping.

 

	 	Type I

Solid Screen	Type II

Visual Screen	Type III

Visual Buffer	Type IV

Low Cover	Type V

Open Area

	Purpose	Type I landscaping is intended to provide a solid sight barrier to totally separate incompatible uses.	Type II landscaping is intended to create a visual separation that is not necessarily one hundred (100) percent sight-obscuring between incompatible uses.	Type III landscaping is intended to provide visual separation of uses from streets and main arterials and between compatible uses so as to soften the appearance of streets, parking lots, and building facades.	Type IV landscaping is intended to provide visual relief where clear sight is desired or as a complement to larger, more predominant planting materials.	Type V landscaping is primarily intended to visually interrupt large open spaces of parking areas.

	Description	Type I landscaping shall consist of evergreen trees or tall shrubs with a minimum height of six (6) feet at planting, which will provide a one hundred (100) percent sight-obscuring screen within three (3) years from the time of planting; or a combination of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs backed by one hundred (100) percent sight-obscuring fence.	Type II landscaping shall be evergreen or a mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees with large shrubs and ground cover interspersed with the trees. A sight-obscuring fence may be required if determined by development plan review that such a fence is necessary.	Type III landscaping shall be evergreen and deciduous trees planted not more than thirty (30) feet on center interspersed with large shrubs and ground cover. Where used to separate parking from streets, plantings must create a visual barrier of at least forty-two (42) inches in height at time of planting and form a solid screen three (3) years after planting.	Type IV landscaping shall consist of a mixture of evergreen and deciduous shrubs and ground cover, to provide solid covering of the entire landscaping area within three (3) years of planting and to be held to a maximum height of three and one-half (3 1/2) feet.	Type V landscaping shall consist of trees planted with supporting shrubs or ground cover. Each landscape area shall be of sufficient size to promote and protect growth of plantings, with a one hundred (100) square foot minimum area and no dimension less than five (5) feet.

	Additional requirements are as follows. Specifications consistent with American Standard for Nursery Stock, ANSI Z60.1-2004, or as amended, are also acceptable.

(A) Deciduous trees shall be a minimum of one and one-half (1 1/2) inch caliper at the time of planting. Evergreen trees shall be six (6) feet high at planting. Tree spacing shall be as appropriate for the species.

(B) Ground cover means low-growing vegetative materials with a mound or spreading manner of growth. Spacing is dependent on the type and size of the plant material and must be adequate to provide total coverage of the landscape area within three (3) years. Ground cover plants, other than grasses, must be at least the four (4) inch pot size at time of planting.

(C) Shrubs shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) inches in height, or two (2) gallon container size, at the time of planting.

(D) The plantings and fence must not violate the sight area safety requirements at street intersections.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 45, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 4074, § 5, 2-19-13)


15.07.060 Regulations for specific districts. Revised 5/20

 

	Zones

 	Minimum Perimeter Landscape Planter Width and Type	Additional Requirements

	Abutting Street	Side Yard	Rear Yard	Abutting Residential District or Use

	SR-1 through SR-8	N/A (see also KCC 12.04.245)	N/A

	MR-D	N/A

	MR-G

MR-T

MR-M

MR-H	10' Type III	10' Type II or III	10' Type II or III	N/A, except for parking lots per KCC 15.07.040(B)(2)	Open green area shall occupy no less than 25 percent of the total lot area. A minimum of five feet of foundation landscaping shall be placed along the perimeter of any multifamily structure. Foundation landscaping consists of shrubbery or some other combination of landscape materials that helps to reduce the visual bulk of structures and buffer dwelling units from light, glare, and other environmental intrusions. Additional requirements may apply through multifamily design review, KCC 15.09.045(D).

	MHP	Requirements per Chapter 12.05 KCC

	CC

CM

GC	5' Type III	N/A	N/A	10' Type II, and for parking lots per KCC 15.07.040(B)(2)	N/A

	DC	N/A	A minimum of three feet of landscaping to screen off-street parking areas, placement of which shall be determined through the downtown design review process outlined in KCC 15.09.046. Additional landscaping or alternative methods of screening may be approved through downtown design review.

	DCE	N/A	10' Type II, and for parking lots per KCC 15.07.040(B)(2)	A minimum of three feet of landscaping to screen off-street parking areas, placement of which shall be determined through the downtown design review process outlined in KCC 15.09.046. Additional landscaping or alternative methods of screening may be approved through downtown design review.

	MTC-11	 

	MTC-22	 

	MCR3	 

	AG

I1	15' Type III in front yard	10' Type II or III	N/A	N/A, except for parking lots per KCC 15.07.040(B)(2)	KCC 15.09.047, Industrial design review

	I2	15' Type III in front yard	10' Type II or III	N/A	N/A, except for parking lots per KCC 15.07.040(B)(2)	KCC 15.09.047, Industrial design review

	I3	15' Type III in front yard	10' Type II or III	N/A	N/A, except for parking lots per KCC 15.07.040(B)(2)	KCC 15.09.047, Industrial design review

	NCC	10' Type III	5' or 10' Type II or III5, 7	5' Type II or III	10' Type II	 

	1MTC-1 additional landscaping requirements. Landscaping requirements shall be determined through the midway design review process outlined in KCC 12.01.040 and shall include the following to soften the appearance of parking areas and building elevation, and to provide separation between uses:

(A) The perimeter of properties abutting a single-family residential or mobile home park land use shall be landscaped with a minimum of 10 feet of Type I landscaping.

(B) The perimeter of properties abutting a multifamily residential land use shall be landscaped with a minimum of 10 feet of Type I landscaping.

(C) The perimeter of properties abutting a public right-of-way shall be landscaped with a minimum of 10 feet of Type III landscaping. The following exceptions apply:

(1) When a vehicular parking area abuts such setback, a Type III landscape strip with an average of 20 feet in depth shall be provided.

(2) When such setback is utilized as a public open space plaza and not accompanying parking, no perimeter landscaping strip shall be required.

(3) When such setback is utilized as a public open space plaza and exceeds 30 linear feet, street trees shall be provided as set forth in the 2009 Design and Construction Standards, or as the same may be subsequently amended.

(D) The perimeter of side property lines shall be landscaped with a minimum of five feet of Type III landscaping, unless the building is constructed at the build-to line or property line.

2MTC-2 additional landscaping requirements. Landscaping requirements shall be determined through the midway design review process outlined in KCC 12.01.040 and shall include the following to soften the appearance of parking areas and building elevations, and to provide separation between uses:

(A) The perimeter of properties abutting public parks, plazas, open space, or multi-purpose trails shall be landscaped with a minimum of 10 feet of Type III landscaping.

(B) When a vehicular parking area abuts a public right-of-way, a Type III landscaping strip a minimum of five feet in depth shall be provided.

(C) When a vehicular parking area abuts the side property lines, a Type III landscaping strip a minimum of 10 feet in depth shall be provided.

3MCR additional landscape requirements. Landscaping requirements shall be determined through the midway design review process outlined in KCC 12.01.040 and shall include the following to soften the appearance of parking areas and building elevations, and to provide separation between uses:

(A) When buildings abut the required front yard, a Type III landscaping strip minimally 10 feet in depth shall be provided.

(B) When vehicular parking area abuts a public right-of-way, a Type III landscaping strip minimally 15 feet in depth shall be provided.

(C) When vehicular parking area abuts the side property lines, a Type III landscaping strip minimally 10 feet in depth shall be provided.

4[Reserved].

5No landscaping along the side property lines shall be required between adjacent properties where a common, shared driveway with a perpetual cross-access easement is provided to serve the adjoining properties.

6[Reserved].

7A Type III landscape strip of at least 10 feet in depth shall be provided alongside all property lines of a corner lot that abut public rights-of-way.

(Ord. No. 4074, § 6, 2-19-13; Ord. No. 4105, § 1, 2-18-14; Ord. No. 4166, § 6, 9-1-15; Ord. No. 4355, § 9 (Exh. I), 3-3-20)


15.07.070 Maintenance of landscaping.

A. Required. Whenever landscaping is or has been required in accordance with the provisions of this title or any addition or amendments to this title, or in accordance with the provisions of any previous code or ordinance of the city, the landscaping shall be permanently maintained in such a manner as to accomplish the purpose for which it was initially required. All landscaping which, due to accident, damage, disease, lack of maintenance, or other cause, fails to show a healthy appearance and growth shall be restored, or replaced with the same type of landscaping elements and in the same location as required in the approved landscape plan. These requirements also apply to landscaping for LID stormwater management systems, such as bioretention swales. Failure to permanently maintain landscaping will result in a code violation, in accordance with Chapter 1.04 KCC.

B. Maintenance assurance. To ensure the maintenance of new landscaping, the planning director may require a performance and maintenance bond or other acceptable maintenance assurance device, such as an irrevocable letter of credit, set-aside letter, assignment of funds, or certificate of deposit, prior to permit issuance. In determining whether to require an assurance device, the planning director may consider elements such as the size and complexity of the project, the likelihood of plant survival, and the likelihood of adequate maintenance. The device shall remain in effect for two (2) years from the completion of planting. The value of the maintenance assurance device shall equal at least one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the total landscape materials plus installation. If a maintenance assurance device is required, the property owner shall comply with the following provisions:

1. If the landscaping is not being properly maintained, the planning director shall notify the property owner that the owner must restore the landscaping to its required condition, to the satisfaction of the director, within thirty (30) days. If the property owner does not restore the landscaping to the satisfaction of the director within thirty (30) days of the notification, then the city may use the proceeds of the assurance device to perform any type of maintenance or replacement necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.

2. The maintenance assurance device shall be accompanied by an agreement granting the city and its agents the right to enter the property and perform any necessary work. The agreement shall also hold the city harmless from all claims and expenses, including attorney’s fees.

3. Upon completion of the two (2) year maintenance period, and inspection by the city to determine that the landscaping has been maintained to the satisfaction of the planning director, the city shall release the maintenance assurance device, less any proceeds previously used by the city pursuant to this section.

4. The property owner is responsible for all costs incurred by the city in doing any work covered by the assurance device. The property owner shall reimburse the city for any amount expended by the city that exceeds any proceeds of the assurance device actually used by the city. The city shall have a lien against the subject property for the amount of any excess.

(Ord. No. 3658, § 4, 9-2-03; Ord. No. 4074, § 7, 2-19-13)


Chapter 15.08 GENERAL AND SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS* Revised 8/19 Revised 5/20

Sections:

15.08.010    Applicability.

15.08.020    Special permit uses.

15.08.030    General conditional uses.

15.08.035    Wireless telecommunications facilities. Revised 5/20

15.08.040    Home occupations.

15.08.050    Performance standards. Revised 5/20

15.08.060    View corridor protection regulations on hillside development.

15.08.070    Keeping of animals.

15.08.080    Parking, storage or habitation of major recreational equipment.

15.08.085    Parking commercial motor vehicles in residential zones.

15.08.090    Parking or storage of inoperable vehicles. Revised 8/19

15.08.100    Nonconforming development.

15.08.110    Reduction of lot area.

15.08.120    Irregular-shaped lots.

15.08.130    Visibility at intersections in residential districts.

15.08.140    Visibility at access points for automobiles.

15.08.150    Side yard on corner lot.

15.08.160    Accessory buildings.

15.08.170    Projections into required yards.

15.08.180    Structures to have access.

15.08.190    Exceptions to height regulations.

15.08.205    Temporary use regulations.

15.08.210    Transition area combining district.

15.08.215    Repealed.

15.08.220    Repealed.

15.08.222    Repealed.

15.08.224    Repealed.

15.08.230    Solar access setback – Purpose.

15.08.232    Solar access setback – Applicability.

15.08.234    Solar access setback – Calculation.

15.08.240    Preservation of trees.

15.08.260    Green River Corridor district regulations.

15.08.270    Adult uses.

15.08.280    Group homes class II and III.

15.08.290    Repealed.

15.08.295    Patient cooperatives. Revised 5/20

15.08.300    Zero lot line development – Authorized.

15.08.310    Same – Permitted uses.

15.08.320    Zero lot line – Development standards for single-family zoning districts.

15.08.330    Same – Development standards for multifamily zoning districts.

15.08.340    Same – Platting requirements.

15.08.350    Accessory dwelling unit regulations.

15.08.359    Accessory living quarters.

15.08.400    Planned unit development, PUD. Revised 5/20

15.08.450    Development agreements.

15.08.500    Illegal uses prohibited – Marijuana producer, processor, retailer.

15.08.550    Use prohibited in all zoning districts.

*Cross reference(s) – Subdivision requirements for parks and open space, § 12.04.490.


15.08.010 Applicability.

The provisions of this chapter are of general application to several or all zoning districts unless otherwise noted.


15.08.020 Special permit uses.

The following uses are permitted in the several districts in which they are listed as special permit uses; provided, that they conform to the development standards listed in this section in addition to conforming to the development standards of the zoning district in which the use is located:

A. Churches (excluding drive-in churches, which are conditional uses).

1. Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area is one (1) acre in SR zones; in other zoning districts it shall be the minimum lot area of the underlying district.

2. Front yard. There shall be a front yard of at least twenty (20) feet in depth.

3. Side yard. Each side yard shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet in width.

4. Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least twenty (20) feet in depth.

5. Ingress and egress. A separate entrance and exit shall be provided. Loading and unloading areas shall be provided and shall be located off public streets.

6. Landscaping. All yard areas must be landscaped.

7. Day-care centers. Day-care centers in churches shall comply with state regulations in WAC 388-148-1275.

8. Parking; signs. Off-street parking and sign regulations shall be observed.

B. Gasoline service stations (with or without retail convenience grocery sales). The provision of gasoline pumps shall not be considered incidental or secondary to a permitted use, and must conform to the requirements of this section.

1. Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area is fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.

2. Lot frontage. There shall be at least one hundred twenty (120) feet of frontage on a public street.

3. Pump setbacks. The pump island shall be set back fifteen (15) feet from the public right-of-way and any property lines.

4. Lubrication facilities. Lubrication shall be done within an enclosed building.

5. Buffering of adjacent property. A solid or woven fence, free of advertising, shall be maintained along property lines which flank residential districts.

6. Lighting. Lighting devices shall be shaded so as not to glare into residential districts.

7. Hours. Gasoline service stations providing automobile repair services abutting residential districts shall limit their hours of operation from 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Signs shall not be lit when the service station is closed.

8. Ingress and egress. Driveway widths and separation shall be reviewed and approved by the public works department. There shall be not more than two (2) driveways per public right-of-way.

9. Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in compliance with Ch. 15.05 KCC.

10. Signs. The sign regulations of Ch. 15.06 KCC shall apply.

11. Grocery sales facilities. Convenience grocery sales facilities shall be limited to a maximum size of three thousand (3,000) square feet of gross floor area in zones which do not allow retail grocery sales as a principally permitted use.

12. General development standards. Development standards and criteria of the underlying zoning district shall apply unless otherwise noted in this section.

13. Storage of motor fuels. Quantity limitations on hazardous substance land uses, including onsite hazardous waste treatment or storage facilities, shall not apply to motor fuels that may be stored on the site for the permitted use.

C. Drive-in restaurants.

1. Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area is fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.

2. Front yard. There shall be a front yard of at least twenty (20) feet in depth.

3. Side yard. Each side yard shall be at least twenty (20) feet in width.

4. Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least twenty (20) feet in depth.

5. Ingress and egress. Driveway widths shall not be greater than thirty (30) feet, and driveways shall not be closer together than twenty-five (25) feet. Driveways shall not be closer than five (5) feet to a property line. There shall be not more than two (2) driveways per public right-of-way.

6. Landscaping. A ten (10) foot strip is required along street rights-of-way, except at points of ingress and egress to the property. A five (5) foot strip of landscaping along side lot lines shall be provided. Landscaping shall be provided in a manner assigned by the planning department at the time of development plan review.

(Ord. No. 2801, § 17, 9-6-88; Ord. No. 3409, § 47, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 3439, § 6, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 4003, § 4, 9-20-11)


15.08.030 General conditional uses.

A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to identify certain types of land uses that usually require relatively greater freedom of location than other uses restricted to certain districts by this title. General conditional uses may be allowed in the various zoning districts following the procedures in this section. General conditional uses may have one (1) or all of the following characteristics:

1. Public necessity requires such use in all or several districts.

2. Their technical, operating, or service characteristics are such as to make it impractical to restrict their location only to certain districts.

3. Although they fit the description in subsections (1) and (2) of this section, their impact or effect on the immediate neighborhood or vicinity in which they are located may be detrimental in the absence of adequate performance standards, development controls, or good site planning.

It is, therefore, the purpose of this section to reconcile potential conflicts between public necessity of certain uses and their possible detrimental effects on other uses.

B. Types of uses identified. The uses identified for the purpose of this section will generally fall into several broad categories, as follows:

1. Utility, transportation, and communication facilities. Includes electrical substations, pumping or regulating devices for the transmission of water, (including public water treatment facilities), gas, steam, petroleum, etc., bus stops, transit stations, etc.

2. Public facilities. Includes firehouses, police stations, libraries, and administrative offices of governmental agencies.

3. Open space uses. Includes cemeteries, parks, playgrounds, golf courses, and other recreation facilities, including buildings or structures associated therewith.

4. Drive-in churches; welfare facilities. Drive-in churches, retirement homes, convalescent homes, and other welfare facilities (excluding group homes class I, II, and III as defined in KCC 15.02.173), whether privately or publicly operated, facilities for rehabilitation or correction, private clubs, fraternal lodges, etc.

5. Schools. Primary and secondary schools, vocational schools, and colleges, whether privately or publicly operated.

(Ord. No. 2958, § 19, 1-2-91; Ord. No. 3360, § 1, 9-2-97; Ord. No. 3386, § 2, 1-7-98)


15.08.035 Wireless telecommunications facilities. Revised 5/20

A. Purpose and goals. The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines for the siting of wireless telecommunications facilities (WTFs), specifically including, without limitation, towers and antennas, in light of the following goals:

1. Protecting residential areas from potential adverse impacts;

2. Enhancing the ability of the providers of wireless telecommunications services to provide those services quickly, effectively, and efficiently;

3. Encouraging location in nonresidential areas;

4. Minimizing the total height of towers within the community;

5. Encouraging the joint use of new and existing sites;

6. Encouraging service providers to locate and configure facilities to minimize adverse impacts through careful design, siting, landscaping, screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques; and

7. Considering potential adverse impacts to the public health and safety from these facilities except where preempted by other laws, rules, and regulations.

In furtherance of these goals, the city shall give due consideration to the city’s comprehensive plan, zoning map, existing land uses, and environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for the location of WTFs, including towers and antennas.

B. Definitions. As used in this section only, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below:

Abandon or abandonment means:

1. To cease operation for a period of 180 or more consecutive calendar days; or

2. To reduce the effective radiated power of an antenna by 75 percent for 180 or more consecutive calendar days unless new technology or the construction of additional cells in the same locality allows reduction of effective radiated power by more than 75 percent, so long as the operator still serves essentially the same customer base.

Antenna means any exterior transmitting or receiving device used in communications that radiates or captures electromagnetic waves.

Backhaul network means the lines that connect a provider’s WTFs/towers/cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long distance providers, or the public switched telephone network.

Camouflage means to disguise, hide, or integrate with an existing or proposed structure or with the natural environment so as to be significantly screened from view.

Colocate means use of a WTF by more than one service provider.

COW means cell on wheels or cellular on wheels.

EIA means Electronic Industries Association.

FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration.

FCC means the Federal Communications Commission.

Guyed tower means a wireless communication support structure which is typically over 100 feet tall and is steadied by guy wires in a radial pattern around the tower.

Height means, when referring to a tower or other WTF, the distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel at the base of the WTF to the highest point on the tower or other WTF, including the base pad and any antennas.

Lattice tower means a support structure which consists of a network of crossed metal braces, forming a tower which is usually triangular or square in cross-section.

Monopole tower means a support structure which consists of a single pole sunk into the ground and/or attached to a foundation.

Non-whip antenna means an antenna that is not a whip antenna, such as dish antennas, panel antennas, etc.

Personal wireless service means commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7)(C), or as amended.

Preexisting WTF means any WTF for which a building permit has been properly issued prior to July 7, 1997, including permitted WTFs that have not yet been constructed, so long as that permit or approval has not expired.

Small cell equipment means wireless telecommunications facilities attached, mounted, or installed on a proprietary or leased pole, excluding monopole towers, that is located in right-of-way and used to provide personal wireless service.

Telecommunications means the transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user’s choosing without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received.

Telecommunications service means the offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.

Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telecommunications, telephone, radio, and similar communication purposes. The term includes the structure, all structural supports, and all related buildings and appurtenances.

Whip antenna means an omnidirectional dipole antenna of cylindrical shape that is no more than six inches in average diameter.

Wireless telecommunications facility or WTF includes “personal wireless service,” “personal wireless service facilities,” and “facilities” as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7)(C), including all future amendments, and also includes facilities for the transmission and reception of radio or microwave signals used for communication, telecommunication, cellular phone personal communications services, enhanced specialized mobile radio, and any other services licensed by the FCC, and also includes any other unlicensed wireless services.

C. Applicability.

1. New uses. All WTF proposals made in the city, whether for new construction or for modification of existing facilities, shall be subject to the regulations set forth in this code, except as provided in subsection (D) of this section.

D. Exemptions. The following are exempt from the provisions of this section and are allowed in all zoning districts:

1. Existing uses. WTFs that currently exist on July 7, 1997, or for which a valid building permit has been obtained and remains in effect on July 7, 1997, except this exemption does not apply to modifications of existing facilities.

2. Industrial/scientific equipment. Industrial processing equipment and scientific or medical equipment using frequencies regulated by the FCC.

3. Amateur radio station operators or receive-only antennas. Any tower or antenna that is under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas.

4. Home satellite services. Satellite dish antennas less than two meters in diameter, including direct-to-home satellite services, when used as a secondary use of the property.

5. COW. A COW or other temporary WTF, but its use anywhere in the city cannot exceed 30 days, unless extended by permit issued by the planning manager or unless the city has declared an area-wide emergency.

6. Public safety WTFs and equipment. Public safety WTFs and equipment, including, but not limited to, the regional 911 system.

7. Small cell equipment. Small cell equipment, as defined in subsection (B) of this section, subject to a specific agreement with the city, provided such equipment complies with concealment features stipulated in such agreements.

E. General.

1. Principal or accessory use. WTFs may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A different use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of WTFs on that lot.

2. Not essential services. WTFs shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this section and shall not be regulated or permitted as essential public services.

F. General requirements.

1. Siting. Anyone who applies to construct a WTF or to modify or add to an existing WTF shall demonstrate to the city’s satisfaction that the proposed facility is located at the least obtrusive and the most appropriate available site to function in the applicant’s grid system.

2. FCC licensing. The city will only process WTF permit applications upon a satisfactory showing of proof that the applicant is an FCC licensed telecommunications provider or that the applicant has agreements with an FCC licensed telecommunications provider for use or lease of the facility.

3. Compliance with other laws. Applicants must show, to the satisfaction of the planning manager, compliance with current FCC and FAA rules and regulations and all other applicable federal, state, and local laws, rules, and regulations.

4. Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of WTFs complies with district development regulations including, but not limited to, setback requirements, lot-coverage requirements, and other requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the WTFs may be located on leased parcels within that lot.

5. Height. Unless further restricted or expanded elsewhere in this section, no WTFs may exceed the following height and usage criteria:

a. For a single user, up to 90 feet in height; and

b. For two or more users, up to 120 feet in height.

6. Security fencing. WTFs shall be enclosed, where appropriate, by security fencing not less than six feet in height; provided, however, that the planning manager or, where applicable, the hearing examiner may waive these requirements, as appropriate.

7. Landscaping. WTFs shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the WTF compound; provided, however, that the planning manager or, where applicable, the hearing examiner may waive these requirements if the goals of this section would be better served.

8. WTFs mounted on structures or rooftops. WTFs mounted on existing structures or rooftops shall be designed and located so as to minimize visual and aesthetic impacts to the adjoining land uses and structures and shall, to the greatest extent practical, blend into the existing environment.

9. Aesthetics. WTFs shall meet the following requirements:

a. WTFs shall be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.

b. At a WTF site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend into the existing natural and constructed environment.

10. Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required for any WTF, the lighting must cause the least disturbance to the surrounding area.

11. Measurement. For purposes of measurement, WTF setbacks and separation distances shall be calculated and applied irrespective of municipal and county jurisdictional boundaries.

12. Franchises, licenses, and permits. Owners and/or operators of WTFs shall certify that they have obtained all franchises, licenses, or permits required by law for the construction and/or operation of a wireless telecommunication system in the city and shall file a copy of all required franchises, licenses, and permits with the planning manager.

13. Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower.

14. Backhaul providers. Backhaul providers shall be identified and they shall have and maintain all necessary approvals to operate as such, including holding necessary franchises, permits, and certificates. The method of providing backhaul, wired or wireless, shall be identified.

G. Tower requirements.

1. Tower setbacks. All towers, support structures, and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum setback requirements for that zoning district.

2. Support systems setbacks. All guy wires, anchors, and other support structures must be located within the buildable area of the lot and not within the front, rear, or side yard setbacks and no closer than five feet to any property line.

3. Monopole construction required. All towers will be of a tapering monopole construction; however, the planning manager or, where applicable, the hearing examiner may allow another type of tower upon a showing that it would cause less impact to the surrounding property than a similar monopole structure or would further the purposes and goals in this section.

4. Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for a tower shall provide an inventory of its existing WTF sites that are either within the jurisdiction of the city or within one mile of its borders, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each facility.

5. EIA standards. Towers shall be constructed so as to meet or exceed the most recent EIA standards. Prior to issuance of a building permit, the building official shall be provided with an engineer’s certification that the tower’s design meets or exceeds those standards.

6. Site selection and height. Towers shall be located to minimize their number and height and to minimize their visual impacts on the surrounding area in accordance with the following policies:

a. Ensure that the height of towers has the least visual impact and that the height is no greater than necessary to achieve service area requirements and to provide for potential colocation; and

b. Demonstrate that the owner or operator has, to the greatest extent practical, selected a new tower site that provides the least visual impact on residential areas. This shall include an analysis of the potential impacts from other vantage points in the area to illustrate that the selected site and design provide the best opportunity to minimize the visual impact of the proposed facility; and

c. Site so as to minimize being visually solitary or prominent when viewed from surrounding areas, especially residential areas. The facility should be camouflaged to the maximum extent feasible.

7. Colocation priority. Colocation of antennas by more than one carrier on existing towers is preferred to construction of new towers; provided, that the colocation is consistent with the following:

a. Redesign restrictions. A tower that is modified or reconstructed to accommodate the colocation of an additional antenna shall be of the same tower type as the existing tower, or of a less obtrusive design (such as a monopole), if practical.

b. Height. Except as may be modified in subsection (I)(1)(a) of this section, an existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height, not to exceed 30 feet over the tower’s existing height or 120 feet, whichever is lower, to accommodate the colocation by another provider or operator of an additional antenna system in any district except DC, DCE, NCC, and all SR districts. This additional height shall not require an additional distance separation.

c. Onsite relocation. A tower that is being rebuilt to accommodate the colocation of an additional antenna may be relocated on its existing site within 50 feet of its existing location. If consistent with the purposes and goals in subsection (A) of this section, the planning manager or, where applicable, the hearing examiner may permit the onsite relocation of a tower which comes within the separation distances to residential units or residentially zoned lands.

8. Separation distances between towers. Separation distances between towers shall be measured between the proposed tower and preexisting towers. Measurement shall be from base of tower to base of tower, excluding pad, footing, or foundation. The separation distances shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the nearest point on the base of the existing tower and the proposed tower base, pursuant to a site plan of the proposed tower. The separation distances (listed in linear feet) shall be as shown in Table 1, unless the distance is reduced by the planning manager when administratively approving a WTF or by the hearing examiner through issuance of a conditional use permit.

Table 1

	 	Lattice	Guyed	Mono-pole 75 feet in height or greater	Mono-pole less than 75 feet in height

	Lattice	5,000	5,000	1,500	750

	Guyed	5,000	5,000	1,500	750

	Monopole 75 feet in height or greater	1,500	1,500	1,500	750

	Monopole less than 75 feet in height	750	750	750	750

H. Administratively approved WTFs. The planning manager may administratively approve the uses listed in this subsection once each applicant has applied for and provided all necessary information required in this code and in the city’s application form. This administrative approval is classified as a Process I application and is subject to the requirements of Chapter 12.01 KCC.

1. Administratively approved uses. The following uses may be approved by the planning manager after conducting an administrative review:

a. Industrial/commercial zones. Locating WTFs, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with WTFs, that do not exceed 90 feet in height for a single user and 120 feet in height for two or more users in the following districts: MA, I1, I2, I3, CM, GC, and GWC.

b. Antennas on existing structures. Locating a WTF other than a tower as an accessory use by attachment to any building or structure other than a single-family dwelling or multifamily structure of fewer than eight dwelling units in any zoning district, provided:

i. The antenna does not extend more than 20 feet above the highest point of the structure if a whip antenna, or 10 feet above the highest point of the structure if a non-whip antenna; and

ii. The antenna complies with all applicable building codes; and

iii. All associated equipment is placed either within the same building or in a separate structure that matches the existing building or structure in character and materials.

c. WTFs on existing towers. Locating a WTF through colocation by attaching the antenna to an existing tower.

d. WTFs within allowable building height. Locating WTFs, including placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with the WTF in O, CC, MRG, MRM, MRH, AG, and A-10 districts, so long as the WTF does not exceed the allowable building height for that district.

e. COWs for greater than 30-day periods. Upon a proper showing of extreme necessity (for example, if repair or modification of an existing WTF clearly and legitimately cannot be completed within 30 days), locating a COW at a single location for more than 30 calendar days; however, purely economic convenience shall not be considered a viable factor in making this determination.

2. Authority to waive certain requirements. In connection with this administrative approval, the planning manager may, in order to encourage camouflaging and colocation of WTFs, administratively waive separation distance requirements between WTFs by up to 50 percent in nonresidential zones. Additionally, the planning manager may, in order to encourage the use of the least obtrusive type of WTF, administratively allow the reconstruction of an existing WTF to that less obstructive use.

I. Conditional use permits. Applications for conditional use permits under this subsection shall be subject to the procedures and requirements of KCC 15.09.030 and Chapter 12.01 KCC, except as modified by this subsection. If the WTF is not subject to administrative approval pursuant to subsection (H) of this section, then a conditional use permit shall be required.

1. Conditional WTF uses. Specifically, conditional use permits shall be required for the following WTFs:

a. Industrial/commercial zones. Locating WTFs that exceed 90 feet in height for a single user or 120 feet for two or more users or locating antennas on existing structures that exceed the height limitations in subsection (H)(1)(b) of this section in the following districts: MA, I1, I2, I3, CM, GC, and GWC.

b. Government property. Locating WTFs (i) separate from existing structures on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the city or other governmental entity or (ii) attached to existing structures on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the city or other governmental entity exceeding the height limitations in subsection (H)(1)(b) of this section, but only on the condition that the total height of the attached WTF, including the structure, does not exceed 120 feet, unless permitted under subsection (I)(1)(a) of this section; however, this subsection shall not apply in DC, DCE, and NCC districts.

c. WTFs exceeding allowable building height. Locating WTFs that exceed the allowable building height in the following districts: O, CC, MRG, MRM, MRH, AG, and A-10.

d. Tower construction under allowed separation distances. Locating towers that do not meet the separation distance requirements in subsection (G)(8) of this section or that do not meet administratively approved separation distance limits.

2. Factors considered in granting conditional use permits for towers. In addition to KCC 15.09.030(D), the hearing examiner shall also consider the following factors when considering a CUP application for WTF towers:

a. Height of the proposed tower;

b. Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries;

c. Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;

d. Surrounding topography;

e. Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;

f. Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness;

g. Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures;

h. Obstruction of or interference with views;

i. Consistency with purpose and goals set forth in subsection (A) of this section.

3. Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the hearing examiner that no existing tower, structure, or alternative technology that does not require the use of towers can accommodate the applicant’s proposed WTF. An applicant shall submit information requested by the hearing examiner related to the availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower, structure, or alternative technology can accommodate the applicant’s proposed WTF may consist of any of the following:

a. No existing WTF is located within the geographic area that meets applicant’s engineering requirements.

b. Existing WTFs are not of sufficient height to meet applicant’s engineering requirements.

c. Existing WTFs cannot practically be reconstructed to provide sufficient structural strength to support applicant’s proposed antenna and related equipment.

d. Electromagnetic interference would occur between two or more WTF systems.

e. The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing WTF or to adapt an existing WTF for colocation are unreasonable. Fees or costs that exceed new WTF development shall not be presumed to render sharing facilities unsuitable.

f. Other limiting factors render existing WTFs unsuitable.

g. An alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or structures would be unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed new WTF development shall not be presumed to render the technology unsuitable.

4. Separation requirements. The hearing examiner may reduce tower separation distance requirements, including administratively approved separation distance reductions, if the purposes and goals of this section would be better served; however, development of multiple tower locations on a single site (often referred to as “antenna farms”) are specifically discouraged wherever possible.

J. Removal of abandoned towers.

1. Abandonment and removal. The owner or operator of any abandoned tower shall notify the city’s planning manager, in writing, of that abandonment and shall remove the same within 90 calendar days. Failure to remove an abandoned tower within 90 calendar days shall be grounds to remove the tower at the owner’s expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then the city’s right to remove the tower shall not become effective until all users abandon the tower.

2. Partial abandonment and removal. If the antennas on any tower are removed or relocated to a point where the top 20 percent or more of the height of the tower is no longer in use, the tower shall be deemed partially abandoned. The owner or operator of any partially abandoned tower shall notify the city’s planning manager, in writing, of that partial abandonment and shall remove the partially abandoned portion within 90 calendar days. Failure to remove a partially abandoned tower within 90 calendar days shall be grounds to remove the abandoned portion of the tower at the owner’s expense.

3. Security and lien. Each applicant, prior to commencement of construction, shall post sufficient security in the form of a bond, assignment of funds, cashier’s check, or cash, in a form acceptable to the city, to cover the estimated cost of demolition or removal of the tower and support structures, including complete site restoration. If for any reason the posted funds are not adequate to cover the cost of removal, then the city may charge the facility owner or operator with the city’s total cost incurred in removing the abandoned structures. If the owner or operator fails to make full payment within 30 calendar days, then the amount remaining unpaid shall become a lien on the facility property.

K. Nonconforming uses.

1. Preexisting towers. Preexisting towers shall be allowed to continue their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance shall be permitted. Any construction other than routine maintenance on a preexisting tower shall comply with the requirements of this section.

2. Damage or destruction not the fault of owner/occupant. Bona fide nonconforming WTFs that are damaged or destroyed without fault attributable to the owner or entity in control may be rebuilt without first having to obtain administrative approval or a conditional use permit and without having to meet separation requirements. The type, height, and location of the tower onsite shall be of the same type and intensity as the original facility. Building permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with applicable building codes and shall be obtained within 180 days from the date the facility is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if the permit expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as specified in subsection (J) of this section.

(Ord. No. 3424, § 30, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3600, § 4, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3612, § 7, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 4286, § 1, 9-18-18; Ord. No. 4355, § 10 (Exh. J), 3-3-20)


15.08.040 Home occupations.

A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to outline general conditions in which home occupations may be permitted in all zoning districts. These conditions have been designed to help preserve the residential character of the city’s neighborhoods from commercial encroachment while recognizing that certain selected business activities are compatible with residential uses.

B. Home occupations permitted. Home occupations which meet the requirements of this section are permitted in every zone where a dwelling unit was lawfully established. The requirements of this section shall not apply to the following home occupations:

1. Home child care.

2. The sale of agricultural products produced on the premises.

C. Development standards. All dwelling units in which a home occupation is located must meet the following minimum development standards:

1. The residential character of the exterior of the building shall be maintained.

2. The outdoor storage or display of materials, goods, products, or equipment is prohibited.

3. A home occupation shall not occupy more than three hundred (300) square feet.

4. The sign regulations of Chapter 15.06 KCC shall apply.

D. Performance standards. All home occupations must meet the following minimum performance standards:

1. Employees. A home occupation may not employ on the premises more than one (1) person who is not a resident of the dwelling unit.

2. Traffic. The traffic generated by a home occupation shall be limited to four (4) two (2) way client-related trips per day and shall not create a need for additional onsite or offsite parking spaces.

3. Sale of goods and services. The sale of goods and services from a home occupation shall be to one (1) customer at a time, by appointment only, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday only.

4. Electrical or mechanical equipment usage. The use of electrical or mechanical equipment that would change the fire rating of the structure or create visual or audible interference in radio or television receivers or electronic equipment or cause fluctuations in line voltage outside the dwelling unit is prohibited.

5. Utility demand. Utility demand for sewer, water, electricity, garbage, or natural gas shall not exceed normal residential levels.

6. Other criteria. There shall be no noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, or other conditions produced as a result of the home occupation which would exceed that normally produced by a single residence, or which would create a disturbing or objectionable condition in the neighborhood.

E. Permit required. A zoning permit is required as provided in KCC 15.09.020.

F. Special home occupation permits. A special home occupation permit shall be required for the following home occupations:

1. Music lessons if more than one (1) student at a time or otherwise not compliant with the development and performance standards of subsections (C) and (D) of this section.

2. Dance lessons if more than one (1) student at a time or otherwise not compliant with the development and performance standards of subsections (C) and (D) of this section.

3. Art lessons if more than one (1) student at a time or otherwise not compliant with the development and performance standards of subsections (C) and (D) of this section.

4. Academic tutoring if more than one (1) student at a time or otherwise not compliant with the development and performance standards of subsections (C) and (D) of this section.

5. Automobile detailing.

A special home occupation permit may only be issued as follows:

1. Application. Applications for a special home occupation permit under this subsection shall be subject to the procedures and requirements of Chapters 2.32 and 12.01 KCC. The application fee for a special home occupation permit shall be the same as for administrative variances unless otherwise established by city council resolution.

2. Criteria for approval. In conducting a hearing on an application for a special home occupation permit, the hearing examiner shall consider the nature and conditions of all adjacent uses and structures. A special home occupation permit may only be approved by the hearing examiner if the hearing examiner finds that such permit will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property in the zone or vicinity in which the property is located, and that the issuance of such special home occupation permit will be consistent with the spirit and purpose of this section and subject to the applicable provisions of Chapter 12.01 KCC.

3. Conditions of approval. In approving a special home occupation permit, the hearing examiner may impose such requirements and conditions with respect to location, installation, construction, maintenance and operation, and extent of open spaces in addition to those expressly set forth in this section, as may be deemed necessary for the protection of other properties in the zone or vicinity and the public interest.

4. Issuance. Any special home occupation permit application approved by the hearing examiner shall be forwarded to the planning department for issuance.

5. Appeal of decision. The decision of the hearing examiner on a special home occupation permit application shall be final. Any appeal of the hearing examiner’s decision shall be pursuant to the appeal provisions of Chapter 12.01 KCC.

G. Home occupations prohibited.

1. The following uses, by the nature of their operation or investment, have a pronounced tendency, once started, to increase beyond the limits permitted for home occupations and impair the use and value of zoning districts where dwelling units are lawfully established. Therefore, the uses listed below shall not be permitted as home occupations:

a. Repair, body repair, building, or servicing of vehicles.

2. Home occupations prohibited by subsection (G)(1) of this section and which were operated lawfully in the city of Kent in compliance with the provision of this chapter as of the date of passage may continue to operate until October 18, 2004, after which date no prohibited home occupations may lawfully operate in the city of Kent.

(Ord. No. 3340, § 1, 4-2-97; Ord. No. 3424, § 31, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3575, § 1, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 3646, § 1, 7-1-03: Ord. No. 3752, § 2, 5-17-05; Ord. No. 4003, § 5, 9-20-11)


15.08.050 Performance standards. Revised 5/20

A. Performance standards defined. Performance standards deal with the operational aspects of land uses. While performance standards shall apply to all land uses within the city, they are primarily concerned with the impact of industrial development upon the environment. Continued compliance with the performance standards shall be required of all uses, except as otherwise provided for in this title. No land or building in any district shall be used or occupied in any manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable condition. The following elements, if created, may become dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable under the circumstances, and are then referred to as dangerous or objectionable elements:

1. Noise, vibration, or glare.

2. Smoke, dust, odor, or other form of air pollution.

3. Heat, cold, or dampness.

4. Hazardous substances and wastes.

B. Nonconforming uses. Uses established before the effective date of this title and nonconforming as to performance standards shall be given three years in which to conform therewith.

C. Locations where determinations are to be made for enforcement of performance standards. The determination of the existence of any dangerous and objectionable elements shall be made at the location of the use creating the dangerous or objectionable elements and at any points where the existence of such elements may be more apparent (referred to in the section as “at any point”); provided, however, that the measurement of performance standards for noise, vibration, odors, glare, or hazardous substances or wastes shall be taken at the following points of measurement:

1. In all districts: at the property lines or lot lines; or

2. In all districts: at the buffer zone setback line for any hazardous substance land use facility, which must be at least 50 feet from any property line.

D. Restrictions on dangerous and objectionable elements.

1. Vibration. No vibration shall be permitted which is discernible without instruments at the points of measurement specified in this section.

2. Odors. No emission shall be permitted of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities so as to exceed the odor threshold at the following points of measurement. The odor threshold shall be defined as the concentration in the air of a gas or vapor which will just evoke a response in the human olfactory system.

a. Industrial business district, I1. Odorous matter released from any operation or activity shall not exceed the odor threshold beyond lot lines.

b. Mixed industrial district, I2. Odorous matter released from any operation or activity shall not exceed the odor threshold beyond lot lines.

c. Heavy industrial district, I3. Odorous matter released from any operation or activity shall not exceed the odor threshold beyond the district boundary or 500 feet from the lot line, whichever distance is shortest.

3. Glare. No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights or from high temperature processes such as combustion or welding or otherwise, so as to be visible at the points of measurement specified in subsection (C) of this section shall be permitted. This restriction shall not apply to signs or floodlighting of buildings for advertising or protection otherwise permitted by the provisions of this title.

4. Radioactivity or electrical disturbance. The regulations of the federal occupational safety and health standards shall apply for all radioactivity and electrical disturbance unless local codes and ordinances supersede this federal regulation.

5. Fire and explosion hazards. The relevant provisions of federal, state and local laws and regulations shall apply.

6. Smoke, fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, gases and other forms of air pollution. The standards of the Puget Sound Air Pollution Control Agency, Regulation I, or those regulations as may be subsequently amended, shall apply.

7. Liquid or solid wastes. No discharge of any materials of such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply, interfere with bacterial processes in sewage treatment, or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements shall be permitted at any point into any public sewer, private sewage disposal system, or stream, or into the ground, except in compliance with state and federal regulations and Chapter 7.14 KCC.

8. Hazardous substances or wastes. No release of hazardous substances or wastes as can contaminate any water supply, interfere with bacterial processes in sewage treatment, or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements shall be permitted at any point into any public sewer, private sewage disposal system, watercourse, or water body, or the ground, except in compliance with state and federal regulations and Chapter 7.14 KCC. The relevant provisions of federal, state, and local laws and regulations shall apply, and compliance shall be certified by applicants for permits under this title. The following site development standards shall apply:

a. Hazardous waste facilities shall meet the location standards for siting dangerous waste management facilities adopted pursuant to Chapter 70.105 RCW;

b. Hazardous substance land use facilities shall be located at least:

i. Two hundred feet from erosion, landslide or seismic hazard areas, or the ordinary high water mark of streams, as defined in Chapter 11.06 KCC, lakes, shorelines of statewide significance, or shorelines of the state;

ii. Repealed by Ord. No. 4257;

iii. One-quarter mile from public parks, public recreation areas, or natural preserves, or state or federal wildlife refuges; provided, that for purposes of this section public recreation areas do not include public trails;

iv. Fifty feet from any property line to serve as an onsite hazardous substance land use facility buffer zone;

v. Five hundred feet and 100 feet from a residential zone and a residential unit, respectively; and

vi. Five hundred feet from a public gathering place or agricultural land or zone, in the case of a nonagricultural hazardous substance land use facility;

c. Hazardous substance land use facilities shall not be located in a 100-year floodplain;

d. Hazardous substance land use facilities which are not entirely enclosed within a building shall provide a type I solid screen landscaping of a width of at least 10 feet in the hazardous substance facility buffer zone required by subsection (D)(8)(b)(iv) of this section;

e. Above ground hazardous substance land use facilities shall be constructed with containment controls which will prevent the escape of hazardous substances or wastes in the event of an accidental release from the facility, and shall meet federal, state, and local design and construction requirements;

f. Underground hazardous substance land use facilities shall meet federal, state, and local design and construction requirements;

g. Hazardous substance land uses shall comply with adopted fire codes;

h. Hazardous substance land uses shall provide for review and approval by the city fire department of a hazardous substance spill contingency plan for immediate implementation in the event of a release of hazardous substances or wastes at the facility;

i. Hazardous substance land uses should use traffic routes which do not go through residential zones;

j. Hazardous substance land uses in the O, NCC, CC, and DC zones shall be entirely enclosed within a building; and

k. Without limiting the application of the adopted fire codes to diesel fuel tanks, above and below ground diesel fuel storage tanks exclusively intended for use on stationary, onsite, oil burning equipment (such as electrical power generator systems) in all nonresidential zoning districts shall be exempt from the hazardous substance regulations of this section, and above and below ground diesel fuel tanks of up to 6,000 gallons intended exclusively for use on stationary, onsite, oil burning equipment (such as electrical power generator systems) in residential zones shall be exempt from the hazardous substance regulations of this section for essential governmental facilities only. The hazardous substance zoning code regulations, including the existing 500-gallon limit for hazardous substances for residential uses, shall otherwise remain in force and effect. Additionally, all above ground diesel fuel tanks over 500 gallons exempted by this subsection are required to have a five-foot minimum landscape buffer surrounding the tank to buffer the visual impacts of these tanks. Moreover, the planning director shall have the discretion to increase or modify this landscape buffer requirement depending upon the specific circumstances posed by any particular tank location.

E. Aesthetics. The following may not be visible from adjacent properties: waste materials, parts or material storage, or machinery or equipment other than that which is necessary for the operation and which, because of size and function, cannot be installed for practical purposes within an enclosed building.

In case of conflict between any of these site development standards and the development standards of specific zoning districts or other requirements of this title, the more restrictive requirement shall apply.

(Ord. No. 2801, § 18, 9-6-88; Ord. No. 2808, § 9, 10-18-88; Ord. No. 3285, § 1, 3-19-96; Ord. No. 3507, § 1, 3-21-00; Ord. No. 3691, § 8, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 3770, § 1, 7-20-04; Ord. No. 3916, § 4, 6-2-09; Ord. No. 4003, § 6, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 4257, § 21, 11-21-17; Ord. No. 4355, § 10 (Exh. J), 3-3-20)

Cross reference(s) – Public nuisances, ch. 8.01; litter control, ch. 8.04; noise control, ch. 8.05; rodent control, ch. 8.06.


15.08.060 View corridor protection regulations on hillside development. 

A. Purpose.

1. The visual environment of the city of Kent is strongly characterized by scenic vistas to the Green River valley from the slopes of the East and West Hills which frame the valley. The purpose of the view regulations set out in this section is to regulate the height and location of buildings on hillsides in order to protect view corridors to and from these hillsides which are on the visual forefront of the city and encourage placement of residences in ways which are compatible with the preservation of such public vistas.

2. The criteria of this section establish procedures for determining heights and locations of buildings on hillsides so that views will not be destroyed by site development plans that fail to consider the topography of the lot and the orientation of adjacent properties. The regulations of this section shall be interpreted and enforced at the time of development plan review. The regulations of this section shall not, however, prohibit construction of any building with a building height of twenty-five (25) feet or less, as measured from natural or finished grade, whichever is lower, on any legal lot of record. 

B. View regulations defined. Any projected development located within two hundred (200) feet downslope from an SR or MR-D zoned area or within five hundred (500) feet downslope from an MR-G, MR-M or MR-H zoned area when such area qualifies as view property must allow for the protection of the view from such property as follows: 

1. Protection of view of large tracts of land. 

a. If the property which has a view to be protected exceeds either twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area or two hundred (200) feet in length or width, the restriction on height of the building to be erected on the adjacent downslope property shall be determined as follows: 

b. Two (2) lines shall be drawn parallel to the slope line, one (1) such line on either side of the building. The term “side,” as used in this subsection, shall be defined as the furthest point of the building measured outward perpendicular from a line through the center of the building parallel to the slope line. These two (2) lines shall extend upslope continuing parallel to the slope line until they meet the property line. No part of the proposed building shall exceed in height by more than ten (10) feet the mean elevation along the property line between these two (2) parallel lines.
[IMAGE]


2. Protection of view of smaller tracts of land. Those tracts of land measuring less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area and less than two hundred (200) feet in both length and width, as well as the erection of more than one (1) residential building on the same piece of property, will be covered by the following regulations: 

a. View property in SR and MR-D zones. 

(1) “View” is an unobstructed field of vision comprising a horizontal angle of not more than ninety (90) degrees and a vertical angle of not more than five (5) degrees below the horizontal. 

(2) The horizontal view angle shall have as its origin a vertical axis passing through the geographic center of the lot whose view is to be protected. The ninety (90) degree angle shall be oriented with forty-five (45) degrees on either side of the slope line, which shall be laid out perpendicular to the mean contour of the area as contrasted to the slope of the particular lot in question. 

(3) The vertical view angle shall have as its origin a point six (6) feet above the ground surface on a lot prior to any excavation for a foundation or basement.

Horizontal View Angle
[IMAGE]


Vertical View Angle
[IMAGE]


(4) No building constructed within five hundred (500) feet of the point of origin of the view angle and located beneath the airspace located within that angle shall rise above the lower extent of the vertical angle. 

b. View property in MR-G, MR-M, and MR-H zones.

(1) “View” is an unobstructed field of vision comprised of a horizontal view angle of sixty (60) degrees and a vertical view angle extending from the horizontal upward to the vertical line. 

(2) The horizontal view angle shall have as its origin a vertical axis passing through the geographic center of the lot whose view is to be protected or, in the case of an existing apartment building, the vertical axis should pass through the geographical center of those units whose view is to be protected. The sixty (60) degree angle may be shifted to the extent that no less than twenty (20) degrees of the sixty (60) degrees lies on either side of the slope line, which shall be laid out perpendicular to the mean contour of the area as contrasted to the slope of the particular lot in question. 
[IMAGE]


(3) The vertical angle shall originate on a horizontal line extending from the intersection of the vertical line forming the axis for the horizontal view angle and the original slope, or in the case of an existing apartment building, the floor level of the lowest residential floor.


[IMAGE]


(4) No building constructed within five hundred (500) feet of the point of origin of the view angle and located beneath the airspace located within the angle shall rise above the lower extent of the vertical angle.

C. Exemptions. The planning director may waive or modify the view regulations on hillside development if it is determined that the intent to preserve views cannot be met by a strict application of the requirements, or if one (1) or more of the following conditions applies:

1. There is no available clear view of the valley from development located upslope of the proposed building; or

2. The orientation of development located upslope is toward a different view angle than prescribed in the view development regulations; or

3. The shape or topography of the lot and lots located upslope make a strict application of the view requirements unnecessary or impractical.

D. Application for variance. If an applicant requests relief from the provisions of this section through a variance as provided in KCC 15.09.040 prior to public hearing, the applicant shall erect a pole structure outlining the proposed height of the building where it is to be constructed on the proposed site to allow adjacent property owners to assess the view impact of the proposed variance. The pole structure shall be in place at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the public hearing on the proposed variance.

(Ord. No. 3469, § 1, 8-3-99)


15.08.070 Keeping of animals.

The keeping of bees, small domesticated animals, large domesticated animals, and domesticated fowl, as those terms are defined in KCC 8.03.030, is permitted in all zones as an accessory use to any principal use permitted or to a permitted conditional use, subject to the standards and restrictions of this section and Ch. 8.03 KCC. 

A. Small domesticated animals. Up to three (3) small domesticated animals may be kept accessory to each business establishment or dwelling unit on a lot, except as follows:

1. In no case is more than one (1) miniature potbelly pig allowed per business establishment or dwelling unit.

2. More than three (3) small domesticated animals are permitted on lots of at least twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, subject to the provisions of Ch. 8.03 KCC.

3. In no case shall a structure that restrains or houses small domesticated animals, such as a kennel or other accessory structure, be located closer than ten (10) feet from any other residential lot.

B. Miniature potbelly pigs. The type of swine commonly known as the Vietnamese, Chinese, or Asian potbelly pigs (Sus scrofa bittatus) may be kept as a small domesticated animal in accordance with subsection (A) of this section; provided, the swine is neither greater than twenty-two (22) inches in height at the shoulder nor more than one hundred fifty (150) pounds in weight. In the event the swine exceeds either of these limitations, it is not allowed within the city. A miniature potbelly pig shall be considered a small domesticated animal when determining the number of small domesticated animals permitted on a lot.

C. Domesticated fowl. Up to three (3) domesticated fowl may be kept on any lot that is at least five thousand (5,000) square feet, subject to the provisions of Ch. 8.03 KCC. These domesticated fowl are in addition to the small domesticated animals that may be permitted on a lot in accordance with subsection (A) of this section. One (1) additional domesticated fowl is permitted for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of land in excess of the minimum five thousand (5,000) square foot threshold. In no case shall a coop or other accessory structure that restrains or houses domesticated fowl be located closer than ten (10) feet from any other residential lot.

D. Large domesticated animals. Large domesticated animals are permitted only on lots of at least twenty thousand (20,000) square feet subject to the provisions of Ch. 8.03 KCC. The keeping of swine is prohibited, except for a single miniature potbelly pig maintained in accordance with subsection (B) of this section.

1. One (1) large domesticated animal for every ten thousand (10,000) square feet of lot area is permitted.

2. Large domesticated animals and structures housing them must be kept at least fifty (50) feet from any other lot in a residential zone.

E. Beekeeping. Beekeeping is permitted as an accessory use, when registered with the State Department of Agriculture; provided, that:

1. No more than four (4) hives, each with only one (1) swarm, shall be kept on lots of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet.

2. Hives shall not be located within twenty-five (25) feet of any property line except when situated eight (8) feet or more above the grade immediately adjacent to the grade of the lot on which the hives are located or when situated less than eight (8) feet above the adjacent existing lot grade and behind a solid fence or hedge six (6) feet high parallel to any property line within twenty-five (25) feet of a hive and extending at least twenty-five (25) feet beyond the hive in both directions.

(Ord. No. 3844, § 3, 6-19-07)

Cross reference(s) – Animal control, ch. 8.03.


15.08.080 Parking, storage or habitation of major recreational equipment.

No more than one (1) unit of a recreational vehicle as defined in KCC 15.02.338 or equipment shall be stored outside an enclosed building or structure on residential property; said equipment shall be screened from view of surrounding neighbors and shall not be used for habitation.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 48, 7-7-98)


15.08.085 Parking commercial motor vehicles in residential zones.

A. Commercial motor vehicles are not permitted to be parked on residentially zoned properties with a land use designation of urban separator (US) and a zoning designation of single-family, one (1) unit per acre (SR-1), unless actively delivering goods. “Commercial motor vehicles” include:

1. Vehicles used in a commercial enterprise which exceed nineteen (19) feet in length; and

2. Truck tractors used in the drayage of semi-truck trailers.

B. Commercial motor vehicles are not permitted to be parked on residentially zoned property with a zoning designation of SR-2 or greater unless actively delivering goods. Commercial motor vehicles include:

1. Vehicles with a gross weight rating (GVWR) of twenty-six thousand and one (26,001) pounds or more; and

2. Trailers with a GVWR of ten thousand and one (10,001) pounds or more if the gross weight rating of the combined vehicles is twenty-six thousand and one (26,001) pounds or more.

(Ord. No. 3813, § 2, 9-5-06)


15.08.090 Parking or storage of inoperable vehicles. Revised 8/19

Only one vehicle of any kind in an inoperable condition, not licensed nor legally operable upon the roadway, may be stored or parked on a residentially zoned property for more than 30 days. Such vehicle must be stored or parked in an enclosed area and hidden from view of surrounding neighbors.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 49, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 4329, § 7, 7-16-19)

Cross reference(s) – Parking regulations, ch. 9.38.


15.08.100 Nonconforming development.

A. Purpose. The intent and purpose of this section is to:

1. Ensure reasonable opportunity for use of legally created lots which do not meet current minimum requirements for the district in which they are located.

2. Ensure reasonable opportunity for use, maintenance, and improvement of legally constructed buildings, structures, and site development features which do not comply with current minimum requirements for the district in which they are located.

3. Ensure reasonable opportunity for continuation of legally established uses which do not conform to use regulations for the district in which they are located.

4. Encourage the eventual replacement of nonconforming uses having potentially undesirable impacts on conforming uses.

5. Encourage the eventual upgrading of nonconforming buildings, structures, and site development features which do not comply with current minimum requirements for the district in which they are located.

B. Applicability. Nonconforming uses, structures, lots, or signs are not favored by law and this title, and it is to avoid injustice that this title accepts such elements. To benefit from the protection given to nonconforming development, such use, structure, or sign must have been lawfully established pursuant to a county resolution in effect at the time of annexation which rendered it nonconforming, or it must have been lawfully established prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or subsequent amendments thereto, or lawfully established prior to the purchase or condemnation of right-of-way by the city of Kent. This section distinguishes between and defines nonconforming uses, major nonconforming buildings and structures, minor nonconforming buildings and structures, nonconforming lots of record and nonconforming signs. Different requirements are made applicable to each of these categories. The degree of restriction made applicable to each separate category is dependent upon the degree to which that category of nonconformance is a nuisance or incompatible with the purpose and requirements of this title.

C. Nonconforming uses.

1. Applicability of restrictions. Regulations applicable to nonconforming uses are in addition to regulations applicable to nonconforming structures, lots, and signs, and in the event of any conflict the most restrictive provisions shall apply.

2. Expansion of nonconforming uses. No existing building, structure, or land devoted to a nonconforming use shall be expanded, enlarged, extended, reconstructed, intensified, or structurally altered unless the use thereof is changed to a use permitted in the district in which such building, structure, or land is located except as follows: When authorized by conditional use permit, a nonconforming use may be expanded, enlarged, extended, reconstructed, intensified, or structurally altered.

3. Change of nonconforming use. When authorized by the planning manager, a nonconforming use may be changed to a use of a like or more restrictive nature.

4. Extension of nonconforming use. When authorized by the planning manager, a nonconforming use may be extended throughout those parts of a building which were manifestly designed or arranged for such use prior to the date when such use of such building became nonconforming, if no structural alterations except those required by law are made therein.

5. Discontinuance of nonconforming use. When a nonconforming use of land or a nonconforming use of all or part of a structure is discontinued or abandoned for a period of six (6) months, such use shall not be resumed, notwithstanding any reserved intent not to abandon such use. Normal seasonal cessation of use, or temporary discontinuance for purposes of maintenance or improvements, shall not be included in determination of the six (6) month period of discontinuance.

6. Reversion to nonconforming use. If a nonconforming use is changed to a permitted use, the nonconforming use shall not be resumed.

7. Residential exception to nonconforming use status. Legally established residential uses located in any residential zoning district shall not be deemed nonconforming in terms of density provisions and shall be a legal use.

8. Exception for certain drive-through banking facilities. Legally established bank buildings with drive-through facilities in the downtown commercial zoning district that existed prior to August 9, 1992, shall not be nonconforming; however, these drive-through facilities may not be expanded beyond that which existed on August 9, 1992, when the city prohibited bank drive-through facilities in DC zones.

D. Nonconforming buildings and structures.

1. Applicability of restrictions. Regulations applicable to nonconforming structures are in addition to regulations applicable to nonconforming uses, lots, and signs, and in the event of any conflict the most restrictive provisions shall apply.



2. Major nonconforming buildings and structures. Except as allowed in KCC 15.04.030(6), no major nonconforming structure may be expanded, enlarged, extended, reconstructed, or structurally altered or changed, nor may any major nonconforming building, structure, or lot be occupied after discontinuance of change in use, unless the structure, use, and associated grounds and development are brought into compliance with use and minimum development standards of the district in which such structure is located, except as follows:

a. Any major nonconforming structure damaged by fire, flood, explosion, wind, earthquake, war, riot, or other natural disaster may be restored, reconstructed, and used as before; provided, that the work be vested by permit application within one (1) year of such happening; any restoration or reconstruction not vested by permit application within twelve (12) months from the date of the fire or other casualty shall be deemed abandoned and not allowed to be restored.

b. Such repairs and maintenance work as required to keep the structure in sound condition may be made to a major nonconforming structure, provided no such structural alterations shall be made except such as are required by law or ordinance or authorized by the planning manager.

3. Minor nonconforming buildings and structures. No minor nonconforming structure may be expanded, enlarged, extended, reconstructed or otherwise structurally altered or changed, nor may any minor nonconforming building, structure, or lot be occupied after discontinuance or change in use, unless the structure and associated grounds and development are brought into compliance with the minimum development standards of the district in which such structure is located, except as follows:

a. Any minor nonconforming structure damaged by fire, flood, explosion, wind, earthquake, war, riot, or other natural disaster may be restored, reconstructed and used as before; provided, that the work be vested by permit application be completed within one (1) year of such happening; any restoration or reconstruction vested by permit application twelve (12) months from the date of the fire or other casualty shall be deemed abandoned and not allowed to be restored.

b. Such repairs and maintenance work as required to keep the structure in sound condition may be made to a minor nonconforming structure, provided no such structural alterations shall be made except such as are required by law or ordinance or authorized by the planning manager.

4. Planning manager’s authority. The planning manager may waive specific development standard requirements or impose additional requirements when all the following criteria are met:

a. When owing to special circumstances a literal enforcement of the provisions of this title or other land use regulatory ordinances of the city will result in unnecessary hardship.

b. When the waiver of development requirements is in harmony with the purpose and intent of city ordinances and the comprehensive plan.

c. When the proposed use, building, and development will function without adverse impact upon adjacent property, development in the area or the city as a whole.

d. When a conditional use permit is not required.

E. Nonconforming lots.

1. Applicability of restrictions. Regulations applicable to nonconforming lots are in addition to the regulations applicable to nonconforming uses, structures, and signs, and, in the event of conflict, the most restrictive provisions shall apply.

2. Nonconforming lots of record.

a. Residential districts.

i. In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record as of June 20, 1973, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this title. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width that are generally applicable in the district; provided, that yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to area or width of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located.

ii. In all single-family zoning districts, with the exception of the SR-8 zoning district, if two (2) or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record prior to June 20, 1973, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the minimum requirements established for lot width and area, the land involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this title, and no portion of the parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this title, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this title.

iii. In the SR-8 zoning district, if two (2) or more single-family zoned lots or combination of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record prior to June 20, 1973, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the following minimum requirements established for lot width, lot area, and topography, the land involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this title, and no portion of the parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this title, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this title.

(A) Minimum lot area: Four thousand six hundred (4,600) square feet.

(B) Minimum lot width: Forty (40) feet.

(C) Maximum site slope: Fifteen (15) percent.

iv. In any district in which duplex dwellings are permitted, a duplex dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record as of June 20, 1973, with a minimum area of seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this title. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width that are generally applicable in the district; provided, that yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to area or width of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located.

b. Other districts. In any other district, permitted building and structures may be constructed on a nonconforming lot of record, provided site coverage, yard, landscaping, and off-street parking requirements are met. Such lots must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership prior to June 20, 1973, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the minimum requirements established for lot width and area, the land involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this title, and no portion of the parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this title, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this title.

F. Nonconforming signs.

1. Applicability of restrictions. Regulations applicable to nonconforming signs are in addition to regulations applicable to nonconforming uses, structures, and lots, and in the event of conflict the most restrictive provisions shall apply.

2. Continuation of nonconforming signs.

a. Signs that were legally existing as of the effective date of this title or subsequent amendments thereto that do not conform to the regulations of this title shall be considered nonconforming signs. Nonconforming signs may not be moved, relocated, altered, or added to without receiving approval from the planning services office.

b. No sign permit shall be issued to allow legal signs on property having an illegal or nonconforming sign until such time as the nonconforming or illegal sign is modified to conform to this title.

3. Amortization period.

a. Abandoned signs. Abandoned signs must be removed within ninety (90) days.

b. Number and type of signs. The number and type of allowable signs for each occupancy must conform to the regulations of this title.

(Ord. No. 2905, § 1, 2-20-90; Ord. No. 3122, § 1, 6-15-93; Ord. No. 3409, § 50, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 3439, § 7, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 3521, § 2, 8-15-00; Ord. No. 3600, § 5, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3665, § 1, 10-7-03; Ord. No. 4003, § 7, 9-20-11)


15.08.110 Reduction of lot area.

No land may be so reduced in area that it would be in violation of minimum lot size, yard provisions, lot coverage, off-street parking or any other requirements of the zoning district or use.


15.08.120 Irregular-shaped lots.

On irregular-shaped lots, the average distance from the building line to the lot line shall be no less than the minimum yard provision; provided, however, that no part of the structure shall be located so that one-half (1/2) the minimum yard provision occurs at any point along such averaged alignment.


15.08.130 Visibility at intersections in residential districts.

On a corner lot in any residential district, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede vision between a height of two and one-half (2 1/2) and ten (10) feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along the street lines twenty (20) feet from the point of the intersection.

Cross reference(s) – Traffic code, Chapter 9.36 KCC.


15.08.140 Visibility at access points for automobiles.

Areas for ingress and egress for automobiles shall be designed in such a manner that adequate visibility is ensured.

Cross reference(s) – Traffic code, Chapter 9.36 KCC.


15.08.150 Side yard on corner lot.

The side yard along a side street on a corner lot shall have a minimum yard of ten (10) feet, except where a larger yard may be required.


15.08.160 Accessory buildings.

A. An accessory building can be located anywhere on a lot if it conforms with the setbacks required by this title for a principal building. In the rear one-half of a lot the accessory building can be built to within two feet of the side and rear lot lines, except when attached to a principal building, in which case it must have the same setbacks as the main building. If other regulations or ordinances conflict with the provisions in this subsection, the stricter regulations shall apply.

B. There shall be not more than one guest cottage or accessory dwelling unit on any one lot. The guest cottage or ADU shall be located on the rear half of the lot, unless determined to be infeasible due to lot shape, house placement, or other factors as approved by the economic and community development director. Accessory dwelling units are also subject to the provisions of KCC 15.08.350.

C. The combined footprint of all accessory buildings on a lot shall not exceed 15 percent of the lot area.

D. Accessory buildings shall not exceed 23 feet in height.

E. Accessory buildings shall not exceed the height of the principal building.

F. Accessory buildings that are 12 feet in height or higher must be visually compatible with the principal building by meeting all of the following:

1. The exterior finish material must be the same or visually match the exterior finish material of the principal building, in type, size, and placement;

2. The trim on the accessory building must be the same or visually match the trim used on the principal building, in type, size, and placement; and

3. The roof pitch of the accessory building must be substantially the same as the roof pitch of the principal building.

(Ord. No. 4003, § 8, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 4174, § 19, 11-17-15)


15.08.170 Projections into required yards.

Certain architectural features may project into required yards or courts as follows: Cornices, canopies, eaves, or other architectural features may protrude up to a distance of two (2) feet into any required yard.


15.08.180 Structures to have access.

Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street, or with access to an approved private street, and all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing and required off-street parking.


15.08.190 Exceptions to height regulations.

The height limitations for the various districts shall not apply to spires, flagpoles, belfries, cupolas, noncommercial antennas, ventilators, chimneys, or other appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy. The height limitations shall not apply to barns and silos provided that they are not located within fifty (50) feet of any lot line. City-owned elevated reservoirs, water tanks, fire or police training towers, and standpipes are exempt from height restrictions.

(Ord. No. 2805, § 1, 10-4-88)


15.08.205 Temporary use regulations.

This section shall be known as the temporary use regulations. Provisions authorizing temporary uses are intended to permit occasional temporary uses, activities, and structures when consistent with the purpose of this title and when compatible with the general vicinity and adjacent uses.

A. Permitted uses. The following types of temporary uses, activities, and associated structures may be authorized, subject to specific limitations in this section and such additional conditions as may be established by the planning director:

1. Model homes or apartments and related real estate sales and display activities located within the subdivision or residential development to which they pertain.

2. Contractor’s office, storage yard, and equipment parking and servicing on the site of an active construction project.

3. Circuses, carnivals, rodeos, fairs, or similar transient amusement or recreational activities.

4. Indoor or outdoor art and craft shows and exhibits.

5. Christmas tree sales lots, fireworks, and flower stands, limited to location on lots not used for residential purposes in commercial or industrial zoning districts.

6. Mobile home residences used for occupancy by supervisory and security personnel on the site of an active construction project.

7. Mobile home residential units used for occupancy of security personnel when not otherwise allowed as an accessory use.

8. Indoor or outdoor special sales, including swap meets, flea markets, parking lot sales, warehouse sales, or similar activities, limited to locations on lots not used for residential purposes in commercial or industrial districts, and when operated not more than ten (10) days in the same month, unless otherwise permitted by the city.

9. Temporary use of mobile trailer units or similar portable structures for nonresidential purposes, located in districts where the use is a permitted use.

10. Seasonal retail sales of agricultural or horticultural products raised or produced off the premises, to be permitted in commercial or industrial zoning districts only.

11. Temporary signs relating directly to the temporary uses described in this section, which may be permitted for a period not to exceed the operation of the use. The signs may be portable in nature and must be placed on the premises. No off-premises signs are permitted. No more than two (2) signs per use shall be permitted and no sign shall exceed a thirty-two (32) square feet total of all faces. Maximum sign height shall be eight (8) feet. No sign permit shall be required.

12. Garage sales, moving sales, and similar activities for the sale of personal belongings when operated not more than three (3) days in the same week or more than twice in the same calendar year. No permit is required.

13. Fund-raising carwashes. No permit is required; however, a car wash kit from public works operations is required.

14. The planning director may authorize additional temporary uses not listed in this subsection when it is found that the proposed uses are in compliance with the requirements and findings of subsection (C) of this section.

B. Conditions of temporary use.

1. Each site occupied by a temporary use shall be left free of debris, litter, or other evidence of temporary use upon completion or removal of the use.

2. A temporary use conducted in a parking facility shall not occupy or remove from availability more than twenty-five (25) percent of the spaces required for the permanent use, except in the downtown commercial (DC-1) zoning district or as approved by the city council.

3. Each site occupied by a temporary use must provide or have available sufficient off-street parking and vehicular maneuvering area for customers. Such parking need not comply with the development requirements of Chapter 15.05 KCC, but must provide safe and efficient interior circulation and ingress and egress from the public right-of-way.

4. No temporary use shall occupy or use public rights-of-way, parks, or other public lands in any manner unless specifically approved by the city council.

5. No temporary use shall occupy a site or operate within the city for more than ninety (90) days within any calendar year, except as follows:

a. When authorized by the planning director, a temporary use may operate an additional ninety (90) days if it is found that such an extension will be consistent with the requirements of subsection (C) of this section.

b. When authorized by the hearing examiner, a temporary use may operate an additional one (1) year if it is found that such an extension will be consistent with the requirements of subsection (C) of this section.

6. All signs shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15.06 KCC, pertaining to sign regulations, except as otherwise specified in this section.

7. All temporary uses shall obtain, prior to occupancy of the site or culmination of activities, all required city permits, licenses or other approvals, e.g., business license, building permit, zoning permit, etc.

8. The planning director may establish such additional conditions as may be deemed necessary to ensure land use compatibility and to minimize potential impacts on nearby uses. These include but are not limited to time and frequency of operation, temporary arrangements for parking and traffic circulation, requirements for screening or enclosure, and guarantees for site restoration and cleanup following temporary use.

C. Determinations. The planning director may authorize the temporary uses described in subsection (A) of this section after consultation and coordination with all other applicable city departments and other agencies and only when the following determinations can be made:

1. The temporary use will not impair the normal, safe, and effective operation of a permanent use on the same site.

2. The temporary use will be compatible with uses in the general vicinity and on adjacent properties.

3. The temporary use will not impact public health, safety, or convenience, or create traffic hazards or congestion, or otherwise interrupt or interfere with the normal conduct of uses and activities in the vicinity.

4. The use and associated structures and living quarters will be conducted and used in a manner compatible with the surrounding area.

5. The temporary use shall comply with all applicable standards of the Seattle King County health department.

D. Application and authorization.

1. Application to conduct a temporary use shall be made to the planning department, and shall include such information as the planning director may require to evaluate the use and to make the determinations required by this section.

2. Application shall be made prior to the requested date for commencement of the temporary use, and the planning director shall make a determination whether to approve, approve conditionally, or deny the temporary use within ten (10) days after the date of application.

3. Authorization of a temporary use shall be by issuance of a zoning permit.

4. A temporary use authorized pursuant to this section shall not be exempted or relieved from compliance with any other ordinance, law, permit, or license applicable to such use, except where specifically noted.

(Ord. No. 4003, § 9, 9-20-11)


15.08.210 Transition area combining district.

The purpose of this section is to provide for a transition area between industrial and residential zoning districts or commercial and residential zoning districts. The transition area provides both a physical and visual buffer between residential districts and other land uses. Transition area regulations shall be superimposed over those of the underlying zones. Buildings and setback areas within industrial or commercial districts shall be affected by these regulations if they are less than three hundred (300) feet from a property line in a single-family residential district, or are less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a property line in a multifamily residential district. Transition area regulations shall apply to those areas designated as transition area combining districts on the official zoning code map, which shall reflect those areas designated as transition area combining districts as set out in charts A and B following this section.

A. Building height. Building height shall not exceed two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. Beyond this height, to a height not greater than either three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet, two (2) feet of yard space beyond that required for a particular district shall be added to compensate for each foot of additional building height allowed at the planning director’s finding that such heights will not be detrimental to their surroundings.

B. Building setback. Building setback shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from the nearest residential property line.

C. Building length. Building frontage adjacent to residential zones shall not exceed two hundred (200) feet.

D. Principal access. Wherever possible, access to any use in a transition area shall be such that traffic does not travel through or past residential districts.

E. Sight screening. Screening equivalent to type I (solid screen) specified in the city’s landscape regulations shall apply in a transition area directly adjacent to a residential zone. Where a transition area occurs along a street that separates industrial or commercial uses from residences, type III (visual buffer) planting shall apply.

F. Parking. Parking and internal circulation of vehicles shall occur along boundaries with residential districts only if sight screened according to type III requirements of the city’s landscape regulations.

G. Building size. No building shall exceed one (1) acre in size.

H. Glare. Highly reflective building materials shall be avoided in transition areas unless it can be shown that they will not adversely impact any other private or public property.

I. Noise. Truck traffic and other noise normally associated with an operation or use in the transition area shall be limited to the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.

J. Separation of buildings. Buildings shall be separated by no less than twenty (20) feet. Variations in this standard may be approved by the planning director if more usable configuration of open space is obtained while still protecting visual transition to residential uses.

(Ord. No. 2786, § 6, 6-21-88)

TRANSITION AREA COMBINING DISTRICT

CHART A


[IMAGE]


TRANSITION AREA COMBINING DISTRICT

CHART B


[IMAGE]



15.08.215 Multifamily transition areas.

Repealed by Ord. No. 4225.


15.08.220 Water quality and hazard area development – Purpose.

Repealed by Ord. No. 3746.


15.08.222 Same – Map – Conflicting provisions.

Repealed by Ord. No. 3746.


15.08.224 Same – Classifications and restrictions.

Repealed by Ord. No. 3746.

(Ord. No. 3312, § 1, 9-17-96)


15.08.230 Solar access setback – Purpose.

The purpose of the solar access setback provisions is to provide a reasonable amount of solar access, wherever feasible, to lots in the city, so that the economic value of solar radiation falling on those properties will be preserved, investments in solar equipment will be secure, and the option to use solar energy will be preserved and encouraged, as provided for in RCW 64.04.140. While the solar access setback is not mandatory, planning department staff will work with applicants on a cooperative and voluntary basis to attempt to site buildings on lots to preserve solar access opportunities.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 51, 7-7-98)


15.08.232 Solar access setback – Applicability.

All structures over six (6) feet in height proposed on properties in the agricultural (A-10), residential agricultural (SR-1), and single-family zones will be reviewed in accordance with the design standards outlined in KCC 15.08.234, and are encouraged to meet those standards when feasible, based on the size and configuration of the lot. The provisions of this section shall not require that the yard and setback requirements of the underlying zone be exceeded.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 52, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 3612, § 8, 8-6-02)


15.08.234 Solar access setback – Calculation.

A. Solar factor.

1. The planning director or his designee shall determine the solar factor for a lot based on Table 1, attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived and by this reference incorporated in this section, or the formula set out in subsection (A)(2) of this section. 

2. The formula referred to in subsection (A)(1) of this section is as follows:

	N

	((1/.42 + P) / 2.38)

B. Solar setback. The following calculations shall be used to assess the distance of the highest shade-producing point of a structure from the northern property line. This setback should be applied where feasible, based on the size and configuration of the lot. 

1. (H – 6)/(.42 + P), for a lot with a solar factor equal to or greater than eighty-five (85); or

2. (H – 14)/(.42 + P), for a lot with a solar factor equal to or greater than forty-seven (47) and less than eighty-five (85).

3. For any lot with a solar factor less than forty-seven (47), the lot is exempt from solar setback calculations. 

C. Definitions. For purposes of this section, “H” is the height of the highest shade-producing point of the structure above grade, and “P” is the solar slope of the lot. “N” is the north-south lot dimension.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 53, 7-7-98)


15.08.240 Preservation of trees.

A. Purpose. Trees have a significant role in contributing to the quality of life in urban environments. The planting or retention of significant trees as required by this section is necessary to maintain and protect property values, to enhance the visual appearance of the city, to reduce the impacts of development on the storm drainage system, to improve air quality, to provide habitat for wildlife, and to provide a transition between various land uses in the city.

B. General restrictions for all districts. Except as provided for in this section, on undeveloped property in the city, all trees of a six-inch diameter or greater shall be retained on the property where they are growing.

C. Applicability.

1. The requirements of this section shall apply to new single-family or duplex development that is not subject to a previously approved tree plan, including but not limited to subdivisions, short subdivisions, planned unit developments, and development of existing lots.

2. Developments other than new single-family or duplex developments, such as multifamily, commercial, institutional, or industrial developments, are exempt from the requirements of this section.

D. Tree density credits requirements. The number of trees required for new development shall be measured in tree density credits. Development proposals shall provide a minimum of 20 tree density credits per net acre. Tree density credits may be achieved by preservation of existing trees, planting of supplemental trees, or a combination of both. The density credit value of existing and supplemental trees is shown in Table A. A tree density calculation that results in a fraction shall be rounded to the nearest whole number.

1. The net area to be used for tree density calculation shall include all residential building lots, recreation space, and open space tracts or easements not designated as critical areas. Public right-of-way, areas of a project site required to be dedicated as public right-of-way, critical areas and associated buffers, stormwater tracts, perimeter landscaping areas required by city code, and vehicular access or utility tracts shall be excluded from the area used for tree density calculation.

2. The tree credit value that corresponds with a tree’s diameter at breast height (DBH) is found in Table A. Diameter breast height (DBH) of the tree shall be measured in inches at the height of four and one-half feet above the ground.

a. Existing individual trees proposed for retention shall be at least six inches in diameter at breast height (DBH).

b. For the purpose of fulfilling the required tree density, the diameter inches of alder and cottonwood trees proposed for retention shall be discounted by a factor of one-half in the tree density calculation.

c. Where the existing trees to be retained do not alone satisfy the tree density requirement, supplemental trees shall be planted to achieve the required tree density. Credit value for supplemental trees is shown in Table A.

d. Supplemental trees shall be of a type and variety that is compatible with development in the Pacific Northwest, such as those included on the city’s approved street tree list.

e. Street trees required by public works standards shall be counted to fulfill the tree density credit requirement.

f. Supplemental trees shall be planted in the following locations, in order of priority:

i. On individual residential building lots;

ii. In private access tracts, as approved by the public works department;

iii. In onsite recreation areas as approved by the parks and human services department.

g. Trees required to be planted around stormwater ponds and in site perimeter tracts, pursuant to other city codes, regulations or development standards, shall not be counted as supplemental trees for the purpose of achieving the required tree density credits.

 

Table A: Tree Density Credits 

	DBH	Tree Credits	DBH	Tree Credits	DBH	Tree Credits

	*2.0 – 5"	1	 	 	 	 

	6 – 10"	1	24"	8	38"	15

	12"	2	26"	9	40"	16

	14"	3	28"	10	42"	17

	16"	4	30"	11	44"	18

	18"	5	32"	12	46"	19

	20"	6	34"	13	48"	20

	22"	7	36"	14	50" or greater	21

*    Applies to supplemental trees only. Supplemental or replacement deciduous trees shall be at least two inches DBH at the time of planting. An evergreen tree shall be at least six feet in height at the time of planting. See KCC 15.08.240(I)(3).

E. Tree retention plan. An applicant for a development permit shall submit and receive city approval of a tree retention plan prior to permit issuance, unless modified by the economic and community development director in accordance with the criteria set forth in subsection (H) of this section. The tree retention plan shall contain the following elements:

1. A tree inventory containing the following:

a. Size (DBH) and common genus name of trees proposed for retention; and

b. A formalized finding by a licensed arborist stating that all trees proposed for retention are healthy and growing in a condition and manner that is compatible with the proposed development.

2. A site plan drawn to a verifiable engineering scale depicting the following:

a. Accurate location of trees proposed for retention in relationship to proposed buildings, streets, parking areas, storm drainage facilities, and utilities (surveyed locations may be required);

b. Limits of disturbance (LOD) around retained trees, as recommended by a licensed arborist to ensure the health of the trees during and after construction;

c. Location, common genus name, and size of proposed supplemental trees; and

d. Location of tree protection measures to be maintained in proximity to retained trees, as recommended by a licensed arborist.

F. Protection of trees during construction. Temporary fencing shall be placed around the tree and its LOD prior to site development work, and no construction activities may be carried out within the protected area, except as allowed by permit, in accordance with the recommendation of a licensed arborist.

G. Required review. The city planning services division shall review the tree retention plan concurrently with each application for a development permit.

H. Alternative tree provision option. The economic and community development director may approve a modification of the tree provision requirements if:

1. The modification is consistent with the stated purpose of this section; and

2. The modification proposal incorporates the retention of other vegetation in consolidated locations which promotes the quality and character of the site and neighborhood.

I. Replacement of removed or damaged trees. Trees removed illegally from undeveloped land or trees designated for retention which are damaged or destroyed shall be replaced as follows:

1. One existing tree with a six-inch DBH shall be replaced by two new trees.

2. For each additional three inches of diameter at breast height, one new replacement tree shall be added, up to a maximum of six trees.

3. Replacement deciduous trees shall be at least two inches DBH at the time of planting. A replacement evergreen shall be at least six feet high.

(Ord. No. 2452, § 1; Ord. No. 2932, § 2, 7-17-90; Ord. No. 3830, § 19, 3-6-07; Ord. No. 4209, § 1, 7-19-16)

Cross reference(s) – Street trees, ch. 6.10.


15.08.260 Green River Corridor district regulations.

A. Purpose. The Green River Corridor district is hereby created to protect, conserve, and manage areas generally located on both sides of the Green River, and to ensure that urban development within the district is compatible with the open natural configuration of the Green River and its adjacent lands. 

B. Location.

1. The Green River Corridor district is that area of the city one thousand (1,000) feet from the ordinary high-water line of the Green River; provided, that the shoreline master program shall govern development within the first two hundred (200) feet of the ordinary high-water line of the river. The district is more particularly described as follows:

Two (2) strips of land each eight hundred (800) feet in width which begin at the north city limit line, on March 4, 1985, and end at the south city limit line, which south line ends in Section 30, Township 22 North, Range 5 East, W.M. Each strip shall be measured from each side of the Green River and the measurement shall be two hundred (200) feet from the ordinary high-water line of the river, all in King County, Washington; except any portions thereof lying outside of the city limits.

2. Property exemption. Property platted in accordance with the city subdivision code, Ordinance No. 1840, before March 2, 1981 (adoption of the Valley Studies), shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 

C. Development standards.

1. Green River access. No building or lot within the district shall be constructed or created without providing access to the Green River via public sidewalks or a private trail system. Such sidewalks or private trail systems shall connect to riverside public trails or scenic drives at intervals of one thousand (1,000) feet or less in industrial developments, and intervals of five hundred (500) feet or less in residential developments.

2. Pedestrian access in residential development. In residential developments, pedestrian access to the Green River shall be accomplished without crossing streets or roads, except scenic and recreational roads, unless clearly shown to be infeasible.

3. Parking facilities. Parking facilities for access to the Green River shall be located as near as practicable to riverfront parks or historic sites and shall be clustered in lots not exceeding thirty (30) cars. Every public parking area shall be visible from a street accessible to the public and be situated so that the public can clearly see riverfront open space and gain access to the public portion of that open space.

4. Payment in lieu of parking facilities. The city may accept or require payment in lieu of providing parking facilities which are required as a condition of the issuance of development permits.



5. Loading dock location. Loading docks shall not be constructed on river-facing sides of buildings unless a minimum fifty (50) foot buffer of native vegetation is provided to screen the loading docks from the shoreline, unless otherwise required by the Kent shoreline master program. Other design and landscaping requirements may be imposed by the planning manager to meet the purpose of the Green River Corridor district.

6. Exterior walls of buildings. No building on any riverfront lot shall have an exterior wall parallel to, or within forty-five (45) degrees of parallel to, the river which exceeds two hundred (200) feet in length, except as follows: buildings on riverfront lots in the MA, M1, M1-C, M2, GC-MU, and M3 zoning districts may have exterior walls parallel to, or within forty-five (45) degrees of parallel to, the river which exceed two hundred (200) feet in length, provided they are screened by a vegetative buffer per subsection (C)(8)(c) of this section.

7. Lots.

a. Each riverfront lot within a subdivision shall contain area sufficient to comply with minimum lot size requirements of Chapter 15.04 KCC and provide a public access easement and building setback line as required by this section.

b. No subdivision of professional and office (O), general commercial (GC), industrial agricultural (MA), industrial park (M1), and limited industrial (M2) zoned land shall be approved unless each lot within the subdivision has an upland boundary at least five hundred (500) feet from the ordinary high-water line of the river.

8. Vegetation buffer.

a. A permanent vegetation buffer, in accordance with KCC 15.07.050(C) pertaining to landscaping type III, shall be maintained or established for each building or use within the district. Any materials storage yard, truck maneuvering area, equipment parking area, junkyard, refuse storage, or similar use within the district shall install such a permanent vegetative buffer between the use and the Green River within two (2) years of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived.

b. Landscape screening and buffer strips shall be planted in order to be harmonious with those already planted on adjacent properties and consistent with the city landscaping requirements as set out in Chapter 15.07 KCC.

c. Buildings on riverfront lots in industrial zoning districts which have exterior walls exceeding two hundred (200) feet in length parallel to, or within forty-five (45) degrees of parallel to, the river must be screened by a vegetation buffer. This vegetative buffer shall be located along the length of the property line located parallel to, or within forty-five (45) degrees of parallel to, the river, for a minimum depth of twenty (20) feet in accordance with type III, visual buffer landscape standards pursuant to KCC 15.07.050(C). In addition, an earth berm of a minimum of forty-eight (48) inches in height must be provided for.

9. Rail lines. No rail lines shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet of the Green River; provided, however, rail lines shall be permitted to within three hundred (300) feet of the Green River in those locations specified on Exhibit B attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived and by this reference incorporated in this section, such locations having been found to be best suited to rail.

10. Road access. All new lots and buildings shall be designed with primary street access to streets other than scenic and recreational roads, unless no other access is available.

11. Street connections. Development shall include no street connections to scenic and recreational roads, unless no other access is available.

12. Utilities. Utilities shall be installed in accordance with Chapter 7.10 KCC.

13. Surface drainage facilities. Surface drainage facilities such as drainage channels and retention areas shall be designed to applicable city standards and shall be integral parts, if possible, of any common trail and open space system connections to the riverfront.

D. Performance standards.

1. Fish and game requirements. The applicant shall comply with applicable requirements of the State Department of Fisheries and State Department of Game for preventing and mitigating adverse impacts on fish and wildlife resources and enhancing wildlife habitat.

2. Flood control works. If city funds are used in the construction of flood control works such as dikes, levees, or floodwalls, public rights of access to such works shall be dedicated prior to construction, where practicable.

(Ord. No. 3338, § 1, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 3600, § 6, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3612, § 9, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 3746, § 9, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 3750, § 1, 5-17-05; Ord. No. 4120, § 1, 8-19-14)


15.08.270 Adult uses.

A. Adult uses, as defined in KCC 15.02.008, are prohibited within the area circumscribed by a circle which has a radius consisting of the following distances from the following specified uses or zones:

1. Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any residential zone (SR-1, A-10, AG, SR-6, SR-4.5, SR-3, MR-D, MR-G, MR-M, MR-H, and MHP as provided in Ch. 15.09 KCC).

2. Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any public or private school.

3. Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any church or other religious facility or institution.

4. Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any public park.

5. Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any public library.

B. The distances provided in this section shall be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest point of the property or parcel upon which the proposed use is to be located, to the nearest point of the parcel of property or the land use district boundary line from which the proposed land is to be separated.

C. Violation of the use provisions of this section is declared to be a public nuisance per se, which shall be abated by the city attorney under state law, including procedures set forth in KCC 15.09.090.

D. Nothing in this section is intended to authorize, legalize, or permit the establishment, operation, or maintenance of any business, building, or use which violates any city ordinance or statute of the state regarding public nuisances, sexual conduct, lewdness, or obscene or harmful matter or the exhibition or public display thereof.

(Ord. No. 2785, § 2, 6-21-88; Ord. No. 3275, § 2, 1-2-96; Ord. No. 3612, § 10, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 3770, § 14, 11-15-05)

Cross reference(s) – Adult entertainment regulations, ch. 5.10.


15.08.280 Group homes class II and III.

A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to outline general conditions with which class II and III group homes, as defined in KCC 15.02.173, must comply when applying for a conditional use permit to locate in the city.

B. Dispersion requirements. A class II and III group home must locate a minimum of six hundred (600) feet from any other class II or III group home. This distance will be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest point of the property or parcel upon which the proposed use is to be located, to the nearest point of the parcel or property or the land use district boundary line from which the proposed use is to be separated.

C. Separation requirements. A one thousand (1,000) foot separation requirement will apply to class II and III group homes to separate such facilities from sensitive land uses such as public or private schools, churches, or other religious facilities or institutions, parks and playgrounds, and other such uses that are deemed to be sensitive. In addition to the sensitive uses listed in this subsection, class III group homes must be separated at least one thousand (1,000) feet from all residential areas. This distance would be measured by the same method as that used for the dispersion requirements described in subsection (B) of this section.

D. Registration and licensing. Group homes must obtain all licenses necessary for operation by state and federal agencies. Class II and III group homes must also register with the city by supplying information pertinent to the validity, update, and renewal status of the home’s state and federal license. Accuracy of all information contained in any state or federal license shall be verified to the extent possible by the city, and any applicant for a group home conditional use permit shall have the responsibility to ensure that any changes made to the license prior to its renewal are immediately provided to the city.

(Ord. No. 2958, § 18, 1-2-91)


15.08.290 Medical cannabis collective gardens.

Repealed by Ord. 4208.

(Ord. No. 4036, § 2, 6-5-12)


15.08.295 Patient cooperatives. Revised 5/20

A. Medical marijuana patient cooperatives, as defined in KCC 15.02.326, are prohibited in the following zoning districts:

1. All agricultural districts, including A-10 and AG;

2. All residential districts, including SR-1, SR-3, SR-4.5, SR-6, SR-8, MR-D, MR-T12, MR-T16, MR-G, MR-M, MR-H, MHP, PUD, MTC-1, MTC-2, and MCR;

3. All commercial districts, including NCC, CC, CC-MU, DC, DCE, DCE-T, CM, GC, and GC-MU;

4. All industrial districts, including I1, I2, and I3; and

5. Any new district established on or after July 1, 2016.

B. Any violation of this section is declared to be a public nuisance per se, and shall be abated by the city attorney under applicable provisions of this code or state law, including, but not limited to, Chapter 1.04 KCC.

C. Nothing in this section is intended to authorize, legalize or permit the establishment or operation of a use that violates any city, county, state or federal law or statute.

(Ord. No. 4208, § 5, 7-5-16; Ord. No. 4355, § 10 (Exh. J), 3-3-20)


15.08.300 Zero lot line development – Authorized.

Zero lot line development may be permitted in the following zoning districts:

A. SR-3 single-family residential.

B. SR-4.5 single-family residential.

C. SR-6 single-family residential.

D. SR-8 single-family residential. 

E. MR-D duplex multifamily residential.

F. MR-G low density multifamily residential.

(Ord. No. 2656, § 1, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 3409, § 54, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 3770, § 15, 11-15-05)

Cross reference(s) – Zero lot line subdivisions, § 12.04.485.


15.08.310 Same – Permitted uses.

Uses permitted in zero lot line developments shall be as outlined in the underlying zoning district.

(Ord. No. 2656, § 1, 9-15-86)


15.08.320 Zero lot line – Development standards for single-family zoning districts.

Zero lot line development standards for single-family zoning districts are as follows:

A. Minimum lot. Minimum lot size is three thousand six hundred (3,600) square feet.

B. Maximum site coverage. Maximum site coverage is fifty (50) percent.

C. Density. The density of the zero lot line development shall not exceed the density of the underlying zoning district.

D. Minimum yard requirements. Minimum yard requirements are as follows:

1. Front (dwelling): Ten (10) feet.

2. Front (garage): Twenty (20) feet.

3. Rear: Eight (8) feet.

4. One (1) side: Zero (0) feet.

5. Other side (dwelling): Ten (10) feet.

6. Other side (garage): Five (5) feet.

E. Distance between dwellings. Minimum distance between dwellings is fifteen (15) feet.

F. Height limitation. The height limitation is two (2) stories, not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet.

G. Openings prohibited on zero lot line side. The wall of the dwelling located on the lot line shall have no windows, doors, air conditioning units, or any other type of opening; provided, however, that atriums or courts shall be permitted on the zero lot line side when the court or atrium is enclosed by three (3) walls of the dwelling unit and a solid wall of at least eight (8) feet in height is provided on the zero lot line. The wall shall be constructed of the same material as exterior walls of the unit. Opaque openings or high-level windows above eight (8) feet in height shall be allowed. There is no restriction on openings where a wall is located on a zero lot line facing open space.

H. Open space. Each zero lot line development shall provide not less than twenty-five (25) percent of the gross land area for common open space, which shall be:

1. Concentrated in large areas and designed to provide either passive or active recreation.

2. Owned and maintained as follows:

a. If under one (1) ownership, owned and maintained by the ownership:

b. Held in common ownership by all the owners of the development by means of a homeowners’ association. Such homeowners’ association shall be responsible for maintenance of the common open space. If such open space is not maintained in a reasonable manner, the city shall have the right to provide for the maintenance thereof and bill the homeowners’ association accordingly. If unpaid, such bills shall be a lien against the homeowners’ association; or

c. Dedicated for public use if accepted by the city legislative authority or other appropriate public agency.

I. Perimeter buffer. A ten (10) foot minimum width buffer strip is required on all boundaries of the development. A one hundred (100) percent sight-obscuring wall, fence, or landscape shall be established along all boundaries. The ten (10) foot buffer strip inside this sight-obscuring screen may be part of the lots, or may be an area maintained by a homeowners’ association. The buffer strip required in this subsection may be a credit against the open space requirements of subsection (I) of this section.

J. Walls. There shall be no contiguous walls between units.

K. Storage of recreational vehicles. The storage or parking of recreational vehicles shall be prohibited within a zero lot line development.

(Ord. No. 2656, § 1, 9-15-86; Ord. No. 3409, § 55, 7-7-98)


15.08.330 Same – Development standards for multifamily zoning districts.

Zero lot line development standards for multifamily zoning districts are as follows:

A. Minimum site area. Minimum site area is five (5) acres.

B. Minimum lot size. Minimum lot size is three thousand (3,000) square feet.

C. Maximum site coverage. Maximum site coverage is fifty (50) percent.

D. Density. The density of the zero lot line development shall not exceed the density of the underlying zoning district.

E. Minimum yard requirements. Minimum yard requirements are as follows:

1. Front (dwelling): Fifteen (15) feet.

2. Front (garage): Twenty (20) feet.

3. Rear: Ten (10) feet.

4. One (1) side: Zero (0) feet.

5. Other side (dwelling): Fifteen (15) feet.

6. Other side (garage): Five (5) feet.

F. Distance between dwellings. Minimum distance between dwellings is fifteen (15) feet.

G. Height limitation. The height limitation is two (2) stories, not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet.

H. Openings prohibited on zero lot line side. The wall of the dwelling located on the lot line shall have no windows, doors, air conditioning units, or any other type of opening; provided, however, that atriums or courts shall be permitted on the zero lot line side when the court or atrium is enclosed by three (3) walls of the dwelling unit and a solid wall at least eight (8) feet in height is provided on the zero lot line. The wall shall be constructed of the same material as exterior walls of the unit. Opaque openings or high-level windows above eight (8) feet in height shall be allowed. There is no restriction on openings where a wall is located on a zero lot line facing open space.

I. Open space. Each zero lot line development shall provide not less than twenty (20) percent of the gross land area for common open space, which shall be:

1. Concentrated in large areas and designed to provide either passive or active recreation.

2. Owned and maintained as follows:

a. If under one (1) ownership, owned and maintained by the ownership;

b. Held in common ownership by all the owners of the development by means of a homeowners’ association. Such homeowners’ association shall be responsible for maintenance of the common open space. If such open space is not maintained in a reasonable manner, the city shall have the right to provide for the maintenance thereof and bill the homeowners’ association accordingly. If unpaid, such bills shall be a lien against the homeowners’ association; or

c. Dedicated for public use if accepted by the city legislative authority or other appropriate public agency.

J. Perimeter buffer. A ten (10) foot minimum width buffer strip is required on all boundaries of the development. A one hundred (100) percent sight-obscuring wall, fence, or landscape shall be established along all boundaries. The ten (10) foot buffer strip inside this sight-obscuring screen may be part of the lots, or may be an area maintained by a homeowners’ association. The buffer strip required in this subsection may be a credit against the open space requirements of subsection (I) of this section.

K. Walls. One (1) wall may be contiguous between buildings.

L. Storage of recreational vehicles. The storage or parking of recreational vehicles shall be prohibited within a zero lot line development.

(Ord. No. 2656, § 1, 9-15-86)


15.08.340 Same – Platting requirements.

Zero lot line subdivisions are subject to the procedures outlined in the city subdivision code, KCC 12.04.260, regarding zero lot line subdivisions.

(Ord. No. 2656, § 1, 9-15-86)

Cross reference(s) – Zero lot line subdivisions, § 12.04.485; lot line adjustments in subdivision regulations, § 12.04.560.


15.08.350 Accessory dwelling unit regulations.

A. Intent. The city provides these accessory dwelling unit regulations for the following purposes:

1. The 1993 Washington Housing Policy Act requires cities with populations in excess of 20,000 to implement regulations that encourage the development of accessory apartments in areas zoned for single-family residential use.

2. To increase the supply of affordable rental units through better use of the existing housing stock, and to provide variety in affordable rental units.

3. To make homeownership more affordable because it will be easier to buy both new and existing homes with the help of an accessory dwelling unit.

4. To provide more options for different household types (single people, older people, people with disabilities, and others).

5. To make better use of existing public investment in streets, transit, water, sewer, and other utilities.

B. Standards and criteria.

1. One ADU per detached single-family dwelling unit is allowed within all residential zones. There shall be not more than one guest cottage or ADU on any one lot.

2. An ADU may be established within or as an addition to a new or existing single-family dwelling, or as a detached unit from the principal dwelling. All ADUs not established within or as an addition to the principal dwelling shall be deemed “detached,” regardless of whether they are attached to any accessory structure or building on the lot. Detached ADUs are subject to the provisions of KCC 15.08.160.

3. The ADU, as well as the principal dwelling unit, must meet all applicable setbacks, lot coverage, and building height requirements.

4. The design and size of an ADU shall conform to the requirements of all building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, fire, health, and any other applicable codes. When there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this section, the building official may grant modifications for individual cases pursuant to the International Building Code, the International Residential Code, or other applicable building codes, as subsequently amended or recodified.

5. One of the dwelling units shall be owner-occupied as the owner’s principal residence for at least six months every calendar year. No permit for an ADU will be issued until the owner files a covenant evidencing this use limitation against the property. This covenant must be recorded in the King County recorder’s office, at the owner’s expense, and shall be in a form acceptable to the city attorney.

6. If either the ADU or the principal unit ceases to be owner-occupied for at least six months in any given calendar year, the ADU permit shall be deemed revoked and use of the unit as an ADU must cease immediately.

7. The size of an ADU contained within or attached to an existing single-family dwelling shall be limited by the existing dwelling’s applicable zoning requirements. An ADU incorporated into the construction of a new single-family dwelling shall be limited to 40 percent of the principal dwelling unit.

8. The size of a detached ADU, for either new construction or an existing home, shall be up to 800 square feet or 33 percent of the size of the principal unit, whichever is smaller. If the detached ADU is built within, above, or in addition to another accessory structure, the footprint of the accessory structure is not counted towards the footprint of the ADU.

9. A legal guest cottage, as defined by KCC 15.02.174, existing prior to November 21, 1995, shall not be denied an accessory housing permit solely because it is larger than the maximum size stated in these criteria. Any legally constructed accessory building, existing prior to November 21, 1995, may be converted to an accessory dwelling unit, provided the structure does not exceed 50 percent of the size of the principal unit.

10. The owner or developer shall take every effort to avoid additional entrances or other visible changes on the street facade of the house which indicates the presence of an ADU.

11. A permit application must be completed and approved for all ADUs. The economic and community development department shall determine the application requirements for an ADU permit.

12. ADUs existing prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section may be found to be legal on the condition that the property owner applies for an ADU permit and complies with all required standards and provisions. Property owners subject to this section have one year from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section to apply for an ADU permit, after which time all affected property owners may be subject to fines and penalties established in this title.

13. Immediately adjacent neighbors of an ADU applicant shall be notified by first-class mail of the pending ADU permit application by the economic and community development department within 15 business days of the city’s acceptance of a fully complete ADU permit application. This notification is informational only. The decision by the economic and community development director to grant an ADU permit is nonappealable by the neighbors of the permit holder.

(Ord. No. 3251, § 12, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 3333, § 3, 1-22-97; Ord. No. 3690, § 19, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 4174, § 20, 11-17-15)


15.08.359 Accessory living quarters.

A. Intent. The city provides these accessory living quarter (ALQ) regulations for the following purposes:

1. To meet the need for onsite dwelling of an owner or employee to provide for security of the business.

2. To reduce the need for commute trips.

B. Standards and criteria. 

1. One (1) ALQ per commercial or manufacturing building is allowed outright within all commercial and manufacturing zones within the city.

2. An ALQ may be established in a new or existing commercial or manufacturing building by creating the living quarters within or as an addition to the building, or as a detached structure from the principal structure. 

3. The ALQ, as well as the main structure, must meet all applicable setbacks, lot coverage, and building height requirements.

4. The design and size of an ALQ shall conform to all applicable standards in the building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, fire, health, and any other applicable codes. When there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this section, the building official may grant modifications for individual cases pursuant to the International Building Code, the International Residential Code, or other applicable building codes, and as subsequently amended or recodified.

5. The size of an ALQ contained within or attached to a commercial or manufacturing establishment shall be limited to twenty (20) percent of the commercial or manufacturing structure in which the ALQ is located. The size of a detached ALQ shall be limited to no more than one thousand (1,000) square feet.

6. A permit application must be completed and approved for all ALQs. The planning department shall determine the applicable requirements for an ALQ permit.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 56, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 3690, § 20, 5-4-04)


15.08.400 Planned unit development, PUD. Revised 5/20

The intent of the PUD is to create a process to promote diversity and creativity in site design, and protect and enhance natural and community features. The process is provided to encourage unique developments which may combine a mixture of residential, commercial, and industrial uses. The PUD process permits departures from the conventional siting, setback, and density requirements of a particular zoning district in the interest of achieving superior site development, creating open space, and encouraging imaginative design by permitting design flexibility. By using flexibility in the application of development standards, this process will promote developments that will benefit citizens that live and work within the city.

A. Zoning districts where permitted. PUDs are permitted in all zoning districts with the exception of the A-10, agricultural zone; provided, however, that PUDs in SR zones are only allowed if the site is at least 100 acres in size, except as provided in subsection (C) of this section.

B. Permitted uses.

1. Principally permitted uses. The principally permitted uses in PUDs shall be the same as those permitted in the underlying zoning classifications, except as provided in subsection (B)(4) of this section.

2. Conditional uses. The conditional uses in PUDs shall be the same as those permitted in the underlying zoning classification. The conditional use permit review process may be consolidated with that of the PUD pursuant to procedures specified in subsection (F) of this section.

3. Accessory uses. Accessory uses and buildings which are customarily incidental and subordinate to a principally permitted use are also permitted.

4. Exceptions. In residential PUDs of 100 acres or more located in SR zones, and in residential PUDs of 10 acres or more located in other zoning districts, commercial uses may be permitted. Commercial uses shall be limited to those uses permitted in the neighborhood convenience commercial district. In PUDs of 100 acres or more in size located in SR zones, attached dwelling units are permitted only if they are condominiums created in accordance with the Washington Condominium Act, Chapter 64.34 RCW; provided, that if a proposed PUD in a single-family zoning district includes such attached condominiums, the density bonus provisions outlined in subsection (D) of this section shall not apply; and further provided, that no condominium building may exceed two stories.

C. Development standards. The following development standards are minimum requirements for a planned unit development:

1. Minimum lot size exclusion. The minimum lot size requirements of the districts outlined in this title shall not apply to PUDs.

2. Minimum site acreage. Minimum site acreage for a PUD is established according to the zoning district in which the PUD is located, as follows: 

	Zones	Minimum Site Acreage

	Multifamily (MR-D, MR-G, MR-M, MR‑H, MR‑T12, MR‑T16)	None

	Commercial, office and manufacturing zones	None

	SR zones (SR-1, SR-3, SR-4.5, SR-6, SR‑8) consisting entirely of detached single-family dwellings as defined in KCC 15.02.115	5 acres

	SR zones (SR-1, SR-3, SR-4.5, SR-6, SR‑8) consisting entirely of detached single-family dwellings as defined in KCC 15.02.115 and if providing increased wetland buffers pursuant to KCC 11.06.600(D)	0 acres

	SR zones (SR-1, SR-3, SR-4.5, SR-6, SR‑8) not comprised entirely of detached single-family dwellings as defined in KCC 15.02.115	100 acres

3. Minimum perimeter building setback. The minimum perimeter building setback of the underlying zone shall apply. The hearing examiner may reduce building separation requirements to the minimum required by the building and fire departments according to the criteria set forth in subsection (G)(1) of this section. If an adjacent property is undevelopable under this title, the hearing examiner may also reduce the perimeter building setback requirement to the minimum standards in the city building and fire codes.

4. Maximum height of structures. The maximum height of structures of the underlying zone shall apply. The hearing examiner may authorize additional height in CC, GC, DC, CM, I1, I2, and I3 zones where proposed development in the PUD is compatible with the scale and character of adjacent existing developments.

5. Open space.

a. The standard set forth in this subsection shall apply to PUD residential developments only. Each PUD shall provide a minimum of 35 percent of the total site area for common open space. In mixed use PUDs containing residential uses, 35 percent of the area used for residential use shall be reserved as open space.

b. For the purpose of this section, open space shall be defined as land which is not used for buildings, dedicated public rights-of-way, traffic circulation and roads, parking areas, or any kind of storage. Open space includes, but is not limited to, privately owned woodlands, open fields, streams, wetlands, severe hazard areas, landscaped areas, trails through parks and sensitive areas (not including required sidewalks), gardens, courtyards, or lawns. Common open space may provide for either active or passive recreation.

c. Open space within a PUD shall be available for common use by the residents, tenants, or the general public, depending on the type of project.

6. Streets. If streets within the development are required to be dedicated to the city for public use, such streets shall be designed in accordance with the standards outlined in the city subdivision code and other appropriate city standards. If streets within the development are to remain in private ownership and remain as private streets, the following standards shall apply:

a. Minimum private street pavement widths for parallel parking in residential planned unit developments. Minimum private street pavement widths with and without parallel parking in residential planned unit developments are as follows: 

	 	No Parking (feet)	Parking One Side (feet)	Parking Both Sides (feet)

	One-way streets	20	29	38

	Two-way streets	22	31	40

The minimum widths set out in this subsection may be modified upon review and approval by the city fire chief and the city traffic engineer, providing they are sufficient to maintain emergency access and traffic safety. A maintenance agreement for private streets within a PUD shall be required by the hearing examiner as a condition of PUD approval.

b. Vehicle parking areas. Adequate vehicular parking areas shall be provided. Vehicular parking areas may be provided by on-street parking or off-street parking lots. The design of such parking areas shall be in accordance with the standards outlined in Chapter 15.05 KCC. In single-family PUDs, parking shall be provided at a ratio of 1.8 parking stalls per dwelling unit; garages are excluded from the parking calculation. The planning manager may recommend for hearing examiner approval additional parking based upon site design and project land uses; the recommendation may include a requirement for on-street parking.

c. One-way streets. One-way loop streets shall be no more than 2,000 feet long.

d. On-street parking. On-street parking shall be permitted. Privately owned and maintained “no parking” and “fire lane” signs may be required as determined by the city traffic engineer and city fire department chief.

7. Pedestrian walkways. Pedestrian walkways shall be provided to connect residences to public walkways and streets and shall be constructed of material deemed to be an all-weather surface by the public works director and planning manager.

8. Landscaping.

a. Minimum perimeter landscaping of the underlying zone shall apply. Additional landscaping shall be required as provided in Chapter 15.07 KCC.

b. All PUD developments shall ensure that parking areas are integrated with the landscaping system and provide screening of vehicles from view from public streets. Parking areas shall be conveniently located to buildings and streets while providing for landscaping adjacent to buildings and pedestrian access.

c. Solid waste collection areas and waste reduction or recycling collection areas shall be conveniently and safely located for onsite use and collection, and attractively site screened.

9. Signs. The sign regulations of Chapter 15.06 KCC shall apply.

10. Platting. If portions of the PUD are to be subdivided for sale or lease, the procedures of the city subdivision code, as amended, shall apply. Specific development standards such as lot size, street design, etc., shall be provided as outlined in subsection (E) of this section.

11. Green River Corridor. Any development located within the Green River Corridor district shall adhere to the Green River Corridor district regulations.

12. View regulations. View regulations as specified in KCC 15.08.060 shall apply to all PUDs.

13. Shoreline master program. Any development located within 200 feet of the Green River shall adhere to the city shoreline master program regulations.

14. Design review. PUDs shall be subject to administrative design review in KCC 15.09.045. PUDs of only single-family detached residences shall be evaluated using the review criteria of KCC 15.09.045(C), residential design review. Multifamily dwellings, multifamily townhouse units, independent senior living facilities, assisted living facilities, residential facilities with health care or transitional housing for three or more families located outside of downtown and Meeker Street from 64th Avenue South to Kent-Des Moines Road are subject to multifamily design review as provided for in KCC 15.09.045(D), or as provided for in KCC 15.09.046 if located within downtown or along Meeker Street from 64th Avenue South to Kent-Des Moines Road.

D. Density bonus standards. The density of residential development for PUDs will be based on the gross density of the underlying zoning district with density bonuses allowed as described below. PUDs under 20 acres in size located in SR zones shall not be allowed density bonuses except as provided by subsection (D)(8) of this section. For all other PUDs, the hearing examiner may recommend a dwelling unit density not more than 20 percent greater than that permitted by the underlying zone upon findings and conclusions that the amenities or design features which promote the purposes of this subsection, as follows, are provided:

1. Open space. A four percent density bonus may be authorized if at least 10 percent of the open space is in concentrated areas for passive use. Open space shall include significant natural features of the site, including but not limited to fields, woodlands, watercourses, and permanent and seasonal wetlands. Excluded from the open space definition are the areas within the building footprints, land used for parking, vehicular circulation or rights-of-way, and areas used for any kind of storage.

2. Active recreation areas. A four percent density bonus may be authorized if at least 10 percent of the site is utilized for active recreational purposes, including but not limited to jogging or walking trails, pools, children’s play areas, etc. Only that percentage of space contained within accessory structures that is directly used for active recreation purposes can be included in the 10 percent active recreation requirement.

3. Stormwater drainage. A two percent density bonus may be authorized if stormwater drainage control is accomplished using natural onsite drainage features. Natural drainage features may include streams, creeks, ponds, etc.

4. Native vegetation. A four percent density bonus may be authorized if at least 15 percent of the native vegetation on the site is left undisturbed in large open areas.

5. Parking lot size. A two percent density bonus may be authorized if off-street parking is grouped in areas of 16 stalls or less. Parking areas must be separated from other parking areas or buildings by significant landscaping in excess of Type V standards as provided in KCC 15.07.050. At least 50 percent of these parking areas must be designed as outlined in this subsection to receive the density bonus.

6. Mixed housing types. A two percent density bonus may be authorized if a development features a mix of residential housing types. Single-family residences, attached single units, condominiums, apartments, and townhomes are examples of housing types. The mix need not include some of every type.

7. Project planning and management. A two percent density bonus may be granted if a design/development team is used. Such a team would include a mixture of architects, engineers, landscape architects, and designers. A design/ development team is likely to produce a professional development concept that would be consistent with the purpose of the zoning regulations.

8. Increased wetland buffer widths. A 10 percent density bonus may be granted for a wetland buffer that is increased by 25 feet. A 20 percent density bonus may be granted for a wetland buffer that is increased by 50 feet. All other requirements of the PUD standards shall apply. 

These standards are thresholds, and partial credit is not given for partial attainment. The site plan must at least meet the threshold level of each bonus standard in order for density bonuses to be given for that standard. In no case shall any of the density bonus provisions be combined to create a total bonus greater than 20 percent.

E. Master plan approvals. The master plan process is intended to allow approval of a generalized, conceptual development plan on a site which would then be constructed in phases over a longer period of time than a typical planned unit development. The master plan approval process is typically appropriate for development which might occur on a site over a period of several years, and in phases which are not entirely predictable.

1. Submittal requirements. The distinguishing characteristic between a master plan development application and a planned unit development application is that a master plan development proposal is conceptual in nature. However, the master plan application shall provide sufficient detail of the scope of the development, the uses, the amount of land to be developed and preserved, and how services will be provided. The specific submittal requirements are noted below:

a. A written description of the scope of the project, including total anticipated build-out (number of units of residential, gross floor area for commercial), and the types of uses proposed;

b. A clear vicinity map, showing adjacent roads;

c. A fully dimensional site plan, which would show the areas upon which development would occur, the proposed number of units or buildings in each phase of the development, the areas that would be preserved for open space or protection of environmentally sensitive features, and a generalized circulation plan, which would include proposed pedestrian and bicycle circulation;

d. A generalized drainage and stormwater runoff plan;

e. A site map showing contours at not greater than five-foot intervals and showing any wetlands, streams, or other natural features;

f. A description of the proposed phasing plan;

g. Documentation of coordination with the Kent school district;

h. Certificates of water and sewer availability;

i. Generalized building elevations showing the types of uses being proposed.

2. Density. The gross density of a residential master plan project shall be the same as the density allowable in the underlying zoning district.

3. Open space. The criteria in subsection (C)(5) of this section shall apply.

4. Application process. The application process for a master plan application shall be as outlined in subsection (F) of this section.

5. Review criteria. The review criteria for a master plan application shall be the same as those outlined in subsection (G) of this section.

6. Administrative approval of individual phases. Once a master site plan PUD has been approved pursuant to subsection (F) of this section, any individual phase of the development shall be reviewed and approved administratively, as outlined in Chapter 15.09 KCC; provided, that for each phase of development that includes a residential condominium, the applicant shall submit a copy of the condominium declaration recorded against the property, and as outlined in RCW 64.34.200.

7. Time limits. The master plan approved by the hearing examiner or city council, as provided in subsection (F) of this section, shall be valid for a period of up to seven years. At the end of this seven-year period, development permits must be issued for all phases of the master plan development. An extension of time may be requested by the applicant. A single extension may be granted by the planning manager for a period of not more than two additional years.

8. Modifications. Once approved, requests for modifications to the master plan project shall be made in writing to the planning manager. The planning manager shall make a determination as to whether the requested modification is major or minor as outlined in subsection (I) of this section.

F. Application process. The application process includes the following steps: informal review process, compliance with the State Environmental Policy Act, community information meeting, development plan review, and public hearing before the hearing examiner.

1. Informal review process. An applicant shall meet informally with the planning department at the earliest possible date to discuss the proposed PUD. The purpose of this meeting is to develop a project that will meet the needs of the applicant and the objectives of the city as defined in this title.

2. SEPA compliance. Compliance with the State Environmental Policy Act and regulations and city SEPA requirements shall be completed prior to development plan review.

3. Development plan review. After informal review and completion of the SEPA process, a proposal shall next be reviewed by city staff through the development plan review process. Comments received by the project developer under the development review process shall be used to formalize the proposed development prior to the development being presented at a public hearing before the hearing examiner.

4. Community information meeting.

a. A community information meeting shall be required for any proposed PUD located in a residential zone or within 200 feet of a residential zone. At this meeting, the applicant shall present the development proposed to interested residents. Issues raised at the meeting may be used to refine the PUD plan. Notice shall be given in at least one publication in the local newspaper at least 10 days prior to the public hearing. Written notice shall be mailed first class to all property owners within a radius of not less than 200 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property subject to the application. Any alleged failure of any property owner to actually receive the notice of hearing shall not invalidate the proceedings.

b. Nonresidential PUDs not located within 200 feet of a residential zone shall not require a community information meeting.

5. Public notice and hearing examiner public hearing. The hearing examiner shall hold at least one public hearing on the proposed PUD and shall give notice thereof in at least one publication in the local newspaper at least 10 days prior to the public hearing. Written notice shall be mailed first class to all property owners within a radius of not less than 200 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property subject to the application. Any alleged failure of any property owner to actually receive the notice of hearing shall not invalidate the proceedings.

6. Consolidation of land use permit processes. The PUD approval process may be used to consolidate other land use permit processes, which are required by other sections of this title. The public hearing required for the PUD may serve as the public hearing for the conditional use permit, subdivision, shoreline substantial development, and rezoning if such land use permits are a part of the overall PUD application. When another land use permit is involved which requires city council approval, the PUD shall not be deemed to be approved until the city council has approved the related land use permit. If a public hearing is required for any of the categories of actions listed in this subsection, the hearing examiner shall employ the public hearing notice requirements for all actions considered which ensure the maximum notice to the public.

7. Hearing examiner decision. The hearing examiner shall issue a written decision within 10 working days from the date of the hearing. Parties of record will be notified in writing of the decision. For PUDs which propose a use permitted in the underlying zoning district, the hearing examiner’s decision is final. For PUDs which propose a use which is not typically permitted in the underlying zoning district as provided in subsection (B)(4) of this section, the hearing examiner shall forward a recommendation to the city council, which shall have the final authority to approve or deny the proposed PUD. For a proposed residential PUD that includes condominiums as outlined in subsection (B)(4) of this section, a condition of approval by the city council shall be that for each development phase the applicant shall submit a recorded copy of the covenants, conditions, and restrictions recorded against the property. Within 30 days of receipt of the hearing examiner’s recommendation, the city council shall, at a regular meeting, consider the application. Any appeal from the final decision of the hearing examiner and city council shall be pursuant to the appeal provisions of Chapter 12.01 KCC.

8. Effective date. In approving a PUD, the hearing examiner shall specify that the approved PUD shall not take effect unless or until the developer files a completed development permit application within the time periods required by this title as set forth in subsection (H) of this section. No official map or zoning text designations shall be amended to reflect the approved PUD designation until such time as the PUD becomes effective.

G. Review criteria for planned unit developments. Upon receipt of a complete application for a residential PUD, the planning department shall review the application and make its recommendation to the hearing examiner. The hearing examiner shall determine whether to grant, deny, or condition an application based upon the following review criteria:

1. Residential planned unit development criteria.

a. The proposed PUD project shall have a beneficial effect upon the community and users of the development which would not normally be achieved by traditional lot-by-lot development and shall not be detrimental to existing or potential surrounding land uses as defined by the comprehensive plan.

b. The proposed PUD project shall be compatible with the existing land use or property that abuts or is directly across the street from the subject property. The term compatibility includes but is not limited to apparent size, scale, mass, and architectural design.

c. Unusual and sensitive environmental features of the site shall be preserved, maintained, and incorporated into the design to benefit the development and the community.

d. The proposed PUD project shall provide areas of openness by using techniques such as clustering, separation of building groups, and use of well-designed open space and landscaping. Open space shall be integrated within the PUD rather than be an isolated element of the project.

e. The proposed PUD project shall promote variety and innovation in site and building design, and shall include architectural and site features that promote community interaction, such as porches, de-emphasized garages, sidewalks/walkways, and adjacent common areas. Buildings in groups shall be related by common materials and roof styles, but contrast shall be provided throughout the site by the use of varied materials, architectural detailing, building scale, and orientation.

f. Building design shall be based on a unified design concept, particularly when construction will be in phases.

2. Nonresidential planned unit development criteria.

a. The proposed project shall have a beneficial effect which would not normally be achieved by traditional lot-by-lot development and not be detrimental to present or potential surrounding land uses as defined by the comprehensive plan.

b. Unusual and sensitive environmental features of the site shall be preserved, maintained, and incorporated into the design to benefit the development and the community.

c. The proposed project shall provide areas of openness by the clustering of buildings, and by the use of well-designed landscaping and open spaces. Landscaping shall promote a coordinated appearance and break up continuous expanses of building and pavement.

d. The proposed project shall promote variety and innovation in site and building design. It shall encourage the incorporation of special design features such as visitor entrances, plazas, outdoor employee lunch and recreation areas, architectural focal points, and accent lighting.

e. Building design shall be based on a unified design concept, particularly when construction will be in phases.

H. Time limits.

1. Application for development permit. The applicant shall apply for a development permit no later than one year following final approval of the PUD. The application for development permit shall contain all conditions of the PUD approval.

2. Extensions. An extension of time for development permit application may be requested in writing by the applicant. Such an extension may be granted by the planning manager for a period not to exceed one year. If a development permit is not issued within two years, the PUD approval shall become null and void and the PUD shall not take effect.

I. Modifications of plan. Requests for modifications of final approved plans shall be made in writing and shall be submitted to the planning services office in the manner and form prescribed by the planning manager. In commercial, office, industrial, and manufacturing zoning districts, where a master plan is consistent with a planned action ordinance and a development agreement, the determination of whether a proposed modification is minor or major shall be made at the sole discretion of the planning manager; provided, however, that the planning manager’s determination must be consistent with criteria established in either the planned action ordinance or the development agreement. If the planned action ordinance or the development agreement does not establish such criteria, the planning manager’s determination shall be consistent with the criteria stated in subsections (I)(1) and (I)(2) of this section. The criteria for determining minor and major modifications in all other cases shall be as stated in subsections (I)(1) and (I)(2) of this section. The criteria for approval of a request for a major modification shall be those criteria covering original approval of the permit which is the subject of the proposed modification.

1. Minor modifications. Modifications are deemed minor if all the following criteria are satisfied:

a. No new land use is proposed;

b. No increase in density, number of dwelling units, or lots is proposed;

c. No change in the general location or number of access points is proposed;

d. No reduction in the amount of open space is proposed;

e. No reduction in the amount of parking is proposed;

f. No increase in the total square footage of structures to be developed is proposed; and

g. No increase in general height of structures is proposed.

Examples of minor modifications include but are not limited to lot line adjustments, minor relocations of buildings or landscaped areas, minor changes in phasing and timing, and minor changes in elevations of buildings.

2. Major modifications. Major adjustments are those which, as determined by the planning manager, substantially change the basic design, density, open space, or other similar requirements or provisions. Major adjustments to the development plans shall be reviewed by the hearing examiner. The hearing examiner may review such adjustments at a regular public hearing. If a public hearing is held, the process outlined in subsection (F) of this section shall apply. The hearing examiner shall issue a written decision to approve, deny, or modify the request. Such a decision shall be final. Any appeals of this decision shall be in accordance with KCC 12.01.040.

(Ord. No. 3439, § 8, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 3600, § 7, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3612, § 11, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 3633, § 1, 1-7-03; Ord. No. 3639, § 1, 4-1-03; Ord. No. 3643, § 1, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 3681, § 1, 3-2-04; Ord. No. 3746, § 10, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 3750, § 3, 5-17-05; Ord. No. 3752, § 3, 5-17-05; Ord. No. 3770, § 16, 11-15-05; Ord. No. 3805, § 2, 8-15-06; Ord. No. 4225, § 13, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 4355, § 10 (Exh. J), 3-3-20)


15.08.450 Development agreements.

A. Pursuant to RCW 36.70B.170 through 36.70B.210, as amended, a person or entity having ownership or control of real property within the city may file an application for a development agreement with the planning director, or on a form approved by the director and acceptable to the city attorney, together with a filing fee as established by council resolution.

B. Terms of the proposed development agreement shall be subject to the preapplication conference established in KCC 12.01.080, along with such other provisions of Chapter 12.01 KCC as may be deemed appropriate by the director.

C. The director, and such designee as may be appointed for this purpose, is authorized, but not required, to negotiate acceptable terms and conditions of the proposed development agreement with due regard for the following criteria:

1. The development agreement conforms to the existing comprehensive plan policies.

2. The terms of the development agreement are generally consistent with the development regulations of the city then in effect.

3. Appropriate project or proposal elements such as permitted uses, residential densities, and nonresidential densities and intensities or structure sizes are adequately provided, to include evidence that the site is adequate in size and shape for the proposed project or use; that it conforms to the general character of the neighborhood; and that it would be compatible with adjacent land uses.

4. Appropriate provisions are made for the amount and payment of impact fees imposed or agreed to in accordance with any applicable provisions of state law, any reimbursement provisions, other financial contributions by the property owner, inspection fees, or dedications.

5. Adequate mitigation measures, development conditions, and mitigation requirements under Chapter 43.21C RCW are provided, including monitoring and adjustment of measures and conditions to ensure mitigation is effective.

6. Adequate and appropriate design standards such as maximum heights, setbacks, drainage and water quality requirements, landscaping, and other development features are provided.

7. If applicable, targets and requirements regarding affordable housing are addressed.

8. Provisions are sufficient to assure requirements of parks and preservation of open space.

9. Interim uses and phasing of development and construction are appropriately provided. In the case of an interim use of a parcel of property, deferments or departures from development regulations may be allowed without providing a demonstrated benefit to the city; provided, that any departures or deferments to the code requested for a final use of the property shall comply with subsection (C)(11) of this section. The agreement shall clearly state the conditions under which the interim use shall be converted to a permanent use within a stated time period and the penalties for noncompliance if the interim use is not converted to the permanent use in the stated period of time.

10. Where a phased development agreement is proposed, a site plan shall be provided and shall clearly show the proposed interim and final uses subject to the agreement.

11. In the case of a development agreement where the proposed use is intended to be the final use of the property, it shall be clearly documented that any departures from the standards of the code that are requested by the applicant are, in the judgment of the city, offset by providing a benefit to the city of equal or greater value relative to the departure requested. In no case shall a departure from the code be granted if no benefit to the city is proposed in turn by the applicant.

12. Conditions are set forth providing for review procedures and standards for implementing decisions.

13. Provisions for maintenance and operations, including landscape maintenance.

14. A build-out or vesting period for applicable standards is provided.

15. Provisions for resolving disputes.

16. Any other appropriate development requirements or procedures necessary to the specific project or proposal are adequately addressed.

17. If appropriate, and if the applicant is to fund or provide public facilities, the development agreement shall contain appropriate provisions for reimbursement over time to the applicant.

18. Appropriate statutory authority exists for any involuntary obligation of the applicant to fund or provide services, infrastructure, impact fees, inspection fees, dedications, or other service or financial contributions.

D. If the director deems that an acceptable development agreement has been negotiated and recommends the same for consideration, the city council shall hold a public hearing and then may take final action, by resolution, to authorize entry into the development agreement. In addition, the council may continue the hearing for the purpose of clarifying issues, or obtaining additional information, facts, or documentary evidence.

E. The decision of the council shall be final immediately upon adoption of a resolution authorizing or rejecting the development agreement.

F. Following approval of a development agreement by the council, and execution of the same, the development agreement shall be recorded with the King County recorder, at the applicant’s expense.

G. Because a development agreement is not necessary to any given project or use of real property under the existing comprehensive plan and development regulations in effect at the time of making application, approval of a development agreement is wholly discretionary and any action taken by the city council is legislative only, and not quasi-judicial.

H. During the term of an approved development agreement, the agreement is binding on the parties and their successors, and any permit or approval issued by the city after execution of the development agreement must be consistent with the development agreement.

I. The city will process and decide upon an application for an amendment to an existing development agreement as if it were an application for a new development agreement in the manner set forth above, unless it is deemed a minor modification as set forth in subsection (J) of this section.

J. Modifications of development agreements.

1. The director may approve minor modifications to an existing development agreement. Criteria for approving minor modifications include but are not limited to the following:

a. Shall conform to the terms of the development agreement;

b. Shall not reduce landscaping, buffering, or open space areas;

c. Shall not reduce setback requirements;

d. Shall not result in an increase in height of any structure;

e. Shall not result in a change in ingress or egress;

f. Shall not increase any adverse impacts or undesirable effects;

g. Shall not significantly alter the project. 

(Ord. 4151, § 4, 5-19-15) 


15.08.500 Illegal uses prohibited – Marijuana producer, processor, retailer.

A. No use that is illegal under, or contrary to, any city, county, state or federal law or statute shall be allowed in any zoning district within the city unless otherwise specifically allowed for in the Kent City Code.

B. No person holding, or claiming to hold, a license from any state regulatory agency to produce, process, sell or distribute marijuana or marijuana-infused products, including but not limited to licenses issued pursuant to Chapter 69.50 RCW and Chapter 314-55 WAC, shall operate, maintain, cause or allow to exist any marijuana-based business in any zoning district within the city. This prohibition is supplemental to, and in no way limits, the scope or effect of subsection (A) of this section.

(Ord. No. 4124, § 1, 10-7-14)


15.08.550 Use prohibited in all zoning districts.

Community health engagement locations (CHELs) designed to provide a hygienic environment where individuals are able to consume illegal or illicit drugs intravenously or by any other means are prohibited in all zoning districts in the city. A CHEL includes all uses established or activities undertaken for the above-defined purpose, irrespective of how the use or activity is described. A CHEL may also be referred to as a medically supervised injection center, supervised injection site or facility, safe injection site, fix room, or drug consumption facility.

(Ord. No. 4261, § 1, 11-21-17)


Chapter 15.09 ADMINISTRATION* Revised 12/19 Revised 5/20

Sections:

15.09.010    Development plan review.

15.09.020    Zoning permit.

15.09.030    Conditional use permit.

15.09.040    Variances.

15.09.042    Administrative variances.

15.09.045    Administrative design review.

15.09.046    Downtown design review – Downtown Design Review Guidelines and Meeker Street Streetscape Design and Construction Standards. Revised 12/19

15.09.047    Industrial design review. Revised 5/20

15.09.049    Repealed.

15.09.050    Amendments. Revised 5/20

15.09.055    Zoning of annexed lands.

15.09.060    Administrative interpretation generally.

15.09.065    Interpretation of uses.

15.09.070    Appeal of administrative interpretations.

15.09.080    Revocation of permits or variances.

15.09.090    Performance standards procedures.

15.09.095    Cleanup of solid waste and hazardous waste facilities.

15.09.300    Responsibility for establishment of lot lines and setback lines.

*Cross reference(s) – Planning office, ch. 2.30; land use and planning board, ch. 2.57.


15.09.010 Development plan review.

A. Review of development plans shall be carried out by the planning department for all buildings and structures hereafter erected, constructed, structurally altered, repaired, or moved within or into any district requiring development plan review and whenever a city permit is required, and for the use of vacant land or for a change in the character of the use of land or buildings, within any district requiring development plan approval.

B. The development plan review is an administrative review, the primary purpose of which is to define and describe the needs of the particular site covered by a development plan in reference to the requirements of this title. The planning director shall make the final decision on development plan review. Development plan review is categorized as a Process I application and shall be subject to the applicable requirements of Ch. 12.01 KCC. Any appeal from the final decision of the planning director shall be to the hearing examiner in accordance with the requirements of Ch. 2.32 KCC and Ch. 12.01 KCC. In addition to the other requirements of this title, the planning department shall approve a development plan only after the following standards, as a minimum, when applicable, have been incorporated into the development plan:

1. Storm drainage must be handled by each proposed development in conformance with existing storm drainage plans and in conformance with city policies for storm drainage.

2. A planned street system is a primary element of any development plan proposed within the city and must be compatible with the city’s circulation plans. Development which is proposed in areas of the city which have a planned street system which is a part of the comprehensive plan or the city’s six (6) year plan, and any other street plan, shall make provisions for such streets and must not cause implementation of such street plans to become unattainable because the street plan is considered secondary to the development plan.

3. A pedestrian circulation system must become a part of any development plan when the proposed development will generate or attract pedestrians. The planning department shall conduct site plan review to ensure that adequate parking is provided within close proximity to each unit entrance.

4. The proposed development shall be compatible with existing development adjacent to or within five hundred (500) feet of the property line of the proposed development. Compatibility shall not refer to architectural design features, but to siting of building and location of off-street parking.

5. Efforts shall be made to preserve trees, natural vegetation, creeks or other environmental amenities.

(Ord. No. 2942, § 1, 9-4-90; Ord. No. 3424, § 32, 11-17-98)

Cross reference(s) – Hearing examiner, ch. 2.32; binding site plans for division of certain land for condominiums, ch. 12.07.


15.09.020 Zoning permit.

A. Zoning permits shall be required for all grading permits, buildings and structures hereafter erected, constructed, altered, repaired or moved within or into any district established by this title, and for the use of vacant land or for a change in the character of use of land or buildings within any district established by this title.

B. The zoning permit shall certify that the proposed use is in accordance with the requirements and standards of this title. A zoning permit shall not be issued until the development plan has been approved.

C. Zoning permits are categorized as Process I applications and shall be subject to the applicable requirements of Ch. 12.01 KCC. Any appeal of the final decision of the planning director shall be to the hearing examiner pursuant to the applicable requirements of Ch. 2.32 KCC and Ch. 12.01 KCC. 

(Ord. No. 3424, § 33, 11-17-98)


15.09.030 Conditional use permit.

A. Purpose.

1. Conditional use permits, revocable, conditional or valid for a time period may be issued by the hearing examiner for any of the uses or purposes for which such permits are required or permitted by the terms of this title. The purpose of the conditional use permit is to allow the proper integration into the community of uses which may be suitable only on certain conditions in specific locations in a zoning district, or if the site is regulated in a particular manner. A conditional use permit is categorized as a Process III application and shall be subject to the requirements of Ch. 2.32 KCC and Ch. 12.01 KCC.

2. Any use existing at the time of adoption of this title which is within the scope of uses permitted by a conditional use permit in the district in which the property is situated shall be deemed a conforming use without necessity of a conditional use permit.

3. Any expansion of an existing conditional use may be required to apply for a new conditional use permit if the planning manager finds that there is a change in the nature of the use by such expansion.

B. Application.

1. The owner or his agent may make application for a conditional use permit, which shall be on a form prescribed by the planning department and filed with the planning department. Applications for conditional use permits shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of Ch. 12.01 KCC.

2. Development plans shall be submitted, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon, the exact sizes and locations on the lot of buildings already existing, if any, and the location on the lot of the proposed building or alteration. The plans shall show proposed landscaping, off-street parking, signs, ingress and egress and adjacent land uses. The plan shall include other information as may be required by the planning department.

C. Public hearing. The hearing examiner shall hold an open record public hearing on any proposed conditional use, and shall give notice thereof in accordance with the procedures established pursuant to Ch. 2.32 KCC and KCC 12.01.130 and 12.01.140.

D. Standards and criteria for granting. A conditional use permit shall only be granted after the hearing examiner has reviewed the proposed use to determine if it complies with the standards and criteria set forth below and in accordance with the requirements for Process III applications under Ch. 12.01 KCC. A conditional use permit shall only be granted if such finding is made.

1. The proposed use in the proposed location will not be detrimental to other uses legally existing or permitted outright in the zoning district.

2. The size of the site is adequate for the proposed use.

3. The traffic generated by the proposed use will not unduly burden the traffic circulation system in the vicinity.

4. The other performance characteristics of the proposed use are compatible with those of other uses in the neighborhood or vicinity.

5. Adequate buffering devices such as fencing, landscaping or topographic characteristics protect adjacent properties from adverse effects of the proposed use, including adverse visual or auditory effects.

6. The other uses in the vicinity of the proposed site are such as to permit the proposed use to function effectively.

7. The proposed use complies with the performance standards, parking requirements and other applicable provisions of this title.

8. Any other similar considerations may be applied that may be appropriate to a particular case.

E. Action of hearing examiner. Special conditions may be imposed on the proposed development to ensure that the proposed use will meet the standards and criteria of subsection (D) of this section in granting a conditional use permit. Guarantees and evidence that such conditions are being complied with may be required.

F. Appeals. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be final. Any appeal of the hearing examiner’s decision shall be pursuant to the appeal provisions of Ch. 12.01 KCC.

G. Period of validity. Any conditional use permit granted by the hearing examiner shall remain effective only for three (3) years unless the use is begun within that time or construction has commenced. If not in use or construction has not commenced within three (3) years, the conditional use permit shall become invalid.

(Ord. No. 2806, § 1, 10-18-88; Ord. No. 2863, § 2, 8-1-89; Ord. No. 3424, § 34, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3600, § 8, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3752, § 4, 5-17-05)

Cross reference(s) – Planning office responsibilities and duties regarding hearings, § 2.30.070.


15.09.040 Variances.

The hearing examiner shall have the authority to grant a variance where practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships and results inconsistent with the general purposes of this title might result from the strict application of certain provisions. A variance may not be granted to allow a use that is not in conformity with the uses specified by this title for the district in which the land is located. (Note: Sign variances are heard by the city hearing examiner.)

A. Application. The owner or his agent may make application for a variance, which shall be on a form prescribed by the planning department and filed with the planning department. An application for a variance shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of Ch. 12.01 KCC.

1. A variance is categorized as a Process III application and shall be subject to the requirements of Ch. 12.01 KCC.

B. Public hearing. The hearing examiner shall hold an open record public hearing on any proposed variance in accordance with the requirements of Ch. 2.32 KCC and Ch. 12.01 KCC.

C. Conditions for granting. Before any variance may be granted, it shall be shown and the hearing examiner shall find that:

1. The variance shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with a limitation upon uses of other properties in the vicinity and zone in which the property on behalf of which the application was filed is located;

2. Such variance is necessary, because of special circumstances relating to the size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings of the subject property, to provide it with use rights and privileges permitted to other properties in the vicinity and in the zone in which the subject property is located; and

3. The granting of such variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and zone in which the subject property is situated.

D. Appeals. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be final. Any appeal of the hearing examiner’s decision shall be pursuant to the appeal provisions of Chapter 12.01 KCC.

E. Period of validity. Any variance authorized by the hearing examiner shall remain effective only for three (3) years, unless the use is begun within that time or construction has commenced. If not in use or construction has not commenced within three (3) years, the variance shall become invalid.

(Ord. No. 2863, § 3, 8-1-89; Ord. No. 3424, § 35, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3600, § 9, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 3752, § 5, 5-17-05)

Cross reference(s) – Planning department shall advise hearing examiner on all variances and conditional exceptions.


15.09.042 Administrative variances.

A. Scope. The planning manager shall have the authority to grant an administrative variance for up to twenty-five (25) percent of the numerical zoning code standard for setbacks, lot coverage, and building height as provided in this title.

B. Application. The owner or his/her agent may make application for an administrative variance, which shall be on a form prescribed by the planning manager and filed with the planning department. An administrative variance is classified as a Process II application and shall be subject to the applicable requirements of Chapter 12.01 KCC. The planning manager shall review applications for completeness, and a notice of completeness will be issued within twenty-eight (28) calendar days after submittal. Those applications deemed incomplete shall be returned to the applicant for further action in accordance with the provisions of KCC 12.01.100. 

C. Conditions for granting an administrative variance. The planning manager may grant an administrative variance if it is shown that:

1. The administrative variance does not detract from the desired character and nature of the vicinity in which it is proposed;

2. The administrative variance enhances or protects the character of the neighborhood or vicinity by protecting natural features, historic sites, open space, or other resources;

3. The administrative variance does not interfere with or negatively impact the operations of existing land uses and all legally permitted uses within the zoning district it occupies; and

4. Granting the administrative variance does not constitute a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare within the city.

D. Appeals. Appeals of the planning manager shall be submitted within fourteen (14) calendar days of the date of the manager’s decision and shall be in accordance with the requirements of KCC 12.01.190.

E. Fee. The fee for an administrative variance shall be one hundred dollars ($100).

(Ord. No. 3333, § 1, 1-22-97; Ord. No. 3424, § 36, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3600, § 10, 5-7-02)


15.09.045 Administrative design review.

A. Purpose and scope. Administrative design review is an administrative process, the purpose of which is to implement and give effect to the comprehensive plan, its policies, or parts thereof through the adoption of design criteria for development relative to site layout, landscape architecture, and exterior structure design. It is the intent of the city that this process will serve to aid applicants in understanding the principal expectations of the city concerning design, and encourage a diversity of imaginative solutions to development through the planning services division review and application of certain criteria. These criteria have been formulated to improve the design, siting, and construction of development projects so as to be compatible, both visually and otherwise, with the topographic, open space, urban, or suburban characteristics of the land or adjacent properties, while still maintaining allowable densities to be applied in a manner consistent with established land use policies, the comprehensive plan, this title, and community development goals of the city.

The adoption of design criteria is an element of the city’s regulation of land use, which is statutorily authorized. Application of the multifamily design process to the design criteria adopted in this section is established as an administrative function delegated to the planning services division pursuant to RCW Title 35A; therefore, in implementing the administrative design review process, the planning director may adopt such rules and procedures as are necessary to provide for expeditious review of proposed projects. Further rules may be promulgated for additional administrative review.

B. Application and review process. Administrative design review process is classified as a Process II application and shall be subject to the applicable requirements of Chapter 12.01 KCC. The applicant must make application for the design review process on forms provided by the planning services division. Upon receipt of an application for design review, the planning director shall circulate the application to the public works director, building official, and the city administrator for review. Prior to making a final decision, the planning director shall review any comments submitted for consideration. In the administration of this process, the planning director may develop supplementary handbooks for the public, which shall pictorially illustrate and provide additional guidance on the interpretation of the criteria set forth in subsections (C) and (D) of this section, as well as a detailed explanation of the design review process.

C. Residential design review. In order to diminish the perception of bulk, and provide visual interest along residential home facades that face public areas, architectural design considerations shall be applied. This design review shall be applied administratively as part of the building permit review process for each new home.

1. Orientation of homes. The entry facade of each dwelling unit shall be generally oriented toward the highest classification street from which access to the lot is allowed, unless otherwise approved by the planning director based on existing context of surrounding development.

2. Attached units. A building that contains a grouping of attached units shall not exceed a 200-foot maximum length and shall be separated from other groups of attached units by a minimum 15 feet.

3. Architecture. Each dwelling unit facade that faces a public area shall, at a minimum, incorporate architectural elements as follows:

a. Two elements of facade modulation or roofline variation. Facade modulation elements shall have a minimum width of eight feet and a minimum depth of three feet. Roofline variation elements shall have a minimum horizontal or vertical offset of three feet and a minimum variation length of eight feet;

b. The maximum horizontal facade length without one element of either facade modulation or roofline variation shall be 20 feet; and

c. Three architectural detail elements.

4. Garages. Dwelling units within subdivisions and short subdivisions shall provide diminished garage doors according to the percentage and locations approved with the subdivision and short subdivision.

D. Multifamily design review. The planning services division shall use the multifamily design guidelines as an adopted element of the city’s regulation of land use, which is statutorily authorized, in the evaluation or conditioning of applications under the multifamily design review process.

E. [Reserved].

F. Mixed use design review. The planning services division shall use the following criteria in the evaluation and/or conditioning of applications under the mixed use design review process when a project includes residential use:

1. The following criteria should apply to all mixed use with a residential component development:

a. Some common recreation space roofs, terraces, indoor rooms, courtyards.

b. Lighting features that are shielded, directing light downwards.

c. The residential portion of the building should incorporate residential details, such as window trim, trellises, balconies, and bay windows.

d. The residential component should have an obvious, generous entrance, within features suggesting a “front door,” for example, a lobby, trellis, gate, archway, or courtyard.

2. The following criteria shall apply to mixed use development:

a. If the residential component is located away from the main street, a landscaped pedestrian path should be provided between the entrance and public sidewalk.

b. Although the commercial and residential components may have different architectural expressions, they should exhibit a number of elements that produce the effect of an integrated development.

c. Surface parking should be generously landscaped to serve as an amenity. Lighting fixtures should not exceed the height of the first floor.

3. The following criteria shall apply to mixed use buildings with a residential component:

a. Parking lots, if used, should be divided into small increments, separated by landscaping and structures, so that parking does not dominate the site.

b. Articulated by use of different materials, generous windows with low sill heights, “store” doors, canopies, and planters.

c. Residential floors should be expressed in an obvious manner, with stepbacks, change in materials or color, and overhangs.

d. Commercial signs should be contained within the first floor commercial base and not extend up into the residential floor facades.

G. Transit-oriented community design review. The planning services division shall use the following criteria in the evaluation or conditioning of applications under the transit-oriented community design review process:

1. The Midway Design Guidelines as an adopted element of the city’s regulation of land use, which is statutorily authorized, shall apply to all development with a land use plan map designation of transit-oriented community.

2. Residential use design review. In addition to the Midway Design Guidelines, the following design requirements apply to residential uses and development:

a. Openings from the build-to line. When a residential unit has direct access to the public domain, a 10-foot front yard shall be provided. When residential units have access through a main location, such as an atrium, courtyard, or other main entryway, said access shall be at the build-to line.

b. Open space. Residential development shall provide not less than 20 percent of the gross land area for common open space, which shall be:

i. Designed to provide either passive or active recreation;

ii. If under one ownership, owner shall be responsible for maintenance;

iii. If held in common ownership by all owners of the development by means of a homeowners’ association, said association shall be responsible for maintenance. If such open space is not maintained in a reasonable manner, the city shall have the right to provide for the maintenance thereof and bill the homeowners’ association accordingly. If unpaid, such bills shall be a lien against the homeowners’ association; or

iv. Dedicated for public use if accepted by the city legislative authority or other appropriate public agency.

c. Storage of recreational vehicles. The storage or parking of recreational vehicles shall be prohibited.

H. Appeals. The decision of the planning director to condition or reject any application under the administrative design review process is final unless an appeal is made by the applicant or any party of record to the hearing examiner within 14 calendar days of either the issuance of the director’s conditional approval under this section of any application, or the director’s written decision rejecting any application under this section. The appeal shall be conducted by the hearing examiner as an open record appeal hearing in accordance with the requirements of Chapters 2.32 and 12.01 KCC. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be final unless an appeal is made to the superior court within 21 calendar days after the hearing examiner’s notice of decision.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 58, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 3424, § 37, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3830, § 20, 3-6-07; Ord. No. 4011, § 22, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 4225, § 14, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 4257, § 20, 11-21-17)


15.09.046 Downtown design review – Downtown Design Review Guidelines and Meeker Street Streetscape Design and Construction Standards. Revised 12/19

A. Purpose and scope.

1. Downtown design review is an administrative process, the purpose of which is to implement and give effect to the downtown subarea action plan and its policies or parts thereof. The Downtown Design Guidelines, adopted in subsection (D) of this section, apply to all development located within the downtown area, as shown on the map following this section, except as noted below:

a. Section 3 of the Downtown Design Guidelines, titled “Sidewalks and Streetscape Features,” shall not apply to that portion of the downtown area that fronts Meeker Street; instead, the Meeker Street Streetscape Design and Construction Standards adopted by council through Ordinance No. 4262 on December 12, 2017, shall apply, as those standards may be amended from time to time. All other sections of the Downtown Design Guidelines still apply.

It is the intent of the city that this process will serve to aid applicants in understanding the principal expectations of the city concerning development in the downtown area and encourage a diversity of imaginative solutions to development through the review and application of the Downtown Design Guidelines. These guidelines have been formulated to ensure that the design, siting, and construction of development will provide a quality pedestrian-oriented urban environment in a manner consistent with established land use policies, the comprehensive plan, and the zoning code of the city.

2. The adoption of the Downtown Design Guidelines is an element of the city’s regulation of land use, which is statutorily authorized. The downtown design review process adopted herein is established as an administrative function delegated to the city’s economic and community development department pursuant to RCW Title 35A. Therefore, in implementing the downtown design review process, the economic and community development director may adopt such rules and procedures as are necessary to provide for review of proposed projects.

3. All development within the downtown area, or within the GC, GC-MU, CC-MU, or MR-M zoning districts along the Meeker Street Corridor between 64th Avenue South and Kent-Des Moines Road, which roadway section is hereby classified a Class B pedestrian street, shall be subject to the Downtown Design Guidelines. If development occurs within that portion of the Meeker Street Corridor that lies between Kent-Des Moines Road on the west and Central Avenue on the east, it shall further comply with the Meeker Street Streetscape Design and Construction Standards adopted by council through Ordinance No. 4262, as those standards may be amended from time to time.

4. The downtown design review process is distinct from the multifamily design review process set forth in KCC 15.09.045(D). Applications for multifamily development within the DC, DCE, DCE-T, GC-MU, CC-MU, MR-M, and MRT-16 zoning districts that are also within the downtown area or along the Meeker Street Corridor between 64th Avenue South and Kent-Des Moines Road shall be subject to this section.

B. Application and review process. The downtown design review process is administrative and is conducted as part of the permit review process. The applicant must make application for the design review process on forms provided by the economic and community development department. Upon receipt of an application for design review, the economic and community development director shall circulate the application to the appropriate city departments and offices for review. Prior to issuing a final decision, the director shall review any comments submitted for consideration. In the administration of this process, the department may develop supplementary handbooks for the public, which shall pictorially illustrate and provide additional guidance on the interpretation of the criteria set forth in the Downtown Design Guidelines.

C. Design review committee. There is hereby established the downtown design review committee, which shall make all final decisions on applications for downtown design review as described in the Kent Downtown Design Guidelines. The committee shall be comprised of three members, who shall be appointed by the economic and community development director under the authority delegated pursuant to RCW Title 35A. The members shall serve at the pleasure of the director. The director shall, by administrative rule, establish the rules of procedure for the committee, which shall be made available to the public upon publication.

D. Downtown Design Guidelines and Meeker Street Streetscape Design and Construction Standards – Adoption. The downtown design review committee shall use the Downtown Design Guidelines in the evaluation and/or conditioning of applications under the downtown design review process. The Downtown Design Guidelines, entitled “Kent Downtown Design Guidelines,” are hereby adopted by this reference as authorized pursuant to RCW 35A.12.140 and shall be placed on file in the offices of the city clerk and the economic and community development department. With respect to the Meeker Street Corridor from Kent-Des Moines Road to Central Avenue, development projects shall additionally comply with the Meeker Street Streetscape Design and Construction Standards, adopted by council through Ordinance No. 4262 on December 12, 2017, as may be amended. For those development projects within the downtown area identified in the map below and along the Meeker Street Corridor, the Downtown Design Guidelines are superseded with those for the Meeker Street Streetscape Design and Construction Standards, and if there is a conflict between the two standards, the Meeker Street Streetscape Design and Construction Standards will control.

E. Appeals. The decision of the downtown administrative design review committee to approve, approve with conditions, or reject any application under the downtown design review process is final unless an appeal is made to the hearing examiner within 14 calendar days of either the issuance of the committee’s approval or rejection of any application under this section. Appeals to the hearing examiner shall be conducted as set forth in Chapter 2.32 KCC. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be final, unless an appeal is made to the King County superior court, within 21 calendar days of the date of the issuance of the decision, pursuant to Chapter 36.70C RCW. 


[IMAGE]


(Ord. No. 3050, § 10, 7-7-92; Ord. No. 3409, § 60, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 3424, § 38, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3457, § 1, 5-4-99; Ord. No. 3525, § 1, 9-19-00; Ord. No. 3742, § 6, 4-19-05; Ord. No. 3988, § 4, 1-4-11; Ord. No. 4093, § 5, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 4116, § 2, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 4175, § 3, 11-17-15; Ord. No. 4225, § 15, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 4337, § 1, 11-5-19)


15.09.047 Industrial design review. Revised 5/20

A. Purpose and scope. Industrial design review is an administrative process, the purpose of which is to implement and give effect to the Rally the Valley Industrial Valley Subarea Plan as adopted into the comprehensive plan, and its policies or parts thereof. The industrial design guidelines, adopted in subsection (D) of this section, apply to development located in industrial zones I1, I2, and I3.

B. Application and review process. The industrial design review process is administrative and is conducted as part of the permit review process. The applicant must make application for the design review process on forms provided by the economic and community development department. In the administration of this process, the department may develop supplementary handbooks for the public, which may pictorially illustrate and provide additional guidance on the interpretation of the criteria set forth in the industrial design guidelines.

C. Applicability. Industrial design review shall apply to all new construction, enlargement of existing buildings and structures, as well as changes of use, as follows:

1. New construction or enlargement.

a. Buildings constructed or enlarged. For enlargement of existing building, 10 percent of improvement value shall be invested in building or site improvements consistent with the industrial design guidelines. Specific improvements shall be approved by the planning manager as part of building permit review. Improvement value shall be assessed according to the most recently published International Code Council building valuation data.

b. Other structures or exterior use areas constructed or enlarged. For enlargement of existing structures or use areas, 10 percent of improvement value shall be invested in building or site improvements consistent with the industrial design guidelines. Specific improvements shall be approved by the planning manager as part of building permit review. Improvement value shall be assessed according to the most recently published International Code Council building valuation data.

2. Change in use. When the occupancy of any land use, structure or building, or any part of a building, structure or land use, is changed to another use, the industrial design guidelines shall apply, with the following exceptions:

a. Change of use from warehousing and distribution to manufacturing uses.

b. Change of use from warehousing and distribution to complexes which include a combination of uses, including a mixture of office, storage, commercial, and manufacturing uses.

c. Change of use from warehousing and distribution to research, development, and testing.

3. For change in use, 10 percent of improvement value shall be invested in building or site improvements consistent with the industrial design guidelines. Specific improvements shall be approved by the planning manager. Improvement value shall be assessed according to the most recently published International Code Council building valuation data.

D. Industrial Design Guidelines – Adoption. The planning manager shall use the industrial design guidelines in the evaluation and/or conditioning of applications under the industrial design review process. The industrial design guidelines, entitled “City of Kent Industrial Design Guidelines,” are hereby adopted by this reference as authorized pursuant to RCW 35A.12.140 and shall be placed on file as adopted and amended hereafter in the offices of the city clerk and the economic and community development department.

E. Appeals. The decision of the planning manager to approve, approve with conditions, or reject any application under the industrial design review process is final unless an appeal is made to the hearing examiner within 14 calendar days of either the issuance of the planning manager’s approval or rejection of any application under this section. Appeals to the hearing examiner shall be conducted as set forth in Chapter 2.32 KCC. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be final, unless an appeal is made to the King County superior court, within 21 calendar days of the date of the issuance of the decision, pursuant to Chapter 36.70C RCW.

(Ord. No. 4355, § 11 (Exh. K), 3-3-20)


15.09.049 Mixed use design review.

Repealed by Ord. No. 3409.

(Ord. No. 3345, § 6, 5-7-97)


15.09.050 Amendments. Revised 5/20

This title may be amended by the city council by changing the boundaries of zoning districts (rezones which change the official zoning map) or by changing any other provisions thereof (text amendments which add, delete, or otherwise modify the text of this title) whenever the public necessity and convenience and the general welfare require such amendment, by following the procedures of this section.

A. Initiation. An amendment may be initiated as follows:

1. Amendments to the text of this title and official zoning map amendments may be initiated by resolution of intention by the city council. Text amendments are heard by the land use and planning board and city council; zoning map amendments are heard by the hearing examiner. In the case of area-wide zoning or rezoning, both text amendments and zoning map amendments may be heard by the land use and planning board and city council in accordance with Chapter 12.01 KCC.

2. Amendments to the text of this title may be initiated by resolution of intention by the land use and planning board.

3. Official zoning map amendments (rezones), including the application of the “C” suffix, may be initiated by application of one or more owners, or their agents, of the property affected by the proposed amendment, which shall be made on a form prescribed by the planning department and filed with the planning department. The application shall be submitted in the manner required for Process IV applications. The hearing examiner shall consider the application in an open record predecision hearing in accordance with Chapters 2.32 and 12.01 KCC.

B. Public hearing. The hearing examiner shall hold an open record predecision hearing on any proposed amendment, and shall give notice thereof in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 12.01 KCC.

C. Standards and criteria for granting a request for rezone. The following standards and criteria shall be used by the hearing examiner and city council to evaluate a request for rezone. Such an amendment shall only be granted if the city council determines that the request is consistent with these standards and criteria and subject to the requirements of Chapter 12.01 KCC.

1. The proposed rezone is consistent with the comprehensive plan.

2. The proposed rezone and subsequent development of the site would be compatible with development in the vicinity.

3. The proposed rezone will not unduly burden the transportation system in the vicinity of the property with significant adverse impacts which cannot be mitigated.

4. Circumstances have changed substantially since the establishment of the current zoning district to warrant the proposed rezone.

5. The proposed rezone will not adversely affect the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city.

6. [Reserved].

D. [Reserved].

E. Rezone to mixed use overlay. The hearing examiner and the city council shall use the standards and criteria provided in subsection (C) of this section to evaluate a request for expanding the boundaries of the mixed use overlay boundary which is located in the GC and CC zoning districts. In addition, the hearing examiner and city council shall evaluate a request for expanding the mixed use overlay using the following standards and criteria as well. Such an amendment shall only be granted if the city council determines the request is consistent with these standards and criteria and subject to the requirements of Chapter 12.01 KCC.

1. The proposed rezone is contiguous to an existing mixed use overlay area, or is at least one acre in size.

2. The proposed area is located within close proximity to existing residential uses and existing commercial uses which would support residential use.

3. The proposed area is located in close proximity to transit stops, parks, and community facilities.

F. Rezoning to MR-T. The hearing examiner and the city council shall use the standards and criteria provided in subsection (C) of this section to evaluate a request for rezone to MR-T. In addition, the hearing examiner and city council shall evaluate a request for MR-T using the following standards and criteria as well. Such an amendment shall only be granted if the city council determines the request is consistent with these standards and criteria and subject to the requirements of Chapter 12.01 KCC.

1. The proposed rezone site is adjacent to or has convenient access to an arterial street to ensure that the traffic accessing the MR-T development minimizes the disruption to single-family residential neighborhoods.

G. Recommendation of hearing examiner. Following the public hearing provided for in this section, the hearing examiner shall make a report of findings and recommendations with respect to the proposed amendment and shall forward such to the city council, which shall have the final authority to act on the amendment.

H. City council action/appeal.

1. The city council shall, at a regular public meeting, consider the recommendation and issue a final decision. The decision of the city council is appealable to the King County superior court within 21 calendar days from the issuance of a notice of decision and in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 12.01 KCC and Chapter 36.70C RCW.

2. If the application for an amendment is denied by the city council, the application shall not be eligible for resubmittal for one year from date of the denial, unless specifically stated to be without prejudice. A new application affecting the same property may be submitted if, in the opinion of the hearing examiner, circumstances affecting the application have changed substantially.

(Ord. No. 2863, § 4, 8-1-89; Ord. No. 3123, § 1, 6-15-93; Ord. No. 3345, § 7, 5-7-97; Ord. No. 3424, § 39, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 3470, § 14, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 4166, § 7, 9-1-15; Ord. No. 4355, § 11 (Exh. K), 3-3-20)


15.09.055 Zoning of annexed lands.

A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide a procedure to ensure that the initial zoning of annexed territories is in conformance with city goals, policies, and plans.

B. Determination of planning director. Whenever the council shall determine that the best interest and general welfare of the city would be served by annexing territory, the planning director will cause an examination to be made of the comprehensive plan of the city. If the city council determines that the comprehensive plan is not current for the area of the proposed annexation, the planning director will cause an application to be made to the land use and planning board for an update of the comprehensive plan. In addition, the planning director will cause an application to be filed with the land use and planning board for an initial zoning recommendation.

C. Recommendation of the land use and planning board.

1. Comprehensive plan. Upon application by the planning director, the land use and planning board shall hold at least one (1) open record public hearing to consider the comprehensive plan for the area of the proposed annexation. Notice of the time, place, and purpose of such hearing shall be mailed to all property owners in the area to be annexed and given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and in the area to be annexed at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing. Upon completion of the hearing, the land use and planning board shall transmit a copy of its recommendations for the comprehensive plan to the council for its consideration.

2. Initial zoning. In addition, the land use and planning board shall hold at least one (1) open record public hearing to consider the initial zoning for the area of the proposed annexation. Notice of the time, place, and purpose of such hearing shall be mailed to all property owners in the area to be annexed and given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and in the area to be annexed at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing.

D. City council action.

1. Comprehensive plan. Within sixty (60) calendar days of the receipt of the recommendation from the land use and planning board for the comprehensive plan for the area of the proposed annexation, the city council shall consider the comprehensive plan at a public meeting. The council may approve or disapprove the comprehensive plan as submitted, modify and approve as modified, or refer the comprehensive plan back to the land use and planning board for further proceedings. If the matter is referred to the land use and planning board, the council shall specify the time within which the land use and planning board shall report back to the council with findings and recommendations on the matters referred to it. An affirmative vote of not less than a majority of the total members of the council shall be required for approval.

2. Initial zoning. Upon receipt of the recommendations of the land use and planning board for the initial zoning of the area of the proposed annexation, the council shall hold two (2) or more public hearings at least thirty (30) calendar days apart. Notice of the time and place and purpose of such hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and in the area to be annexed at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing. The ordinance adopting the initial zoning may provide that it will become effective upon the annexation of the area into the city. The city clerk shall file a certified copy of the ordinance and any accompanying maps or plats with the county auditor.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 62, 7-7-98: Ord. No. 3424, § 40, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 4003, § 10, 9-20-11)


15.09.060 Administrative interpretation generally.

The planning director may make interpretations of the provisions of this title. Such administrative interpretations shall include determinations of uses permitted in the various districts, and approval or disapproval of development plans and zoning permits. Other interpretations may be made as specific circumstances arise which require such interpretations. The purpose of such administrative interpretations is to provide a degree of flexibility in the administration of this title while following the intent of the city council. Administrative interpretations are subject to applicable requirements of Process I applications per Ch. 12.01 KCC.

(Ord. No. 3424, § 41, 11-17-98)


15.09.065 Interpretation of uses.

A. Land uses which are listed as principally permitted uses in the Land Use Tables shall be permitted subject to the review processes, standards, and regulations specified in Title 15. If a use is not listed in the Land Use Tables, it shall be considered to be a prohibited use unless the planning director determines it to be a permitted use following the process outlined below. If a proposed use is not specifically listed in the Land Use Tables, an applicant may request from the planning director an interpretation as to whether or not such use is a permitted use. In determining whether a proposed use closely resembles a use expressly authorized in the applicable zoning district(s), the planning director shall utilize the following criteria:

1. The use resembles or is of the same basic nature as a use expressly authorized in the applicable zoning district or districts in terms of the following:

a. The activities involved in or equipment or materials employed in the use;

b. The effects of the use on the surrounding area, such as traffic impacts, noise, dust, odors, vibrations, lighting and glare, and aesthetic appearance.

2. The use is consistent with the stated purpose of the applicable district or districts.

3. The use is compatible with the applicable goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan.

B. A record shall be kept of all interpretations and rulings made by the planning director. Such decisions shall be used for future administration. The planning director shall report decisions to the land use and planning board when it appears desirable and necessary to amend this code. The planning director’s determination is classified as a Process I application and shall be processed and subject to the applicable requirements of Ch. 12.01 KCC and may be appealed as provided in Ch. 12.01 KCC. 

C. Appeals. Any appeal from the planning director’s determination shall be an open record appeal hearing and shall be filed in accordance with the procedures established for Process I applications under Ch. 12.01 KCC.

(Ord. No. 3409, § 63, 7-7-98: Ord. No. 3424, § 42, 11-17-98)




15.09.070 Appeal of administrative interpretations.

A. Any appeal of administrative decisions relating to the enforcement or interpretation of this title, unless otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, shall be in writing, and shall be filed with the planning department within fourteen (14) calendar days after such decision, and in the manner set forth in Ch. 12.01 KCC.

B. The appeal shall be heard by the hearing examiner, and the hearing examiner shall render his or her decision in accordance with the requirements of Ch. 2.32 KCC and Ch. 12.01 KCC.

(Ord. No. 3424, § 43, 11-17-98)


15.09.080 Revocation of permits or variances.

Any zoning permit, planned unit development permit, conditional use permit or variance granted in accordance with the terms of this title may be revoked if any of the conditions or terms of such permit or variance are violated, or if any law or ordinance is violated in connection therewith.


15.09.090 Performance standards procedures.

The planning director shall have the power to authorize the following procedures prior to the issuance of a zoning permit for industrial uses as provided for in the several industrial districts:

A. Application for zoning permit. An application for a zoning permit for a use subject to performance standard procedures shall be submitted by the owner or his agent in duplicate on a form prescribed by the planning department. The applicant shall also submit in duplicate a plan of the proposed machinery, processes and products, and specifications for the mechanisms and techniques to be used in restricting the creation or emission of dangerous and objectionable elements as set forth in KCC 15.08.050(D). The applicant shall also provide such supporting scientific, technical or other data or information as is necessary to establish that the use will comply with the performance standards set forth in KCC 15.08.050.

B. Review by expert consultants. The planning director, upon obtaining approval of the costs by the city council, may refer the application for review and report to one (1) or more expert consultants qualified to advise as to whether a proposed use will conform to the applicable performance standards specified in KCC 15.08.050 in a manner set forth in the application. A copy of such report shall be filed with the planning department for inspection by interested persons.

C. Review by planning director. Within thirty (30) days after the planning department has received the application provided for in this section, or within such period as agreed to by the applicant, the planning director shall decide whether the proposed use will conform to the applicable performance standards, and on such basis shall authorize or refuse to authorize issuance of a zoning permit, or require a modification of the proposed equipment or operation. Any zoning permit so authorized and issued shall be conditioned upon, among other things, the applicant’s completed buildings and installations conforming in operation to the applicable performance standards.

D. Continued enforcement.

1. The planning department shall investigate any purported violation of performance standards. For the purpose of investigating such violations, the planning director may employ qualified experts.

2. After investigation, on due notice to the alleged violator, the planning director may order the violations corrected within a prescribed period of time, and if such violations are not so corrected may order the violator to cease and desist from carrying on that portion of the operation or process causing a violation.

E. Violations. If violation has occurred, the planning director shall report to the city attorney if the violation was wilful or likely to occur again, and the city attorney may order the violator to take such steps as are necessary to ensure future compliance with this chapter. The procedure provided in this subsection shall not be exclusive, and, if the violation has been wilful or without reasonable justification the violator may be prosecuted as for a misdemeanor.


15.09.095 Cleanup of solid waste and hazardous waste facilities.

Application of land use and zoning regulations contained in Ch. 15.04 KCC, off-street parking and loading requirements of Ch. 15.05 KCC, landscaping regulations of Ch. 15.07 KCC, general and supplemental provisions of Ch. 15.08 KCC, and administration provisions of Ch. 15.09 KCC relating to development plan review, zoning permits and conditional uses relating to the required cleanup of solid waste and hazardous waste facilities under this title shall be governed under procedures and requirements as set forth in KCC 11.02.060.

(Ord. No. 2745, § 4, 9-15-87)


15.09.300 Responsibility for establishment of lot lines and setback lines.

Notwithstanding any provisions in this title to the contrary, the city shall have no duty to verify or establish lot lines or setback lines at a development. The location of lot lines or setback lines at a development and construction related thereto shall be the responsibility of the applicant and owner.

(Ord. No. 2662, § 2, 10-6-86)


Chapter 15.10 ENFORCEMENT*

Sections:

15.10.010    Violations.

15.10.020    Duty to enforce.

15.10.030    Investigation and notice of violation.

15.10.040    Stop work order.

15.10.050    Emergency order.

15.10.060    Extension of compliance date.

15.10.070    Violation – Penalty.

15.10.080    Additional relief.

*Editor’s note – Ord. No. 3124, § 1, adopted June 15, 1993, amended and renumbered former ch. 15.10 in its entirety. See the Code comparative table for a detailed analysis of inclusion.

Cross reference(s) – Planning, ch. 2.30; planning commission, ch. 2.56.


15.10.010 Violations.

A. It is a violation of this title for any person to initiate or maintain or cause to be initiated or maintained the use of any structure, land or property within the city without first obtaining the permits or authorizations required for the use by this title.

B. It is a violation of this title for any person to use, construct, locate or demolish any structure, land or property within the city in any manner that is not permitted by the terms of any permit or authorization issued pursuant to this title; provided, that the terms or conditions are explicitly stated on the permit or the approved plans.

C. It is a violation of this title to remove or deface any sign, notice, complaint or order required by or posted in accordance with this title or Ch. 11.03 KCC.

D. It is a violation of this title to misrepresent any material fact in any application, plans or other information submitted to obtain any land use authorization.

E. It is a violation of this title for anyone to fail to comply with the requirements of this title.

(Ord. No. 3032, § 2, 2-18-92; Ord. No. 3124, § 1, 6-15-93)


15.10.020 Duty to enforce.

A. It shall be the duty of the director of planning to enforce this title. The director may call upon the police, fire, health or other appropriate city departments to assist in enforcement.

B. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the director or duly authorized representative of the director may, with the consent of the owner or occupier of a building or premises, or pursuant to a lawfully issued inspection warrant, enter at reasonable times any building or premises subject to the consent or warrant to perform the duties imposed by this title.

C. This title shall be enforced for the benefit of the health, safety and welfare of the general public, and not for the benefit of any particular person or class of persons.

D. It is the intent of this title to place the obligation of complying with its requirements upon the owner, occupier or other person responsible for the condition of the land and buildings within the scope of this title.

E. No provision or term used in this title is intended to impose any duty upon the city or any of its officers or employees which would subject them to damages in a civil action.

(Ord. No. 3032, § 2, 2-18-92; Ord. No. 3124, § 1, 6-15-93)


15.10.030 Investigation and notice of violation.

A. The director or his representative shall investigate any structure or use which the director reasonably believes does not comply with the standards and requirements of this title.

B. If, after investigation, the director determines that the standards or requirements have been violated, the director may seek compliance and serve a notice of violation on the owner, tenant or other person responsible for the condition and/or otherwise enforce pursuant to this chapter and KCC 15.10.070 below.


15.10.040 Stop work order.

Whenever a continuing violation of this title will materially impair the director’s ability to secure compliance with this title, or when the continuing violation threatens the health or safety of the public, the director may issue a stop work order specifying the violation and prohibiting any work or other activity at the site. A failure to comply with a stop work order shall constitute a violation of this title.

(Ord. No. 3032, § 2, 2-18-92; Ord. No. 3124, § 1, 6-15-93)


15.10.050 Emergency order.

A. Whenever any use or activity in violation of this title threatens the health and safety of the occupants of the premises or any member of the public, the director may issue an emergency order directing that the use or activity be discontinued and the condition causing the threat to the public health and safety be corrected. The emergency order shall specify the time for compliance and shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property, if posting is physically possible. A failure to comply with an emergency order shall constitute a violation of this title.

B. Any condition described in the emergency order which is not corrected within the time specified is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the director is authorized to abate such nuisance summarily by such means as may be available. The cost of such abatement shall be recovered from the owner or person responsible, or both, in the manner provided by law.

(Ord. No. 3032, § 2, 2-18-92; Ord. No. 3124, § 1, 6-15-93)


15.10.060 Extension of compliance date.

A. The director may grant an extension of time for compliance with any notice or order, whether pending or final, upon the director’s finding that substantial progress toward compliance has been made and that the public will not be adversely affected by the extension.

B. An extension of time may be revoked by the director if it is shown that the conditions at the time the extension was granted have changed, if the director determines that a party is not performing corrective actions as agreed, or if the extension creates an adverse effect on the public. The date of revocation shall then be considered as the compliance date.

(Ord. No. 3032, § 2, 2-18-92; Ord. No. 3124, § 1, 6-15-93)


15.10.070 Violation – Penalty.

A. Civil code enforcement action. Any violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a civil violation under Chapter 1.04 KCC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required as provided therein.

B. Criminal offense. In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of the Kent City Code may be charged criminally, pursuant to KCC 1.04.030(B).

C. Civil infraction. In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of this chapter may be issued a class 1 civil infraction pursuant to RCW 7.80.120, as currently enacted or hereafter amended, and KCC 1.04.225.

(Ord. No. 3032, § 2, 2-18-92; Ord. No. 3124, § 1, 6-15-93; Ord. No. 4282, § 9, 7-3-18)


15.10.080 Additional relief.

The director may seek legal or equitable relief to enjoin any acts or practices and restore or abate any condition which constitutes or will constitute a violation of this title when civil or criminal penalties are inadequate to effect compliance.

(Ord. No. 3032, § 2, 2-18-92; Ord. No. 3124, § 1, 6-15-93) 


Chapter 15.15 HIGH CAPACITY TRANSIT (HCT) FACILITIES

Sections: 

15.15.010    Purpose.

15.15.015    Director.

15.15.020    Authority and application.

15.15.110    Station design – Architectural expression.

15.15.120    Site furnishings.

15.15.130    Lighting.

15.15.210    Track design.

15.15.220    Buffering of track corridor.

15.15.230    Elevated structures.

15.15.240    Pedestrian crossings of track and access to stations.

15.15.310    Minimum parking space requirements.

15.15.320    Surface parking lot landscaping and treatment of perimeter.

15.15.330    Pedestrian circulation through parking lots.

15.15.340    Placement of surface parking facilities.

15.15.410    Threshold standard for the inclusion of structured parking.

15.15.420    Parking structure design.

15.15.430    Parking structure character and massing.

15.15.440    Ground floor uses in parking structures.

15.15.510    Offsite improvements.

15.15.610    Directional and informational signage.

15.15.620    Community guides, maps, directories, bulletin boards.

15.15.630    Station-related advertising signs.

15.15.710    Fire safety standards.

15.15.800    Development plan – Filing requirements.

15.15.900    Minimum open space area required.

15.15.910    Front yard open space.

15.15.920    Relation to adjacent development.


15.15.010 Purpose.

The design standards for high capacity transit (HCT) facilities are intended to encourage:

A. Facilities and stations that are well designed;

B. Development of distinctive community focal points;

C. Connections between the HCT network, adjacent development, and community vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle routes;

D. Incorporation of pedestrian-oriented furnishings and a variety of public spaces;

E. Adequate buffers between different types of land uses; and

F. Uses of alternative travel modes rather than single-occupant vehicles. 

(Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 5-19-15)


15.15.015 Director.

For purposes of this chapter, director means the director of economic and community development or the director’s designee.

(Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 5-19-15)


15.15.020 Authority and application.

A. This chapter shall apply to:

1. Any form of HCT, such as light or heavy rail, train, express bus, personal rapid transit, people mover, or other similar technology that moves large numbers of people to set destinations, but excluding transit systems designed to exclusively serve transport to and from airport terminals or associated airport facilities;

2. All property owned, purchased or leased by public agencies for the purpose of constructing or operating HCT systems and associated facilities; and

3. All HCT facility construction requiring a city building permit, but excluding bus stops and minor expansions (less than twenty (20) percent) of existing HCT facilities.

B. In order to provide flexibility and creativity of project design, minor variations from these standards may be permitted, subject to the approval of the director, if the strict interpretation or application of these standards would be inconsistent with related or more restrictive provisions of the zoning code, or would be contrary to the overall purpose or intent of city goals and policies established in the city’s comprehensive plan. 

(Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 5-19-15) 


15.15.110 Station design – Architectural expression.

A. In order to ensure that HCT station facilities, associated site furnishings, and public art are designed as an expression of community identity, each HCT station within the city shall be consistent with a locally determined design theme. The process to determine a local design theme shall be established for each HCT facility by the director.

B. HCT station design themes shall be approved by the city council. 

(Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 5-19-15)


15.15.120 Site furnishings.

A. Weather protection – Shelters.

1. Weather protection features or shelters shall be provided at station platforms and buildings by including vertical and horizontal features to minimize passenger exposure to wind and rain. Weather protection features may include, but are not limited to: awnings, marquees, canopies, building overhangs, walls, or other features acceptable to the director.

2. In order to ensure that HCT weather protection features or shelters are designed as an expression of community identity, roof designs shall conform to one (1) of the following options:

a. Roofline with architectural focal point. A roofline focal point refers to a prominent rooftop feature such as a peak, barrel vault, undulating curve, or roofline art installation.

b. Roofline variation. A roofline variation refers to a roofline articulated through variation or steps in roof height or detail.

B. Benches and seating areas.

1. HCT station areas and platforms shall include seating areas designed and arranged as part of a coherent HCT station theme. Station platforms shall include at least one (1) linear foot of seating per each ten (10) linear foot length of station loading platform.

2. Usable open space areas adjacent to HCT stations, such as publicly accessible plazas, courtyards and pocket parks, shall include at least one (1) linear foot of seating per each fifty (50) square feet of plaza, courtyard or pocket park space onsite.

3. HCT station seating shall be in the form of:

a. Leaning rails associated with platform waiting areas (no more than fifty (50) percent of total linear feet of seating);

b. Benches or chairs at least twenty (20) inches wide; or

c. Seating incorporated into low walls, raised planters or building foundations at least twelve (12) inches wide and eighteen (18) inches high.

C. Platform landscaping and associated open space.

1. All principal ground level exterior entry points to at-grade or elevated station platforms shall include a minimum of two hundred (200) square feet of usable open space consisting of decorative paving.

a. Usable open space shall include one (1) or more publicly accessible plazas, courtyards, pocket parks or decorative paving areas constructed contiguous with new or existing sidewalks located either within the front yard setback or elsewhere onsite.

b. Developments proposed to include onsite plazas and pocket parks as publicly accessible project amenities shall link the open space elements with adjacent sidewalks, pedestrian paths, or bikeways.

2. Decorative paving areas shall be constructed of such materials as stamped, broom finish, or scored concrete, brick or modular pavers. One (1) deciduous tree of at least three (3) inches diameter (caliper) measured four (4) feet above the ground at the time of planting, or one (1) evergreen tree at least eight (8) feet in height from treetop to ground level at the time of planting, shall be required for every two hundred (200) square feet of decorative paving area.

3. At-grade HCT stations shall include trees in landscape beds or planting wells on or adjacent to the station platform.

D. Ornamental fencing.

1. The design, color and material of any fencing associated with an HCT station shall be consistent with the city’s established station design theme, in accordance with KCC 15.15.110.

2. Where station area fencing is proposed to be included, the fence type shall conform to one (1) or more of the following options:

a. Ornamental iron or steel;

b. Cable and bollard fencing;

c. Post and chain fencing; or

d. Brick.

3. HCT station area fencing shall not include barbed wire, razor wire or chain-link fencing.

E. Restroom facilities. HCT stations associated with a park and ride lot, as described in RCW 47.12.270, as amended, and HCT stations with parking facilities, shall include public restrooms with sanitary sewer connections, as well as hot and cold running water.

F. Garbage receptacles. Garbage receptacles shall be provided at all HCT station areas.

G. Bicycle parking areas.

1. Rack space and storage lockers for a minimum of ten (10) bicycles shall be provided at each HCT station.

2. Bicycle parking areas shall be located out of pedestrian walkways, and within fifty (50) feet of station entrances.

H. Materials. Exterior materials and site furnishings associated with HCT station structures shall be consistent with the city’s established station design theme, in accordance with KCC 15.15.110, and selected to handle long-term exposure to weather and heavy use. 

(Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 5-19-15) 


15.15.130 Lighting.

A. Lighting associated with all HCT facilities shall be screened, hooded or otherwise limited in illumination area so as to minimize excessive “light throw” to offsite areas. Light fixtures shall be sited and directed to minimize glare.

B. Light post standards at the pedestrian level shall be no greater than sixteen (16) feet in height. Light post standards used to illuminate vehicular access ways and parking lots shall be no greater than twenty-five (25) feet in height.

C. Exterior lighting shall be used to identify and distinguish the pedestrian walkway network from car or transit circulation. Along pedestrian circulation corridors, light post standards shall be placed between pedestrian ways and public or private streets, driveways or parking areas.

D. Light post standard designs shall be approved by the director, consistent with the city’s established station design theme, in accordance with KCC 15.15.110. 

(Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 5-19-15)


15.15.210 Track design.

A. At-grade HCT track within or immediately adjacent to a public street right-of-way shall be embedded in nonasphalt, ornamental paving material, consisting of patterned or colored concrete, brick, cobble stone-patterned pavers, grass-crete, or other similar ornamental paving system subject to approval by the director.

B. Any structural supports for the HCT overhead catenary system within or immediately adjacent to a public street right-of-way shall be low profile and carefully selected as part of a unified street design. Where possible, the HCT overhead catenary system shall be supported through arm extensions attached to light standards or other traditional streetscape elements. 

(Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 5-19-15) 


15.15.220 Buffering of track corridor.

A. Landscaping.

1. At-grade HCT track corridors shall be screened from adjacent streets or nearby development with landscape strips at least five (5) feet wide, consisting of trees, low shrubs, and ground cover paralleling the track corridor, subject to approval by the director. The required five (5) foot landscape strip width dimension shall be a measurement of the usable soil area between pavement curb edges.

2. The area beneath elevated guideways not utilized for other public purposes, including but not limited to streets, sidewalks, bike tracks, parking stalls or parks, shall be landscaped in accordance with Chapter 15.07 KCC for Type V landscaping, unless modified due to existing site conditions. Any modification must be approved by the director.

B. Noise barriers. Where noise barrier sound walls are to be included in addition to the required landscape strip along HCT corridors, wall design and type shall conform to one (1) or more of the following options:

1. Precast or cast-in-place concrete with architectural texturing; or

2. Patterned masonry.

C. Light rail vehicle noise suppression. Light rail vehicles and associated track shall utilize the best available noise suppression technology in order to minimize adverse impacts to adjacent properties.

D. Track corridor access control.

1. At-grade HCT track within or immediately adjacent to a public street right-of-way, with the exception of dedicated crossing points, shall be separated from automobile and pedestrian areas through the inclusion of one (1) of the following:

a. Cable and bollard fencing;

b. Post and chain fencing;

c. Contrasting surface material and texture;

d. Landscape medians between the HCT track right-of-way and the automobile or pedestrian areas; or

e. Rolled curb.

2. Where fencing along HCT track corridors is to be included in areas not within or adjacent to a public street right-of-way, the fence type shall conform to one (1) or more of the following options:

a. Ornamental iron or steel;

b. Chain link with top rail, colored vinyl coating, or decorative slatting;

c. Cable and bollard fencing; or

d. Post and chain fencing.

3. HCT track corridor fencing shall not include barbed wire, razor wire, or chain link fencing without a colored vinyl coating or decorative slatting. 

(Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 5-19-15)


15.15.230 Elevated structures.

The design of support columns for elevated sections of HCT track visible from the public right-of-way shall conform to at least one (1) of the following options, as approved by the director:

A. A decorative form pattern, or other architectural feature covering at least fifty (50) percent of the surface of support columns; or

B. Projections, indentations, or intervals of material change to visually break up the surface of support columns. 

(Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 5-19-15)


15.15.240 Pedestrian crossings of track and access to stations.

In order to minimize risk of collision with light rail transit vehicles or other vehicular traffic, pedestrian crossings of HCT track or public streets serving HCT stations shall conform to the following standard:

A. Crossings of streets with less than thirty thousand (30,000) daily vehicle trips shall include a signalized pedestrian crossing.

B. Crossings of streets with more than thirty thousand (30,000) daily vehicle trips shall include a covered pedestrian overpass. 

(Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 5-19-15)


15.15.310 Minimum parking space requirements.

A. In order to provide adequate off-street parking, the lead agency for an HCT facility shall be required to provide a parking study, prepared as part of an EIS or separately, for each station, demonstrating that the parking demand will be satisfied. The director shall review the proposed minimum number of required parking spaces per HCT station and, after consultation with the public works director, shall make a determination as to adequacy, based on a comparable parking demand.

B. The minimum number of required parking spaces per HCT station, as established pursuant to this section, shall form the basis for determining the threshold standard for the inclusion of structured parking, as specified in KCC 15.15.410. 

(Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 5-19-15)


15.15.320 Surface parking lot landscaping and treatment of perimeter.

A. At least ten (10) percent of the interior surface parking area shall have landscaping when the total number of parking spaces exceeds twenty (20), including a minimum of one (1) tree for every seven (7) parking spaces, to be distributed between rows or spaces throughout the parking lot.

B. Surface parking shall be visually screened from public or private streets by means of building placement or landscaping. The perimeter of a parking lot shall be planted with Type III landscaping at least five (5) feet wide. Any abutting landscaped areas can be credited toward meeting this standard.

C. The required width dimension for interior parking area planting beds shall be a measurement of the usable soil area between pavement curb edges. Trees and required landscaping shall be placed in planting beds at least five (5) feet in width between parking rows or spaces within the interior of the parking lot. 

(Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 5-19-15) 


15.15.330 Pedestrian circulation through parking lots.

A. Pedestrian walkways shall be provided through surface parking lots containing one hundred (100) or more parking spaces. Pedestrian walkways shall be raised a minimum of three (3) inches above the parking surface grade, and shall be a minimum of six (6) feet wide, separated from vehicular travel lanes to the maximum extent possible and designed to provide safe access to HCT station platforms or existing pedestrian ways.

1. For parking rows perpendicular to HCT station loading platforms, pedestrian ways shall be located between two (2) rows of parking spaces at a minimum of one (1) pedestrian way every two hundred (200) feet.

2. For parking rows parallel to HCT station loading platforms, pedestrian ways shall be incorporated adjacent to a series of aligned landscape islands at a minimum of one (1) walkway every twenty-one (21) parking spaces.

B. The pedestrian way network shall be clearly distinguished from vehicular or transit circulation. This is particularly important in areas where these various travel modes intersect, such as at driveway entrances. Where sidewalks or walkways cross vehicular driveways, the pedestrian crossing shall be distinguished from the driveway surface by use of a continuous raised crossing or by marking with a contrasting paving material. 

(Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 5-19-15)


15.15.340 Placement of surface parking facilities.

Except for short-term loading and offloading areas, HCT station surface parking lots shall be allowed only as an interim use subject to the following requirements:

A. A site plan as established in KCC 15.15.800(A); and

B. A binding commitment that any surface parking facility will be made available for transit-oriented development within a set time period, as determined by the director.

The term transit-oriented development refers to public/private development that supports transit use. Transit-oriented development projects emphasize pedestrian access, and include a mix of residential, commercial, recreational and service activities centered at or around transit facilities. 

(Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 5-19-15)


15.15.410 Threshold standard for the inclusion of structured parking.

In order to meet city goals for high density development near transit stations, each HCT station with more than two hundred (200) associated parking spaces shall include a parking structure either onsite or on adjacent property with capacity to house all of the total minimum number of required parking spaces, as established in KCC 15.15.310. 

(Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 5-19-15)


15.15.420 Parking structure design.

A. Parking decks should be flat where feasible. At a minimum, a majority of both the ground floor and top parking decks shall be required to be flat, as opposed to continuously ramping.

B. External elevator towers and stairwells shall be open to public view, or enclosed with transparent glazing.

C. Lighting on or within multi-level parking structures shall be screened, hooded or otherwise limited in illumination area so as to minimize excessive “light throw” to offsite areas, but must still provide sufficient internal lighting, as determined by the director.

D. Parking structure top floor wall design must conform to one (1) or more of the following options:

1. Architectural focal point. A prominent edge feature such as a glazed elevator or stair tower, or top floor line trellis structure.

2. Projecting cornice. Top floor wall line articulated through a variation or step in cornice height or detail. Cornices must be located at or near the top of the wall or parapet.

3. Articulated parapet. Top floor wall line parapets shall incorporate angled, curved or stepped detail elements.

4. Alternative options that provide similar or better features, subject to approval by the director.

(Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 5-19-15) 


15.15.430 Parking structure character and massing.

Parking structure elevations over one hundred fifty (150) feet in length shall incorporate vertical or horizontal variation in setback, material or fenestration design along the length of the applicable facade, in at least one (1) of the following ways:

A. Vertical facades shall be designed to incorporate intervals of architectural variation at least every sixty (60) feet over the length of the applicable facade, including one (1) or more of the following:

1. Varying the arrangement, proportion or design of garage floor openings;

2. Incorporating changes in architectural materials, including texture and color; or

3. Projecting forward or recessing back portions or elements of the parking structure facade.

B. Horizontal facades shall be designed to differentiate the ground floor from upper floors by including one (1) or more of the following:

1. Stepping back the upper floors from the ground floor parking structure facade;

2. Changing materials between the parking structure base and upper floors; or

3. Including a continuous cornice line or pedestrian weather protection element between the ground floor and upper floors. 

(Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 5-19-15)


15.15.440 Ground floor uses in parking structures.

A. Each parking structure shall be designed so that a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the length of the exterior ground floor facade with existing or projected adjacent foot traffic, excluding vehicle entrances and exits, includes ground floor area either built out as, or convertible to, retail/commercial or service uses.

B. The applicable ground floor area shall extend in depth a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the exterior parking structure facade; provided, that the minimum required may be averaged, with no depth less than fifteen (15) feet.

C. The clear interior ceiling height standard for the retail/commercial or service use portion of a parking structure shall be a minimum of fourteen (14) feet.

D. Parking structure ground floors shall include fire suppressing sprinkler systems at the time of construction.

E. The director may consider a ground floor bus or drop-off facility rather than a retail or service use if the director determines that such a facility would better promote transit-oriented development around the HCT station. 

(Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 5-19-15)


15.15.510 Offsite improvements.

A. To promote public transit use, the city and the lead agency for the development of HCT facilities shall coordinate an assessment of the need for vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian access improvements within a comfortable biking and walking distance of each city HCT station. One thousand five hundred (1,500) feet is considered a “comfortable walking distance”; six thousand (6,000) feet is considered a “comfortable biking distance”; however, the actual distance could be greater or lesser depending on surrounding features.

B. HCT station area access improvements shall include the following:

1. HCT station platforms shall be connected to nearby core commercial, residential and employment areas through paved sidewalks, pedestrian-only walkways or pedestrian overpasses. Stations and park and ride lots shall be linked when feasible with existing and proposed bike routes and pedestrian trails as shown in the city’s comprehensive plan.

2. Station area street improvements shall include sidewalks, bike lanes or paths, street trees, street front landscaping, improved lighting, and, if applicable, bus stop and HOV lane improvements, as approved by the director, after consultation with the director of public works. 

(Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 5-19-15) 


15.15.610 Directional and informational signage.

A. Directional or informational signs associated with HCT stations shall be consistent with the city’s established station design theme, in accordance with KCC 15.15.110.

B. The lead agency for the construction of an HCT station shall coordinate with the city in determining appropriate installation locations and design of station exterior or offsite signage. 

(Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 5-19-15)


15.15.620 Community guides, maps, directories, bulletin boards.

A. Local information signs associated with HCT stations, in the form of community guides, maps, directories or bulletin boards, are intended to convey information to the general public regarding local services, amenities, or general city information.

B. The lead agency shall coordinate with the city in determining appropriate installation locations for one (1) or more forms of local information signage at each HCT station. 

(Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 5-19-15)


15.15.630 Station-related advertising signs.

No commercial advertising signs shall be visible from outside the HCT station. This section shall not apply to signs on rail cars. 

(Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 5-19-15)


15.15.710 Fire safety standards.

The design of HCT stations and associated facilities, including elevated structures, shall conform to the most current versions of all applicable sections of the building code, fire code, and National Fire Protection Standards No. 130. Conflicts among these codes shall be resolved in favor of the city’s currently adopted building and fire codes or as otherwise approved by the fire marshal and building official. 

(Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 5-19-15)


15.15.800 Development plan – Filing requirements.

Development applications must be submitted in sufficient detail to allow review of the project in accordance with the special standards of this chapter, SEPA requirements, and other applicable provisions of this code.

In addition to existing application requirements, the following information, at a minimum, must be included as elements in every HCT development application:

A. Site plan. A site plan, at a scale no smaller than one (1) inch to twenty (20) feet, which must show the following:

1. The location, size and finished grade of all proposed and existing onsite structures, as well as the existing topography and the grade of all public or private streets adjacent to the site;

2. A circulation plan which depicts access to the site and the vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle traffic flow onsite, as well as links with developments on adjoining parcels. Site access and circulation shall be approved by both the director and the director of public works;

3. The location, arrangement, and total square footage of onsite usable open space areas, as specified in KCC 15.15.900 and 15.15.910;

4. Links to open spaces and landscaped areas on adjacent parcels;

5. The lot lines and footprints of all structures on all parcels within two hundred (200) feet of the boundaries of the project parcel; and

6. Details on how all mechanical and utility rooftop equipment will be screened. 

(Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 5-19-15) 


15.15.900 Minimum open space area required.

A. A minimum of ten (10) percent of the net site area shall be set aside as usable outdoor open space accessible to the public. Net site area is the total site area for the station, including, but not limited to: parking and maneuvering areas, platforms, buildings and other structures, minus areas classified as critical areas under Chapter 11.06 KCC.

1. Required landscaping and sensitive area buffers without common access links, such as pedestrian trails, shall not be included toward meeting the minimum open space area requirement.

2. Driveways, parking, or other auto uses shall not be included in any usable outdoor open space area.

3. Areas of a parcel with slopes greater than eight (8) percent shall not qualify as usable outdoor open space, unless the area has been developed with an enhanced accessibility system of stairs, ramps, terraces, trails, seating areas, or other site improvements approved by the director.

4. Wetlands, streams, and their associated buffers shall be excluded for the purpose of calculating the open space requirement.

5. Provided that such facilities are at grade and not covered, storm water facilities shall be excluded for the purpose of calculating the open space requirement.

B. Usable open space shall include one (1) or more of the following:

1. Active outdoor recreation areas;

2. Multi-purpose green spaces;

3. Pedestrian-only corridors separate from the public or private roadway system and dedicated to passive recreation, including access links in sensitive area buffers (also see Chapter 11.06 KCC). The square footage of pedestrian-only corridors shall be counted as usable open space. A pedestrian overpass on a street shall not be counted as usable open space; or

4. Publicly accessible plazas, courtyards, pocket parks and decorative paving areas constructed contiguous with new or existing sidewalks located either within the front yard setback or elsewhere onsite. Developments proposing onsite plazas and pocket parks as publicly accessible project amenities shall link the open space elements with adjacent sidewalks, pedestrian paths, or bikeways. Publicly accessible courtyard designs shall conform to the following standards:

a. The courtyard dimension is a measurement of the usable open space between two (2) buildings or to a property line, and shall have a width equal to the height of the building, up to a maximum of seventy-five (75) feet, but in no case less than twenty (20) feet.

b. If the enclosing walls of a courtyard terrace upward and back with succeeding stories, the courtyard dimension shall be measured from the lowest enclosing floor or projection.

C. The front yard open space requirement per KCC 15.15.910 may be counted toward the minimum open space area requirement.

D. Usable open space areas onsite shall be organized and designed in a manner that allows for maximum integration with open space on adjacent parcels, as specified in KCC 15.15.920. 

(Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 5-19-15)


15.15.910 Front yard open space.

The following front yard open space regulations shall supersede the street frontage landscape requirement as specified in Chapter 15.07 KCC. The building facade landscaping and other landscaping requirements shall continue to apply.

A. Front yard open space area equal to the square footage of a five (5) foot strip along the length of street-facing front facades shall be developed and arranged in a manner that is accessible to the public at all times, directly connected to a sidewalk or pedestrian pathway, and bordered on at least one (1) side by, or readily accessible from, approved structures onsite. Front yard open space shall be placed in one (1) or more of the following ways, as approved by the director:

1. Plaza, courtyard, or pocket park. Publicly accessible open space a minimum of two hundred (200) square feet that is adjacent to a pedestrian building entrance and consisting of at least fifty (50) percent decorative paving. The remaining percentage of required open space area may be installed as plantings within or immediately adjacent to the plaza, courtyard, or pocket park. One (1) tree shall be required for every two hundred (200) square feet of decorative paving area. Decorative paving areas shall be constructed of such materials as stamped, broom finish, or scored concrete, brick or modular pavers;

2. Multi-purpose green space. A combination of grass, pedestrian ways, and seating areas of a minimum two hundred (200) square feet. One (1) tree shall be required for every two hundred (200) square feet of green space area; or

3. Decorative paving contiguous with sidewalk. A minimum five (5) foot wide decorative paving area constructed contiguous with a new or existing sidewalk along the length of the front yard building facade, coupled with a direct connection between the building entrance and sidewalk.

B. Outdoor seating. Publicly accessible plazas, courtyards, and pocket parks shall include at least one (1) linear foot of seating per each forty (40) square feet of plaza, courtyard, or pocket park space onsite. Outdoor seating shall be in the form of:

1. Freestanding outdoor benches at least sixteen (16) inches wide; or

2. Seating incorporated into low walls, raised planters or building foundations at least twelve (12) inches wide and eighteen (18) inches high.

C. Focal point for plazas, courtyards and pocket parks. In addition to seating, publicly accessible plazas, courtyards, and pocket parks should incorporate one (1) or more of the following open space amenities in order to encourage pedestrian use and activity:

1. Public art, such as a water feature or sculpture;

2. Performance or stage areas; or

3. Other public amenities, as approved by the director.

D. Accessory site furnishings. Accessory site furnishings shall be located so as not to obstruct pedestrian access along sidewalks and to businesses.

1. Waste receptacles, movable planters and other accessory site furnishings shall be designed to be compatible with the design of the plaza, courtyard, or pocket park, through the use of similar detailing or materials. 

(Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 5-19-15) 


15.15.920 Relation to adjacent development.

Proposed developments shall coordinate with current site planning and development efforts on adjoining parcels to take advantage of opportunities to mutually improve development design.

A. Adjacent developments shall link open spaces and landscaping whenever possible.

B. Proposed developments shall provide publicly accessible pedestrian connections to adjacent residential neighborhoods wherever possible, via a through-block walkway or links to sidewalks; or provide stairs or ramps where necessary when topographic barriers, such as steep slopes, inhibit direct access to surrounding development or destination points, such as transit stops.

C. Where multifamily residential development is located adjacent to retail, commercial, employment, or institutional uses, side or rear yard landscape buffers shall be intersected by approved pedestrian circulation routes in order to facilitate convenient walking connections to adjacent uses or services.

D. Buildings or structures that terminate view corridors shall include architectural features that increase the visibility and landmark status of the subject building facade, such as a clearly defined building modulation (with a minimum width of eight feet and a minimum depth of three feet), pedestrian entry feature, or roofline that accentuates the building as a focal point.

(Ord. No. 4151, § 1, 5-19-15; Ord. No. 4225, § 16, 12-13-16) 



-----------------------------

The Kent City Code is current through Ordinance 4360, passed May 19, 2020.

Disclaimer: The City Clerk's Office has the official version of the Kent City Code. Users should contact the City Clerk's Office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: http://kentwa.gov/ City Telephone: (253) 856-5725

Code Publishing Company