


Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:

1.01    Code Adoption

1.05    General Provisions

1.10    Public Records

1.15    General Penalty

1.20    Code Enforcement


Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION

Sections:

1.01.010    Adoption, amendment and repeal.

1.01.020    Reservation of prosecutions.

1.01.030    Severability.


1.01.010 Adoption, amendment and repeal.

A. There is hereby adopted the Kenmore Municipal Code which consists of the ordinances of the City that have ongoing effect and which have not expired according to their own terms.

B. This code may be cited as the Kenmore Municipal Code.

C. This code may be amended by reference to code section without the necessity of referring to the underlying ordinance.

D. New ordinances may be added to the code, and if an ordinance is enacted with a numbering system that is inconsistent with the code numbering system, the city clerk is authorized to assign an appropriate code number and to codify the ordinance accordingly.

E. The repeal of any code section does not revive the original text of the code section, but rather, repeal of an existing section repeals the underlying ordinance section and all of its amendments. [Ord. 02-0158 § 1.]


1.01.020 Reservation of prosecutions.

The adoption of this code shall not affect any prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of the adoption of the municipal code, nor shall the adoption of the municipal code be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty due and owing at the effective date of the code adoption, nor shall adoption affect the validity of any bond or cash deposited with the City pursuant to the terms of any ordinance, upon its codification, but rather, all rights and obligations pertaining under ordinances in effect prior to codification shall remain in full force and effect. [Ord. 02-0158 § 1.]


1.01.030 Severability.

If any section, subsection, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The City declares that it would have enacted this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional. [Ord. 02-0158 § 1.]


Chapter 1.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS (Reserved)


Chapter 1.10 PUBLIC RECORDS

Sections:

1.10.010    Authority and purpose.

1.10.020    Contact information – Public records officer.

1.10.030    Availability of public records.

1.10.040    Processing of public records requests – General.

1.10.050    Processing of public records requests – Electronic records.

1.10.060    Exemptions.

1.10.070    Costs of providing copies of public records.

1.10.080    Retention of records.


1.10.010 Authority and purpose.

A. Public Records Act. The Public Records Act, Chapter 42.56 RCW (“Act”), requires the City to make identifiable, nonexempt public records available for inspection and copying upon request, and to publish rules of procedures to inform the public how access to public records will be accomplished. The Act defines “public record” at RCW 42.56.010(3), which may be amended.

B. Purpose of Rules. The purpose of this chapter is to provide full access to public records and establish procedures for responding to public records disclosure requests. This chapter provides information to persons wishing to request access to public records of the City and establishes processes for both requestors and City staff that are designed to assist members of the public in obtaining such access.

C. Full Access. The purpose of the Act is to provide the public full access to information concerning the conduct of government, while balancing individuals’ privacy rights and the desirability of the efficient administration of government. In carrying out its responsibilities under the Act, the City will be guided by the provisions of the Act describing its purposes and interpretation. [Ord. 18-0460 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0338 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


1.10.020 Contact information – Public records officer.

A. City Business Office. The City is a municipal corporation of the State of Washington. The City’s business office is located at: 18120 68th Avenue NE, Kenmore, Washington 98028.

B. Public Records Officer. The public records officer for the City shall be the administrative assistant assigned to the city manager’s department and her or his designee. Any person wishing to inspect City public records, or seeking assistance in making such a request, should contact the public records officer at the City:

City of Kenmore

Attention: Public Records Officer

18120 68th Avenue NE

P.O. Box 82607

Kenmore, WA 98028

Phone: 425-398-8900

Fax: 425-481-3236

C. Duties and Designee. The public records officer shall oversee compliance with the Act and this chapter, but other City staff members may also assist in processing requests. [Ord. 18-0460 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0346 § 1; Ord. 12-0338 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


1.10.030 Availability of public records.

A. Business Hours. Public records shall be available for inspection and copying during the City’s normal business hours: Monday through Friday, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., excluding legal holidays. City public records must be inspected at the address listed in KMC 1.10.020, unless another location is designated for a particular request by the public records officer.

B. Records Index. Due to the small size of City staff, maintaining a central index of the City’s records is unduly burdensome, costly, and would interfere with City operations due to the number and complexity of records generated as a result of the wide range of the City’s activities. However, the City maintains an index of ordinances and resolutions adopted by the city council, which may be accessed on the City’s website online or by requesting them from the public records officer.

C. Organization of Records. The City shall maintain its records in a reasonably organized manner. The City shall take reasonable actions to protect records from damage and disorganization. A requestor shall not take City public records from the City’s office, or from a location designated by the public records officer, without the permission of the public records officer.

D. Records Request – Format. Any person wishing to inspect or copy public records of the City shall make the request in writing on the City’s request form or webpage. Requests received in person during the City’s normal business hours or by email are accepted. The request shall include the following information:

1. Name of requestor;

2. Adequate contact information, including telephone number, a mailing address, e-mail address, etc.;

3. Identification of the public records adequate for the public records officer to locate the records; and

4. The date of the request.

E. Notice of Request. A requestor must provide the City with reasonable notice that the request being made is for public records. If a request is contained in a larger document unrelated to a public records request, the requestor should point out the public records request by labeling the front page of the document as containing a public records request or otherwise calling the request to the attention of the public records officer to facilitate timely response to the request.

A public records request must be for identifiable records. A request for all or substantially all records prepared, owned, used or retained by the City is not a valid request for identifiable public records; provided, that a request for all records regarding a particular topic or containing a particular keyword or name shall not be considered a request for all of the City’s records.

Pursuant to RCW 42.56.080(3), the City may deny a bot request because responding to multiple bot requests would cause excessive interference with other City essential functions and would be unduly costly and burdensome to the City. A “bot request” means a request for public records that the City reasonably believes was automatically generated by a computer program or script, which is one of multiple requests from a requestor to the City within a 24-hour period.

F. Request for Copies. If the requestor wishes to have copies of the records made instead of simply inspecting them, the requestor should so indicate and make arrangements to pay for copies of the records or to pay a deposit as required by the City.

G. Other Form. The public records officer may accept, but shall not be required to accept, requests for three public records that contain the above information by telephone or in person. If the public records officer accepts such a request, the officer shall confirm receipt of the information and the substance of the request in writing.

H. Purpose of Request. A requestor need not state the purpose of the request. However, in an effort to clarify or prioritize a request and provide responsive documents, the public records officer may inquire about the nature or scope of the request. If the request is for a list of individuals, the public records officer may ask the requestor if they intend to use the records for a commercial purpose. The City is prohibited by statute from disclosing lists of individuals for commercial purposes. RCW 42.56.070(9). [Ord. 18-0460 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0338 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


1.10.040 Processing of public records requests – General.

A. Providing Access and Assistance. This chapter identifies how the City will provide full access to public records, protect records from damage or disorganization, prevent excessive interference with other essential functions of the City, provide fullest assistance to requestors, and provide the most timely possible action on public records requests. All assistance necessary to help requestors locate particular responsive records shall be provided by the public records officer; provided, that the giving of such assistance does not unreasonably disrupt the daily operations of the City.

B. Order of Processing Requests. The public records officer will process requests in the order allowing the most requests to be processed in the most efficient manner.

C. Acknowledging and Fulfilling Requests. Within five business days of receipt of the request, the public records officer will do one or more of the following:

1. Provide the records available for inspection or copying;

2. Provide an Internet address and link on the City’s website to the specific records requested;

3. Acknowledge receipt of the request and provide a reasonable estimate of time the City will require to respond to the request;

4. Acknowledge receipt of the request and ask requestor to provide clarification for a request that is unclear, and provide, to the greatest extent possible, a reasonable estimate of time the City will require to respond to the request, if it is not clarified; or

5. Deny the request.

D. Clarification. If the request is unclear or does not sufficiently identify the requested records, the City may ask the requestor to clarify what information the requestor is seeking. Such clarification may be requested and provided by telephone. The public records officer may revise the estimate of when records will be available. If the requestor fails to respond to the City’s request to clarify, and the entire request is unclear, the City need not respond to it. Otherwise, the City will respond to those portions of a request that are clear.

E. Failure to Respond. If the City does not respond in writing within five business days of receipt of the request for disclosure, the requestor should contact the public records officer to determine the reason for the failure to respond.

F. Third Party Notice. If the requested records contain information that may affect the rights of others and may be exempt from disclosure, the public records officer may, prior to providing the records, give notice to such others whose rights may be affected by the disclosure. Such notice should be given so as to make it possible for those other persons to contact the requestor and ask him or her to revise the request, or, if necessary, seek an order from a court to prevent or limit the disclosure. The notice to the affected persons shall include a copy of the request.

G. Redaction. Some records are exempt from disclosure, in whole or in part. If the City believes that a record is exempt from disclosure and should be withheld, the public records officer will state the specific exemption and provide a brief explanation of why the record or a portion of the record is being withheld. If only a portion of a record is exempt from disclosure, but the remainder is not exempt, the public records officer will redact the exempt portions, provide the nonexempt portions, and indicate to the requestor why portions of the record are being redacted.

H. Access to and Preserving Records. The City shall promptly provide space to inspect public records. No member of the public may remove public records from the viewing area or disassemble or alter any public record. The requestor shall indicate which records they wish to have copied using a mutually agreed upon nonpermanent method of marking the desired record. If the requestor cannot access the records made available on the City’s website, the City must provide copies of the record or allow the requestor to view the records using a City computer designated for the public inspection of records.

I. Consequence of Failure to Review Request. The requestor must claim or review the assembled records within 30 days of the City notification to the requestor that the records are available for inspection or copying. The City will notify the requestor in writing of this requirement, and that the requestor must contact the City to make arrangements to claim or review the records. If the requestor or a representative of the requestor fails to claim or review the records within the 30-day period or make other arrangements, the City may close the request and refile the assembled records.

J. Copying Request. After inspection is complete, the public records officer shall make the requested copies or arrange for copying.

K. Installments. If the request is for a large number of public records, the public records officer shall provide access for inspection and copying in installments, if the public records officer reasonably determines that it would be practical to provide the records in that way. If, within 30 days, the requestor fails to inspect the entire set of records or one or more of the installments, the public records officer shall no longer be obligated to fulfill the balance of the request, and shall stop searching for the remaining records and close the request.

L. Completion of Search. When the inspection of the requested records is complete and all requested copies are provided, the public records officer shall indicate that the City has completed a diligent search for the requested records and made any located nonexempt records available for inspection.

M. Closing Request. When the requestor either withdraws the request or fails to fulfill the requestor’s obligations to inspect the records or pay the deposit or final payment for the requested copies, the public records officer shall close the request and indicate to the requestor that the City has closed the request.

N. Later Discovered Records. If, after the City has informed the requestor that it has provided all available records, the City becomes aware of additional public records existing at the time of the request that are responsive to the request, it shall promptly inform the requestor of the additional public records and make them available for inspection on an expedited basis.

O. Consequence of Disclosing Record in Error. The City and its officials and employees are not liable for loss or damage based on release of a public record if the City official or employee acted in good faith in attempting to comply with the Act.

P. No Duty to Create Records. The City is not obligated to create a new record to satisfy a records request; however, the City may, in its discretion, create such a new record to fulfill the request where it may be easier for the City to create a record responsive to the request than to collect and make available voluminous records that contain small pieces of information responsive to the request.

Q. No Duty to Supplement Responses. The City is not obligated to hold current records requests open to respond to requests for City public records that may be created in the future. If a public record is created or comes into the possession of the City after a request is received by the City, it is not responsive to the request and will not be provided. A new request must be made to obtain later-created public records. [Ord. 18-0460 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0338 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


1.10.050 Processing of public records requests – Electronic records.

A. Processing Electronic Records. The process for requesting electronic public records is the same as for requesting paper public records.

B. Format. When a requestor requests records in an electronic format, the public records officer shall provide the nonexempt records or portions of such records that are reasonably locatable in an electronic format that is used by the City and is generally commercially available, or in a format that is reasonably translatable from the format in which the City keeps the record. Redacted records may be produced in paper form. [Ord. 18-0460 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0338 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


1.10.060 Exemptions.

A. Exemptions Listed for Informational Purposes. The Act provides that a number of categories of public records are exempt from public inspection and copying. In addition, the Act provides that certain public records may be exempt from disclosure if any other statute or law exempts or prohibits disclosure. For informational purposes only, the City has set forth a list of exemptions below. This list is not inclusive or exhaustive of all exemptions under the Act or other statutes. The City’s failure to list an exemption below shall not affect the efficacy of any exemption. RCW 42.56.070(2).

Requestors should be aware that the following exemptions may restrict the availability of inspection or copying of some public records, or portions thereof:

1. Personal Information. Personal information in files maintained for employees and appointed or elected officials of the City to the extent disclosure would violate their right to privacy; and financial information including credit card numbers, debit card numbers, social security numbers, electronic check numbers, card expiration dates, and bank or other financial account numbers. RCW 42.56.230.

2. Employment and Licensing. Applications for public employment and related materials submitted with respect to an applicant; examination information (test questions, scoring keys and other data used to administer a license, employment or academic examination); and personal contact information in files maintained for City employees or volunteers, and their dependents (address, telephone number, e-mail address, social security number, emergency contacts and date of birth). RCW 42.56.250.

3. Real Estate Appraisals. Real estate appraisals made for or by the City relative to the acquisition or sale of property until the project is abandoned or sold, except disclosure may not be denied for more than three years after the appraisal. RCW 42.56.260.

4. Financial, Commercial and Proprietary Information. Valuable formulae, designs, drawings, computer source code or object code, and research data obtained by the City within five years of the request for disclosure when disclosure would produce private gain and public loss. RCW 42.56.270.

5. Preliminary Drafts, Notes, Recommendations and Interagency Memorandums. Records in which opinions are expressed or policies formulated or recommended, except if the opinion or policy is implemented or the record is publicly cited in connection with City action. RCW 42.56.280.

6. Work Product. Records which are relevant to a controversy to which the City is a party but which records would not be available to another party under the rules of pretrial discovery for superior courts. RCW 42.56.290.

7. Public Utilities Information. Records filed with the Utilities and Transportation Commission or Attorney General under RCW 80.04.095; and records containing the addresses, telephone numbers, electronic contact information and customer-specific utility usage and certain billing information of City customers. RCW 42.56.330.

8. Security. Records assembled or prepared to prevent, mitigate or respond to terrorist acts, the disclosure of which would have a substantial likelihood of threatening public safety; specific and unique vulnerability assessments or emergency response plans and records containing information regarding the infrastructure and security of computer and telecommunications networks, consisting of passwords, security access codes and programs and access codes for secure software applications. RCW 42.56.420.

9. Attorney-Client Privileged Information. Records reflecting communications transmitted in confidence between the City and its attorney for the purposes of legal advice. RCW 5.60.060(2)(a).

10. Medical Records. Medical records in employee personnel files. Chapter 70.02 RCW.

11. Trade Secrets. Records containing trade secrets of businesses the City regulates. Chapter 19.108 RCW.

12. Other statutes which exempt or prohibit disclosure of specific information or records. RCW 42.56.070(1). [Ord. 18-0460 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0338 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


1.10.070 Costs of providing copies of public records.

A. Inspection. There is no fee for inspecting public records.

B. Actual Copy Costs. Pursuant to RCW 42.56.120(2)(b), the City has not calculated the actual costs it charges for providing public records because to do so would be unduly burdensome for the following reasons: (1) the City does not have the resources to conduct a study to determine all its actual copying costs; (2) to conduct such a study would interfere with other essential City functions; and (3) through the 2017 legislative process, the public and requestors have commented on and been informed of authorized fees and costs, including for electronic records, provided in RCW 42.56.120(2)(b) and (c), (3) and (4).

C. Statutory Default Fees. The City shall charge for copies of public records in accordance with the statutory default fees set forth in RCW 42.56.120(2)(b) and (c), and as set forth in Attachment 1 – Public Records Fee Schedule, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and incorporated by reference, which shall include the following:

1. The City shall charge for customized services in accordance with RCW 42.56.120(3), and shall comply with the procedures set forth therein to charge for customized services.

2. Pursuant to RCW 42.56.130, the City may charge other copy fees authorized by statutes located outside of Chapter 42.56 RCW.

3. The City may enter into an alternate fee agreement with a requestor under RCW 42.56.120(4), and shall comply with the procedures set forth therein for such agreements.

4. Standard Copies. The charge for standard (eight-and-one-half-inch by 11-inch, eight-and-one-half-inch by 14-inch, and 11-inch by 17-inch) photocopies and printed copies of electronic public records (when requested by the requestor) shall be $0.15 per page. If the number of pages is six or less, the City will waive this fee. For example, a request for seven pages to be copied will cost $1.05.

5. Scanned Copies. The charge for scanned copies (eight-and-one-half-inch by 11-inch, eight-and-one-half-inch by 14-inch, and 11-inch by 17-inch) shall be $0.10 per page. If the number of pages is 10 or less, the City will waive this fee. For example, a request for 11 pages to be scanned will cost $1.10.

6. Electronic Copies. Uploading/attaching electronic files to digital storage media/device(s), a cloud-based data storage service, or e-mails is charged at $0.05 per each four files. If the number of files is 80 or less, then City will waive this fee. For example, a request for 84 files will cost $1.05. Transmission of public records in an electronic format is charged at $0.10 per gigabyte.

7. Nonstandard Copies. The City will periodically update and post a fee schedule for the copying of other nonstandard public records or those in other formats or media.

8. Off-Site Vendor Copying, Data Compilations or Customized Electronic Access Services. If the City determines that the request requires the use of information technology expertise or equipment for data compilations, customized electronic access, or copying public records in nonstandard formats, including but not limited to photographs, blueprints, plat maps, or tape recordings, the requestor shall pay the actual costs of such duplication. If the public records officer determines it is reasonable to send a request to an off-site vendor for copying, the City may: (a) arrange for the requestor to pay the vendor directly for copies made; or (b) charge the requestor the actual amount charged by the off-site vendor to the City for the copies made.

9. Deposit. Before beginning to make the copies, the public records officer may require a deposit of 10 percent of the estimated fees when the fee estimate for an installment or an entire request exceeds $25.00. The public records officer may also require the payment of the remainder of the copying costs before providing all the records, or the payment of the costs of copying an installment before providing that installment. The City shall not charge sales tax when it makes copies of public records, unless required by law to do so.

10. If the City makes a request available on a partial or installment basis, the City may charge for each part of the request as it is provided. If an installment of a records request is not claimed or reviewed, the City is not obligated to fulfill the balance of the request.

11. Facsimile/Mail. The City shall also charge actual costs of long distance facsimile transmission and/or mailing, including postage and the cost of the shipping container.

12. Certified Copies. Where the request is for a certified copy of public records, an additional charge of $5.00 may be applied to cover the additional expense and time required for certification.

D. Payment Methods. The requestor shall pay for copies of public records by credit card, cash, check, or money order payable to the City.

E. City staff is directed to update the City’s fee resolution (Resolution 18-306) to be consistent with Attachment 1 to the ordinance codified in this chapter, Public Records Fee Schedule. If there are any conflicts between this chapter and Attachment 1 to the ordinance codified in this chapter, Public Records Fee Schedule, and the City’s fee resolution (Resolution 18-306), then this chapter shall prevail. [Ord. 18-0460 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0338 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


1.10.080 Retention of records.

The City shall retain its records in accordance with retention schedules approved by the State Local Records Committee. Public records may not be destroyed per retention schedule if a public records request or actual or anticipated litigation is pending. [Ord. 18-0460 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0338 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 1.15 GENERAL PENALTY

Sections:

1.15.010    General penalties.

1.15.020    Separate offense.

1.15.030    Nuisance.


1.15.010 General penalties.

Unless otherwise specified by City ordinance, anyone who violates the provisions of any ordinance shall be punished pursuant to the general penalty provision set forth below:

A. Criminal Penalty. Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any of the provisions of any ordinance of the City is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under this code shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $5,000 or by imprisonment not to exceed one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B. Civil Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of any ordinance of the City which is designated a civil offense shall have committed a civil infraction. Unless otherwise provided, any such person shall be assessed a monetary penalty not to exceed $250.00 for each day that the violation occurs. [Ord. 98-0012 § 1.]


1.15.020 Separate offense.

Every person violating any of the provisions of any ordinance of the City is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which the violation is committed, continued or permitted by any such person. [Ord. 98-0012 § 2.]


1.15.030 Nuisance.

In addition to the penalties set forth above, all remedies given by law for the prevention and abatement of nuisances shall apply regardless of any other remedy. [Ord. 98-0012 § 3.]


Chapter 1.20 CODE ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

1.20.010    Purpose.

1.20.020    Definitions.

1.20.030    Violation unlawful – Each day is separate violation – Misdemeanor.

1.20.040    Joint and several responsibility and liability.

1.20.050    Interference with code enforcement unlawful – Misdemeanor.

1.20.060    Methods of service.

1.20.070    Voluntary correction.

1.20.080    Notice of violation.

1.20.090    Stop work order – Violation a misdemeanor.

1.20.100    Stop use order – Violation a misdemeanor.

1.20.110    Removal of stop work or stop use order – Misdemeanor.

1.20.120    Response to notice of violation.

1.20.130    Failure to respond.

1.20.140    Scheduling of hearing to contest or mitigate – Correction prior to hearing.

1.20.150    Contested hearing – Procedure.

1.20.160    Contested hearing – Decision of the hearing examiner.

1.20.170    Mitigation hearing – Procedure.

1.20.180    Mitigation hearing – Decision of the hearing examiner.

1.20.190    Failure to appear – Default judgment.

1.20.200    Monetary penalty.

1.20.210    Appeal.

1.20.220    Repeat violation or failure to abate – Misdemeanor.

1.20.230    Abatement.

1.20.240    Additional enforcement procedures.

1.20.250    Emergency orders.

1.20.260    Conflicting code provisions.

1.20.270    Duty not creating liability.


1.20.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish an efficient system of enforcing City regulations that will enable violations to be promptly resolved wherever possible, while providing both appropriate penalties and a full opportunity for alleged violators to have a hearing to contest the violations. This chapter shall apply to all regulations as defined in KMC 1.20.020, except that this chapter shall not apply to junk vehicle regulations, which shall be governed by Chapter 8.25 KMC. In addition to any other penalty or remedy provided for in this code, a violation of any regulation may be prosecuted as a criminal violation at the City’s discretion, pursuant to KMC 1.15.010. [Ord. 18-0461 § 1; Ord. 11-0328 § 2.]


1.20.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following words, terms, and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless a different meaning is plainly required:

A. Abate means to act to stop an activity, and/or to repair, replace, remove, or otherwise remedy a condition, where such activity or condition constitutes a violation of a regulation. The actions must resolve the violation to the satisfaction of the City, or the hearing examiner if the matter has been mitigated or contested and found to be a violation or the penalty has been mitigated. The actions taken and the manner in which they are performed must not endanger the general health, safety, and welfare of the community. For the purposes of this chapter, the verbs “abate” and “correct” shall be interchangeable and have the same meaning.

B. Act means doing or performing something.

C. City means City of Kenmore, Washington.

D. Code enforcement officer means any person or persons authorized by statute, ordinance, regulation, written City policy, or interlocal agreement, or designated by the city manager or his or her designee, to enforce any of the regulations subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of this chapter, and shall expressly include the City’s code enforcement officer. 

E. Correction notice means a written statement, issued by a code enforcement officer, notifying a person that property under his or her control is in violation of one or more regulations, and informing such person that a notice of violation may be issued and/or criminal charges filed if the violations are not abated.

F. Day or days, as used in this chapter, shall mean calendar days unless expressly stated otherwise in a given section or subsection. In addition, any portion of a 24-hour day shall constitute a full calendar day.

G. Hearing examiner means the Kenmore hearing examiner and the office thereof established pursuant to Chapter 19.30 KMC.

H. Notice of violation or notice of civil violation means a written statement, issued by a code enforcement officer, which contains the information required under KMC 1.20.080, and which notifies a person that he or she is responsible for one or more violations of the Kenmore Municipal Code.

I. Omission means a failure to act.

J. Person means any individual, firm, business, association, partnership, corporation or other legal entity, public or private, however organized. Because “person” shall include both human and nonhuman entities, any of the following pronouns may be used to describe a person: he, she, or it.

K. Person responsible for the violation means any of the following: a person who has titled ownership or legal control of the property or structure that is subject to the regulation; an occupant or other person in control of the property or structure that is subject to the regulation; a developer, builder, business operator, or owner who is developing, building, or operating a business on the property or in a structure that is subject to the regulation; or any person who created, caused, or has allowed the violation to occur.

L. Regulation means and includes any of the following, as now enacted or hereafter amended:

1. All City code provisions;

2. All standards, regulations, and procedures adopted by the City that make reference to this chapter; and

3. The terms and conditions of any permit or approval issued by the City, or any concomitant agreement with the City pursuant to code provisions that make reference to this chapter.

M. Repeat violation means, as evidenced by the prior issuance of a correction notice or a notice of violation, that a violation has occurred on the same property within a one-year period, or a person responsible for a violation has committed a violation elsewhere within the City within a one-year period.

N. Violation or civil violation means an act or omission contrary to a regulation as defined in subsection L of this section. A violation continues to exist until abated to the satisfaction of the City or the hearing examiner, with each day or portion thereof in which the violation continues constituting a separate violation. [Ord. 11-0328 § 2.]


1.20.030 Violation unlawful – Each day is separate violation – Misdemeanor.

The violation of any regulation shall be unlawful. Each day, or portion thereof, in which the violation continues constitutes a separate offense for which separate notices of violation may be issued. A code enforcement officer may, pursuant to this chapter, issue a notice of violation. In addition, any violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. The city manager may request the city attorney (prosecutor) to file a violation as a criminal misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than 90 days, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than $1,000, or by both such imprisonment and fine. All penalties are subject to a 15 percent administration fee. Penalties for repeat violations shall be doubled. All criminal misdemeanor charges filed under this chapter shall be filed with the King County district court. When the City files criminal misdemeanor charges pursuant to this chapter, the City shall have the burden of proving, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the violation occurred. [Ord. 11-0328 § 2.]


1.20.040 Joint and several responsibility and liability.

Responsibility for violations of the codes enforced under this chapter is joint and several, and the City is not prohibited from taking action against a party where other persons may also be potentially responsible for a violation, nor is the City required to take action against all persons potentially responsible for a violation. [Ord. 11-0328 § 2.]


1.20.050 Interference with code enforcement unlawful – Misdemeanor.

Any person who intentionally obstructs, impedes, or interferes with any lawful attempt to serve a notice of a violation, a stop work or stop use order, or an emergency order, or intentionally obstructs, impedes, or interferes with lawful attempts to correct a violation, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than 90 days or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than $1,000, or by both such imprisonment and fine. [Ord. 11-0328 § 2.]


1.20.060 Methods of service.

A. Service for Civil Violations and Misdemeanors. Any correction notice, notice of violation, notice of hearing, or other code enforcement document for a civil violation shall be deemed legally served upon a party by use of regular first class mail, as described in subsection (B)(2) of this section, and for a misdemeanor shall be deemed legally served upon a party by personal service and mailing, as described in subsections (B)(1) and (2) of this section. For civil violations, the code enforcement officer shall use due diligence in attempting to locate a mailing address for a party. If the code enforcement officer is unable to locate a mailing address for such a party, the code enforcement officer may serve such party by posting or publication, as described in subsections (B)(3) and (4) of this section. For civil violations, the code enforcement officer may personally serve documents or cause documents to be personally served upon a party. For civil violations and misdemeanors, the code enforcement officer may post documents as described in subsection (B)(3) of this section.

B. Methods of Service Defined. For purposes of this chapter, the methods of service of any documents related to code enforcement, such as correction notices, notices of violation, stop work orders, etc. (hereinafter “document”), are defined as follows:

1. Personal Service. Personal service shall mean handing the document to the person subject to the document or leaving it at his or her dwelling house or usual place of abode with some person of suitable age and discretion then residing therein, or leaving it at his or her office or place of employment with a person in charge thereof. Personal service shall also be deemed complete when the hearing examiner or his or her assistant hands any order, ruling, decision, or other document to a person prior to, during, or after a hearing.

2. Mailing. Service by mail shall mean sending the document by regular first class mail to the last known address of the person subject to the document. The last known address shall be an address provided to the City by the person to whom the document is directed. If an address has not been provided to the City, the last known address shall be any of the following as they appear at the time the document is mailed: the address of the property where the violation is occurring, as reflected on the most recent equalized tax assessment roll of the county assessor or the taxpayer address appearing for the property on the official property tax information website for King County; the address appearing in any database used for the payment of utilities for the property at which the violations are occurring; or the address of the person to whom the documents are being sent that appears in the Washington State Department of Licensing database. Where service of the notice of violation is by mail, service shall be deemed complete upon the third day following the day upon which they are placed in the mail, unless the third day falls on a Saturday, 

Sunday, or legal holiday, in which event service shall be deemed complete on the first day other than a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday following the third day.

3. Posting. Posting shall mean affixing a copy of the document in a conspicuous place on the property, with at least one copy of such document placed at an entryway to the property or structure if an entryway exists.

4. Publication. Publication of the document shall mean publication as set forth in RCW 4.28.100 and 4.28.110, as currently enacted or hereafter amended.

C. Proof of Service – Due Diligence. Proof of service shall be made by written affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting the service, declaring the time and date of service, the manner by which service was made, and, if service was made solely by posting or publication, facts showing that due diligence was used in attempting to locate a mailing address for the person at whom the notice of violation is directed.

D. Additional Proof of Service Not Necessary. The hearing examiner shall not require additional proof of service beyond the requirements in this chapter. [Ord. 11-0328 § 2.]


1.20.070 Voluntary correction.

A. General. Prior to the issuance of a notice of violation, the code enforcement officer shall attempt to secure the voluntary correction of a violation by attempting to contact the person responsible for the violation, explaining the violation, and requesting correction. This may be done verbally by the code enforcement officer; provided, a written correction notice shall be served on the person responsible for the violation prior to issuance of a notice of violation; provided further, a written correction notice need not be served nor efforts made to secure voluntary correction where the nature of the violation creates a risk of imminent harm to public health or safety, or where it is a repeat violation as defined in this chapter.

B. Service of Correction Notice. Service of a written correction notice may be accomplished by mailing or by personal service, as described in KMC 1.20.060(B)(1) and (2), at the discretion of the code enforcement officer, or by posting or publication if an address for the person responsible for the violation cannot be ascertained pursuant to KMC 1.20.060(B)(2).

C. Contents of Written Correction Notice. The written correction notice shall be deemed sufficient if it contains the following information:

1. The name and address of a person responsible for the violation; and

2. The street address or description sufficient for identification of the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation has occurred or is occurring; and

3. A description of the violation and a reference to the code provisions that have been violated; and

4. A statement indicating what corrective actions are required and a correction deadline stating the date and time by which the corrective actions must be completed to the satisfaction of the code enforcement officer in order for the violator to avoid the issuance of a notice of violation; and

5. A statement indicating that, pursuant to KMC 1.20.030, a notice of violation may be issued for each day a violation continues, with each violation constituting a separate offense subject to civil and/or criminal penalties.

D. Time Period in Which to Correct or Abate the Violation. Whenever a person responsible for a violation is served with a written correction notice, he or she shall be given at least 15 days from the date of issuance of the notice to correct the violation(s) to the satisfaction of the code enforcement officer; provided, where, in the opinion of the code enforcement officer, a violation creates a risk of imminent harm to public health or safety, or is a repeat violation as defined in this chapter, the City can require less than 15 days for correction to be completed. In the event the violation is not corrected within the required time period, the City may, at its discretion, issue separate notices of violation for each day, or portion thereof, that the violation has existed or continues to exist.

E. Extension of Voluntary Correction Period or Modification of Required Actions. An extension of the deadline for voluntary correction, or a modification of any required corrective action noted in the written correction notice, may be granted by the code enforcement officer if the person responsible for the violation has, in the opinion of the code enforcement officer, shown due diligence or made substantial progress in correcting the violations but unforeseen circumstances render correction unattainable within the original deadline.

F. Revocation of Deadline for Compliance. The original deadline for compliance, or any extension for compliance previously granted by the code enforcement officer, may be revoked and immediate compliance required where, in the opinion of the code enforcement officer, circumstances make immediate correction necessary to avoid an imminent risk of injury to persons or property.

G. Use of Written Voluntary Correction Agreement.

1. At the sole discretion of the City, a voluntary correction agreement may be entered into between the person responsible for the violation and the City. The voluntary correction agreement must be in writing.

2. Contents of Voluntary Correction Agreement. The voluntary correction agreement is a contract between the City and the person responsible for the violation under which that person agrees to abate the violations within a specified time and according to specified conditions. The voluntary correction agreement shall include the following:

a. The name and address of the person responsible for the violation; and

b. The street address or a description sufficient for identification of the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation has occurred or is occurring; and

c. A description of the violation and a reference to the regulations that have been violated; and

d. An acknowledgement by the person responsible for the violations that the violations described in the correction agreement exist, and that he or she is waiving the right to contest the existence of the violations or to mitigate the penalties; and

e. The necessary corrective action to be taken, the date or time by which correction must be completed, and an acknowledgement by the person responsible for the violation that he or she will correct the violations within the time specified in the voluntary correction agreement; and

f. Acknowledgement by the person responsible for the violation that the City may enter the property and inspect the premises as may be necessary to determine compliance with the voluntary correction agreement; and

g. Acknowledgement by the person responsible for the violation that if the terms of the voluntary correction agreement are not met, the City may enter the property to abate the violation and may also recover its costs and expenses and/or a monetary penalty pursuant to this chapter from the person responsible for the violation; and

h. The signature or official mark of the person responsible for the violation and the signature or official mark of the code enforcement officer.

3. Failure to Comply with Voluntary Correction Agreement.

a. Abatement by the City. In addition to any other remedy provided for in this chapter, the City may abate the violation in accordance with KMC 1.20.230 if the terms of the voluntary correction agreement are not met.

b. Penalties and Costs. If the terms of the voluntary correction agreement are not met, the person responsible for the violation may be assessed a monetary penalty in accordance with KMC 1.20.200, plus all costs and expenses of abatement, as set forth in KMC 1.20.230, in addition to being issued new notices of violation or criminal charges if the violation has not been abated. [Ord. 11-0328 § 2.]


1.20.080 Notice of violation.

A. Issuance of Notice of Violation. When the City determines that a violation has occurred or is occurring, and does not secure voluntary correction pursuant to KMC 1.20.070, the code enforcement officer may issue a notice of violation to any person responsible for the violation, or the city manager may request the city attorney (prosecutor) to file a violation as a criminal misdemeanor.

B. Contents of Notice. The notice of violation shall include the following:

1. The name and address of a person responsible for the violation; and

2. The street address or description sufficient for identification of the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation has occurred or is occurring; and

3. A description of the violation and a reference to the regulations violated; and

4. A statement indicating that the violator must respond to the notice of violation within 15 days of the date of issuance by doing one of the following:

a. Paying the fine and correcting the violation;

b. Requesting a mitigation hearing and correcting the violation; or

c. Requesting a hearing to contest the violation; and

5. A statement indicating that failure to respond shall result in the violation(s) being deemed committed without requiring further action by the City, and that the full fine amount indicated on the notice of violation shall be due and owing to the City by the person or entity to whom the notice of violation was issued; and

6. A statement indicating that, unless a request to contest the violation or to mitigate the penalty is properly filed, a monetary penalty of $500.00 for each violation listed on the notice of violation is due and owing at the time the notice of violation is issued, and must be paid in full within 30 days or may be assigned to a collection agency; and

7. A statement indicating that if the person or entity to whom a notice of violation was issued requests a hearing and fails to attend the hearing, the hearing examiner or judge shall enter a default judgment against the person or entity to whom the violation was issued, with the full amount of the fine indicated on the notice of violation immediately due and owing, and that any unpaid fines and any costs may be assigned to a collection agency after 30 days have elapsed from the date the notice of violation was issued; and

8. A statement indicating that the City may seek to recover from the person to whom the notice of violation was issued the costs to the City of any abatement action taken; and

9. A statement indicating that separate notices of violation may be issued for each day, or portion thereof, in which a violation continues; and

10. A statement indicating that payment of a monetary penalty does not relieve the person or entity named in the notice of violation of the duty to abate the violation, and that failure to abate may result in the issuance of additional notices of violation and/or criminal charges, with additional civil and/or criminal penalties.

C. Service of Notice of Violation. Service of a notice of violation shall be accomplished as prescribed by KMC 1.20.060. The City may, at its discretion, record a notice of civil violation against the subject property. [Ord. 11-0328 § 2.]


1.20.090 Stop work order – Violation a misdemeanor.

A stop work order may be issued pursuant to any of the codes or regulations adopted pursuant to KMC Titles 12, 13, 15 and 18. In addition, the code enforcement officer may issue a stop work order whenever any work that is subject to regulation under the Kenmore Municipal Code is, in the opinion of the code enforcement officer, being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of the Kenmore Municipal Code, or will exacerbate damage that has already been caused to any property, or will materially impair the code enforcement officer’s ability to seek compliance. The stop work order shall state the reasons for the order and may be appended to, or incorporate by reference, a notice of violation. The stop work order shall take effect immediately upon service. Service of the stop work order shall be deemed accomplished upon posting of the notice in the manner described in KMC 1.20.060(B)(3). Violation of a stop work order shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than 90 days, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than $500.00, or by both such imprisonment and fine. [Ord. 11-0328 § 2.]


1.20.100 Stop use order – Violation a misdemeanor.

In addition to any remedy provided for in this chapter, the code enforcement officer may issue a stop use order when allowing the use to continue creates an imminent threat of injury to the health, safety, or welfare of any member of the public, or creates an imminent threat of harm to neighboring property, or will exacerbate injury already caused to any property. The stop use order shall state the reasons for the order; provided, the stop use order may be appended to, or incorporate by reference, a notice of violation. The stop use order shall take effect immediately upon service. Service of the stop use order shall be deemed accomplished upon posting of the notice in the manner described in KMC 1.20.060(B)(3). Violation of a stop use order shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than 90 days, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than $500.00, or by both such imprisonment and fine. [Ord. 11-0328 § 2.]


1.20.110 Removal of stop work or stop use order – Misdemeanor.

Where a stop work order or a stop use order has been posted in conformity with the requirements of this chapter, removal of such order without the authorization of the City, or the hearing examiner as part of an order following a hearing under this chapter, shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than 90 days, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than $500.00, or by both such imprisonment and fine. [Ord. 11-0328 § 2.]


1.20.120 Response to notice of violation.

A. Generally. A person who has been served with a notice of violation must respond to the notice within 15 days of the date the notice is served. A person may respond to the notice of violation by:

1. Paying the amount of the monetary penalty as set forth in the notice of violation. Partial payment or payment using a check that is rejected for insufficient funds shall not be deemed payment under this subsection. Payment of the fine shall not relieve the person or entity responsible for the violation from the duty to correct or abate the violation. Additional notices of violation may be issued if the violation goes uncorrected.

2. Contesting the notice of violation by requesting a contested hearing in writing and sending the request to the City as described in subsection B of this section and submitting appropriate fees.

3. Seeking to mitigate the monetary penalty by requesting a mitigation hearing to explain the circumstances surrounding the violation. The request to mitigate must be made in writing and sent to the City as described in subsection B of this section. Requesting to mitigate the penalty shall not relieve the person responsible for the violation from the duty to correct or abate the violation. Additional notices of violation may be issued if the violation goes uncorrected.

B. Method of Response. The person or entity to whom a notice of violation has been issued may respond by mailing, faxing, e-mailing, or hand-delivering the response to the City. Mailed responses must be postmarked no later than the fifteenth day from the date of service of the notice of violation; hand-delivered, faxed, and e-mailed responses must be provided to the City no later than 4:30 p.m. on the fifteenth day after service; provided, where the fifteenth day falls on a weekend or holiday, the deadline shall be extended to the next regular business day. All responses must include the address of the person or entity who responds. [Ord. 11-0328 § 2.]


1.20.130 Failure to respond.

If the person to whom the notice of violation is issued fails to respond as required in KMC 1.20.120, the violations shall be deemed committed without requiring further action by the City or the hearing examiner and the person to whom the notice of violation was issued shall owe the full fine amount indicated in the notice of violation. [Ord. 11-0328 § 2.]


1.20.140 Scheduling of hearing to contest or mitigate – Correction prior to hearing.

A. Notice and Scheduling of Hearing. Upon the timely filing of a request for a hearing to contest a violation or to mitigate the penalty, the matter shall be scheduled to be heard at the next available appearance by the hearing examiner, or before the court, that is a minimum of 15 days but no later than 60 calendar days after the date the request was received by the City. Notice of the hearing date and time shall be served by regular first class mail to the address of the party who requested the hearing. The date and time for any hearing may be rescheduled by the hearing examiner or court for good cause upon the motion of a party or the hearing examiner or court.

B. Correction of Violation Prior to Hearing. The hearing may be cancelled and the party requesting the hearing need not appear only if, at least five business days prior to the scheduled hearing, the code enforcement officer determines that the violation has been satisfactorily corrected or abated and the monetary penalty paid in full. Where the scheduled hearing involves a repeat violation as defined in this chapter, the hearing shall not be cancelled unless the new violation has been corrected or abated to the satisfaction of the code enforcement officer and the monetary penalty and costs for the new violation(s) and any monetary penalty and costs owing for the previous violation(s) have been paid in full. [Ord. 11-0328 § 2.]


1.20.150 Contested hearing – Procedure.

The hearing examiner shall conduct a hearing to contest a violation pursuant to Chapter 19.30 KMC when such hearing is properly and timely requested. The City and the person or entity to whom the notice of civil violation was issued may participate in the hearing and each party, or its legal representatives, may call witnesses and present evidence and rebuttal, subject to the following:

A. The City shall have the burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, that a violation has occurred.

B. The parties are responsible for securing the appearance of any witnesses they may wish to call. Neither the City nor the hearing examiner shall have the burden of securing any witnesses on behalf of the person who is contesting the violation(s) or seeking to mitigate the penalties.

C. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply to any such hearing. The hearing examiner shall allow hearsay testimony by the parties and not require proof of chain of custody for evidence that is presented; provided, the hearing examiner shall determine the weight to be assigned to any evidence presented.

D. Any notes, reports, summaries, photographs, or other materials prepared by the parties shall be admitted into evidence if requested; provided, the parties are free to argue the weight that should be assigned by the hearing examiner to any evidence submitted. [Ord. 11-0328 § 2.]


1.20.160 Contested hearing – Decision of the hearing examiner.

A. Contents of Order. Upon the conclusion of a hearing to contest a violation, the hearing examiner shall issue a written decision within 10 business days following the hearing. The decision shall contain findings and conclusions based on the record that includes the following:

1. For each alleged violation of the City code, a determination of whether the violation has been found committed or not committed;

2. For violations found committed, the monetary penalties and costs being assessed pursuant to this chapter;

3. For violations found committed, any required corrective actions;

4. For violations found committed, a finding that abatement of the violations by the City is authorized, at the expense of the person responsible for the violations; and

5. A statement notifying the person responsible for the violation that he or she is subject to additional civil and/or criminal penalties if any violation that was the subject of the hearing has not been corrected or abated.

The hearing examiner may enter a verbal order at the close of the hearing and prior to the issuance of the written decision. The verbal order shall include preliminary findings and conclusions as described above.

B. Notice of Decision. Within two business days of the issuance of the written decision, the hearing examiner shall cause a copy of the written decision to be served upon the parties by mail in accordance with KMC 1.20.060(B)(2). [Ord. 11-0328 § 2.]


1.20.170 Mitigation hearing – Procedure.

The hearing examiner shall conduct a hearing to mitigate the penalty on a violation when such hearing is properly and timely requested; provided, that in the event a person has requested a hearing to contest a violation and prior to the start of the hearing indicates to the hearing examiner a desire to mitigate rather than contest, the hearing examiner shall permit the person to seek mitigation of the monetary penalty. The mitigation hearing shall be conducted according to the following general procedures:

A. The person responsible for the violation shall, as a condition of proceeding with the mitigation hearing, agree that he or she has committed the violations as set forth in the notice of the violation. The City shall be relieved of any burden of proving that the violations were committed, and such agreement by the person responsible for the violations shall be sufficient basis for the hearing examiner to find the violations committed.

B. If the person who has requested the mitigation hearing decides at the time of the hearing that he or she wishes to contest all or some of the alleged violations, the matters wishing to be contested shall, at the request of the City, be rescheduled.

C. The person responsible for the violations shall be given the opportunity to explain or provide evidence regarding the nature of the violations, why the violations exist, why the violations have not been abated or corrected, and any other information the hearing examiner determines is relevant.

D. The City shall be given the opportunity, at its discretion, to provide evidence of the nature of the violation, evidence to rebut assertions made by any party, and any other information or evidence the hearing examiner deems is relevant. [Ord. 11-0328 § 2.]


1.20.180 Mitigation hearing – Decision of the hearing examiner.

A. Decision to Be Issued at Close of Hearing. Upon the conclusion of a penalty mitigation hearing, the hearing examiner shall issue, at that time, a written decision and order using a standard form that contains the following findings and conclusions based on the record:

1. For each violation of the City code, a statement indicating that the violation has been committed;

2. The monetary penalties and costs being assessed pursuant to this chapter;

3. Any required corrective action;

4. A statement notifying the person responsible for the violation that he or she is subject to additional civil and/or criminal penalties if any violation that was the subject of the hearing has not been corrected or abated;

5. A determination that abatement of the violations by the City is authorized, at the expense of the person responsible for the violations.

B. Notice of Decision. The hearing examiner shall provide a copy of the decision and order to the parties at the close of the mitigation hearing. When a party fails to appear after requesting a hearing, the hearing examiner shall cause a copy of the decision to be served on the party by mail in accordance with KMC 1.20.060(B)(2) within 10 business days of the hearing. [Ord. 11-0328 § 2.]


1.20.190 Failure to appear – Default judgment.

If the person who requests a hearing to contest a violation or mitigate the penalty then fails to appear at the scheduled hearing after having been given notice in the manner provided for by this chapter, the hearing examiner shall use a standard form to immediately issue a default judgment, which finds committed all the violations set forth in the notice of violation, and which assesses a fine in the full amount indicated in the notice of violation. In addition, at the request of the City, the hearing examiner shall also impose upon the non-appearing party any costs to the City related to preparation for the hearing. The hearing examiner shall cause a copy of the default judgment to be served upon the nonappearing party by mail in accordance with KMC 1.20.060(B)(2) within 10 business days of the hearing. Upon the motion of a party, the hearing examiner may rescind a default judgment only upon a showing of good cause to do so, and only if such motion has been brought within 30 calendar days of the date of the hearing at which the default judgment was ordered. [Ord. 11-0328 § 2.]


1.20.200 Monetary penalty.

A. Monetary Penalty. Each violation of a City regulation deemed committed by the hearing examiner is subject to a monetary penalty in an amount up to $500.00 unless a different penalty amount for a given violation is expressly authorized or required by a more specific City code provision. Except where the person responsible for the violation has requested mitigation of the monetary penalty pursuant to KMC 1.20.120, the hearing examiner shall have no authority to reduce the amount of the monetary penalty. Where the person has requested to mitigate the monetary penalty, the examiner may reduce the monetary penalty for each violation, but in no case shall the penalty be reduced to an amount less than $100.00 for each violation found committed. 

B. Payment of Monetary Penalty. Any monetary penalties assessed pursuant to this chapter constitute a personal obligation of the person to whom the notice of civil violation is directed. In addition, the monetary penalties assessed pursuant to this chapter may be assessed against the property that is the subject of the enforcement action. Any monetary penalty assessed must be paid in full to the City within 30 days from the date of service of an uncontested notice of violation or any order of the hearing examiner that assesses monetary penalties.

C. Collection of Monetary Penalty – Use of Collection Agency. The City is authorized to take legal action to collect the monetary penalty. Pursuant to Chapter 19.16 RCW, as currently enacted or hereafter amended, the City may, at its discretion, use a collection agency for the purposes of collecting penalties and costs assessed pursuant to this chapter. The collection agency may add fees or interest charges to the original amount assigned to collections as allowed by law. No debt may be assigned to a collection agency until at least 30 calendar days have elapsed from the time that the City attempts to notify the person responsible for the debt of the existence of the debt and that the debt may be assigned to a collection agency for collection if the debt is not paid. Notice of potential assignment to collections shall be sent by mail in accordance with KMC 1.20.060(B)(2) to the person responsible for the violation; provided, inability to ascertain a current mailing address shall not prohibit the debt from being assigned to collections. Collection of monetary penalties is to be at parity with City or county taxes. 

D. Continuing Duty to Abate Violations. Payment of a monetary penalty pursuant to this chapter does not relieve the person responsible for the violation of the duty to correct or abate the violation. Additional notices of violation may be issued and/or criminal charges filed for continuing failure to correct or abate a violation. [Ord. 11-0328 § 2.]


1.20.210 Appeal.

An appeal of the decision of the hearing examiner must be filed with the King County superior court within 21 calendar days of service of the decision, which shall be the exclusive means to appeal a decision of the hearing examiner rendered under this chapter. [Ord. 11-0328 § 2.]


1.20.220 Repeat violation or failure to abate – Misdemeanor.

Where a person or entity has been found to have committed a violation under this chapter, regardless of whether the violation was resolved without penalty, the failure to abate the violation, or the commission of a subsequent violation, or the violation of a written decision or order of the hearing examiner after having received notice of the decision or order as provided in this chapter within 12 months, shall each constitute a repeat violation and shall each be a misdemeanor subject to the penalties and provisions of KMC 1.20.030. The city manager shall have authority to file a repeat violation as a civil violation and to request the city attorney (prosecutor) to file a repeat violation as a misdemeanor. [Ord. 11-0328 § 2.]


1.20.230 Abatement.

A. Other Abatement Proceedings Not Precluded. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the City from pursuing abatement of a violation pursuant to any other laws of the State of Washington or the City.

B. Costs of Abatement. The costs of any abatement action taken by the City shall become a charge to the person responsible for the violation. These charges may be assessed against the person responsible for the violation or the property upon which the violation occurred, or both. The City may use any lawful means to collect these charges. [Ord. 11-0328 § 2.]


1.20.240 Additional enforcement procedures.

The provisions of this chapter are not exclusive, and may be used in addition to other enforcement and penalty provisions authorized by this code or any other law. [Ord. 11-0328 § 2.]


1.20.250 Emergency orders.

Whenever any use or activity in violation of this code immediately threatens the health and safety of the occupants of the premises or any member of the public, the City may issue an emergency order directing that the use or activity be discontinued and the condition causing the threat to the public health and safety be abated. The emergency order shall specify the time for compliance and shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property, if posting is physically possible. Any condition described in the emergency order which is not abated within the time specified is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the City is authorized to enjoin or abate such nuisance by any legal or equitable means as may be available. The City shall be entitled to recover all costs necessary for the injunction or abatement, specifically including reasonable attorney and expert witness fees. [Ord. 11-0328 § 2.]


1.20.260 Conflicting code provisions.

In the event a conflict exists between the enforcement provisions of this chapter and the enforcement provisions of any international or uniform code, statute, or regulation that is adopted in this code and subject to the enforcement provisions of this chapter, the enforcement provisions of this chapter will prevail, unless the enforcement provisions of this chapter are preempted or specifically modified by the code, statute, or regulation. [Ord. 11-0328 § 2.]


1.20.270 Duty not creating liability.

No provision or term used in this chapter is intended to impose any duty upon the City or any of its officers or employees which would subject them to damages in a civil action. [Ord. 11-0328 § 2.]


Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL

Chapters:

2.05    City Offices

2.10    City Manager

2.15    City Clerk

2.20    Landmarks and Heritage Commission

2.25    Travel Advances

2.30    Planning Commission

2.35    Repealed

2.40    Salary Commission

2.45    City Council

2.50    Indemnification of Employees and Appointed and Elected City Officials


Chapter 2.05 CITY OFFICES

Sections:

2.05.010    Office hours.

2.05.020    Oath required.

2.05.030    Bond required.


2.05.010 Office hours.

Pursuant to RCW 35A.21.070, the city council hereby establishes the following days and time to be the City of Kenmore’s office hours: Monday through Friday, 9:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m., except on holidays, where the City’s offices will be closed. [Ord. 98-0034 § 1.]


2.05.020 Oath required.

Any City officer, before entering upon the performance of the duties of office, shall be required to take an oath or affirmation for the faithful performance of his or her duties. The oath or affirmation shall be filed with the King County department of records and elections. [Ord. 98-0010 § 1.]


2.05.030 Bond required.

Prior to entering upon the performance of duties, the city manager, the city clerk, and the city finance director shall be required to furnish an official bond, to be renewed annually, conditioned on the honest and faithful performance of their official duties. The premium on the bond(s) shall be paid by the City. The amount of the bond(s) shall be:

A. City manager: $50,000;

B. City finance director: $50,000;

C. City clerk: $10,000. [Ord. 98-0010 § 2.]


Chapter 2.10 CITY MANAGER

Sections:

2.10.010    Office of city manager established – Appointment.

2.10.020    Duties of city manager.

2.10.030    City organization.

2.10.040    Appointment as auditing officer.


2.10.010 Office of city manager established – Appointment.

Pursuant to RCW 35A.13.010 and 35A.13.090, there is hereby established for the City of Kenmore the office of city manager. Such office shall be appointive and all appointments to such office shall be made by the city council. [Ord. 98-0011 § 1.]


2.10.020 Duties of city manager.

The city manager shall be the chief executive officer and head of the administrative branch of the City. The city manager shall be responsible to the council for the proper administration of all affairs of the City. The city manager shall have all of the powers and shall perform each and all of the duties specified by Chapter 35A.13 RCW, together with any other duties or authority which may be conferred upon such office by the city council or by the laws of the State of Washington or the ordinances of the City as they now exist or may hereafter be amended. [Ord. 98-0011 § 2.]


2.10.030 City organization.

The city manager is authorized to create, eliminate, consolidate and modify such departments, offices, and employments as from time to time he or she may find necessary or advisable for the efficient operations of the City and may determine the powers and duties of each department or office. The city manager may delegate to such officer any duties required or authorized to be performed by the city manager. [Ord. 98-0011 § 3.]


2.10.040 Appointment as auditing officer.

The city council hereby appoints the city manager as auditing officer. [Ord. 98-0029 § 1.]


Chapter 2.15 CITY CLERK

Sections:

2.15.010    Claims for damages.


2.15.010 Claims for damages.

The city clerk is hereby appointed to be the City agent responsible to receive claims for damages made under Chapter 4.96 RCW. Other than vacation, sick leave, and other temporary absences, the city clerk shall be available to receive claims for damages during normal City Hall business hours at Kenmore City Hall, 6700 NE 181st Street, Kenmore, Washington, 98028-0607. [Ord. 01-0117 § 1.]


Chapter 2.20 LANDMARKS AND HERITAGE COMMISSION

Sections:

2.20.010    Findings and purpose.

2.20.020    Created – Membership and organization.

2.20.030    Definitions.

2.20.040    Designation criteria.

2.20.050    Nomination procedure.

2.20.060    Designation procedure.

2.20.070    Certificate of appropriateness procedure.

2.20.080    Evaluation of economic impact.

2.20.090    Appeal procedure.

2.20.100    Penalty for violation of KMC 2.20.070.

2.20.110    Special valuation for historic properties.

2.20.120    Historic resources – Review process.

2.20.130    Redesignation of existing landmarks.


2.20.010 Findings and purpose.

The city council finds that:

A. The protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of buildings, sites, districts, structures and objects of historical, cultural, architectural, engineering, geographic, ethnic and archaeological significance located in Kenmore is necessary in the interest of the prosperity, civic pride and general welfare of the people of Kenmore.

B. Such cultural and historic resources are a significant part of the heritage, education and economic base of Kenmore, and the economic, cultural and aesthetic well-being of Kenmore cannot be maintained or enhanced by disregarding its heritage and by allowing the unnecessary destruction or defacement of such resources.

C. Present preservation programs and activities are inadequate for insuring present and future generations of Kenmore residents and visitors a genuine opportunity to appreciate and enjoy our heritage.

D. The purposes of this chapter are to:

1. Designate, preserve, protect, enhance, and perpetuate those sites, buildings, districts, structures and objects which reflect a significant element of the cultural, aesthetic, social, economic, political, architectural, ethnic, archaeological, engineering, historic and other heritage of Kenmore, the county, State and nation;

2. Foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past;

3. Stabilize and improve the economic values and vitality of landmarks;

4. Protect and enhance Kenmore’s tourist industry by promoting heritage-related tourism;

5. Promote the continued use, exhibition and interpretation of significant sites, districts, buildings, structures, and objects for the education, inspiration and welfare of the people of Kenmore;

6. Promote and continue incentives for ownership and utilization of landmarks;

7. Assist, encourage and provide incentives to public and private owners for preservation, restoration, rehabilitation and use of landmark buildings, sites, districts, structures and objects;

8. Work cooperatively with other jurisdictions to identify, evaluate and protect historic resources in furtherance of the purposes of this chapter. [Ord. 98-0008 § 1.]


2.20.020 Created – Membership and organization.

A. The King County landmarks and heritage commission established pursuant to Chapter 20.62 of the King County Code is hereby designated and empowered to act as the landmarks commission for Kenmore, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

B. The special member of the King County landmarks and heritage commission provided for in Section 20.62.030 of the King County Code shall be appointed for a three-year term by the mayor, subject to confirmation of the city council. Such special member shall be appointed based on a demonstrated interest and competence in historic preservation. The special member shall serve until his or her successor is duly appointed and confirmed. In the event of a vacancy, an appointment shall be made to fill the vacancy in the manner set forth in this section, and the person appointed to fill the vacancy shall hold the position for the remainder of the unexpired term. Such special member may be reappointed, but may not serve more than two consecutive three-year terms. The special member shall be deemed to have served one full term if he or she resigns at any time after his or her appointment, or if the special member serves more than two years of an unexpired term. The special members of the commission shall serve without compensation except for out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with commission meetings or programs, which expenses shall be reimbursed by the City of Kenmore.

C. The commission shall not conduct any public hearings required under this chapter with respect to properties located within the City of Kenmore until the commission’s rules, regulations and procedures, consistent with this chapter, have been filed with the city clerk. [Ord. 98-0008 § 2.]


2.20.030 Definitions.

The following words and terms shall, when used in this chapter, be defined as follows unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:

A. “Alteration” is any construction, demolition, removal, modification, excavation, restoration or remodeling of a landmark.

B. “Building” is a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel, or similar structure. Building may refer to an historically related complex, such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn.

C. “Certificate of appropriateness” is written authorization issued by the commission or its designee permitting an alteration to a significant feature of a designated landmark.

D. “Commission” is the landmarks and heritage commission created by this chapter.

E. “Community landmark” is an historic resource which has been designated pursuant to KMC 2.20.040 but which may be altered or changed without application for or approval of a certificate of appropriateness.

F. “Council” is the Kenmore city council.

G. “Designation” is the act of the commission determining that an historic resource meets the criteria established by this chapter.

H. “Designation report” is a report issued by the commission after a public hearing setting forth its determination to designate a landmark and specifying the significant feature or features thereof.

I. “Director” or “manager” is the person or officer who approves building permits for the City, or his or her designee.

J. “District” is a geographically definable area, urban or rural, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history.

K. “Heritage” is a discipline relating to history, ethnic history, traditional cultures, folklore, archaeology and historic preservation.

L. “Historic preservation officer” is the City of Kenmore historic preservation officer or his or her designee.

M. “Historic resource” is a district, site, building, structure or object significant in national, State or local history, architecture, archaeology, and culture.

N. “Historic resource inventory” is an organized compilation of information on historic resources considered to be significant according to the criteria listed in KMC 2.20.040(A). The historic resource inventory is kept on file by the historic preservation officer and is updated from time to time to include newly eligible resources and to reflect changes to resources.

O. “Incentives” are such compensation, rights or privileges, or combination thereof, which the council, or other local, State or federal public body or agency, by virtue of applicable present or future legislation, may be authorized to grant to or obtain for the owner(s) of designated landmarks. Examples of economic incentives include but are not limited to tax relief, conditional use permits, rezoning, street vacation, planned unit development, transfer of development rights, facade easements, gifts, preferential leasing policies, private or public grants-in-aid, beneficial placement of public improvements, or amenities, or the like.

P. “Interested person of record” is any individual, corporation, partnership or association which notifies the commission or the council in writing of its interest in any matter before the commission.

Q. “Landmark” is an historic resource designated as a landmark pursuant to KMC 2.20.060.

R. “Nomination” is a proposal that an historic resource be designated a landmark.

S. “Object” is a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical, or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment.

T. “Owner” is a person having a fee simple interest, a substantial beneficial interest of record or a substantial beneficial interest known to the commission in an historic resource. Where the owner is a public agency or government, that agency shall specify the person or persons to receive notices hereunder.

U. “Person” is any individual, partnership, corporation, group or association.

V. “Person in charge” is the person or persons in possession of a landmark including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, an assignee of rents, a receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, tenant, agent, or any other person directly or indirectly in control of the landmark.

W. “Preliminary determination” is a decision of the commission determining that an historic resource which has been nominated for designation is of significant value and is likely to satisfy the criteria for designation.

X. “Significant feature” is any element of a landmark which the commission has designated pursuant to this chapter as of importance to the historic, architectural or archaeological value of the landmark.

Y. “Site” is the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains an historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structures.

Z. “Structure” is any functional construction made usually for purposes other than creating human shelter. [Ord. 98-0008 § 3(A) (KCC 20.62.020).]


2.20.040 Designation criteria.

A. An historic resource may be designated as a City of Kenmore landmark if it is more than 40 years old or, in the case of a landmark district, contains resources that are more than 40 years old, and possesses integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association, and:

1. Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of national, State or local history; or

2. Is associated with the lives of persons significant in national, State or local history; or

3. Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, style or method of design or construction, or that represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or

4. Has yielded or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history; or

5. Is an outstanding work of a designer or builder who has made a substantial contribution to the art.

B. An historic resource may be designated a community landmark because it is an easily identifiable visual feature of a neighborhood or the City and contributes to the distinctive quality or identity of such neighborhood or City or because of its association with significant historical events or historic themes, association with important or prominent persons in the community or City, or recognition by local citizens for substantial contribution to the neighborhood or community. An improvement or site qualifying for designation solely by virtue of satisfying criteria set out in this section shall be designated a community landmark and shall not be subject to the provisions of KMC 2.20.070.

C. Cemeteries, birthplaces, or graves of historical figures, properties owned by religious institutions or used for religious purposes, structures that have been moved from their original locations, reconstructed historic buildings, properties primarily commemorative in nature, and properties that have achieved significance within the past 40 years shall not be considered eligible for designation. However, such a property shall be eligible for designation if they are an integral part of districts that meet the criteria set out in subsection (A) of this section or if it is:

1. A religious property deriving primary significance from architectural or artistic distinction or historical importance; or

2. A building or structure removed from its original location but which is significant primarily for its architectural value, or which is the surviving structure most importantly associated with a historic person or event; or

3. A birthplace, grave or residence of a historical figure of outstanding importance if there is no other appropriate site or building directly associated with his or her productive life; or

4. A cemetery that derives its primary significance from graves of persons of transcendent importance, from age, from distinctive design features, or from association with historic events; or

5. A reconstructed building when accurately executed in a suitable environment and presented in a dignified manner or as part of a restoration master plan, and when no other building or structure with the same association has survived; or

6. A property commemorative in intent if design, age, tradition, or symbolic value has invested it with its own historical significance; or

7. A property achieving significance within the past 40 years if it is of exceptional importance. [Ord. 98-0008 § 3(B) (KCC 20.62.040).]


2.20.050 Nomination procedure.

A. Any person, including the historic preservation officer and any member of the commission, may nominate an historic resource for designation as a landmark or community landmark. The procedures set forth in this section and KMC 2.20.070 may be used to amend existing designations or to terminate an existing designation based on changes which affect the applicability of the criteria for designation set forth in KMC 2.20.040. The nomination or designation of an historic resource as a landmark shall constitute nomination or designation of the land which is occupied by the historic resource unless the nomination provides otherwise. Nominations shall be made on official nomination forms provided by the historic preservation officer shall be filed with the historic preservation officer, and shall include all data required by the commission.

B. Upon receipt by the historic preservation officer of any nomination for designation, the officer shall review the nomination, consult with the person or persons submitting the nomination, and the owner, and prepare any amendments to or additional information on the nomination deemed necessary by the officer. The historic preservation officer may refuse to accept any nomination for which inadequate information is provided by the person or persons submitting the nomination. It is the responsibility of the person or persons submitting the nomination to perform such research as is necessary for consideration by the commission. The historic preservation officer may assume responsibility for gathering the required information or appoint an expert or experts to carry out this research in the interest of expediting the consideration.

C. When the historic preservation officer is satisfied that the nomination contains sufficient information and complies with the commission’s regulations for nomination, the officer shall give notice in writing, certified mail/return receipt requested, to the owner of the property or object, to the person submitting the nomination and interested persons of record that a preliminary or a designation determination on the nomination will be made by the commission. The notice shall include:

1. The date, time, and place of hearing;

2. The address and description of the historic resource and the boundaries of the nominated resource;

3. A statement that, upon a designation or upon a preliminary determination of significance, the certificate of appropriateness procedure set out in KMC 2.20.070 will apply;

4. A statement that, upon a designation or a preliminary determination of significance, no significant feature may be changed without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the commission, whether or not a building or other permit is required. A copy of the provisions of KMC 2.20.070 shall be included with the notice;

5. A statement that all proceedings to review the action of the commission at the hearing on a preliminary determination or a designation will be based on the record made at such hearing and that no further right to present evidence on the issue of preliminary determination or designation is afforded pursuant to this chapter.

D. The historic preservation officer shall, after mailing the notice required herein, refer the nomination and all supporting information to the commission for consideration on the date specified in the notice. No nomination shall be considered by the commission less than 30 nor more than 45 calendar days after notice setting the hearing date has been mailed except where the historic preservation officer or members of the commission have reason to believe that immediate action is necessary to prevent destruction, demolition or defacing of an historic resource, in which case the notice setting the hearing shall so state. [Ord. 98-0008 § 3(C) (KCC 20.62.050).]


2.20.060 Designation procedure.

A. The commission may approve, deny, amend or terminate the designation of an historic resource as a landmark or community landmark only after a public hearing. At the designation hearing the commission shall receive evidence and hear argument only on the issues of whether the historic resource meets the criteria for designation of landmarks or community landmarks as specified in KMC 2.20.040 and merits designation as a landmark or community landmark and the significant features of the landmark. The hearing may be continued from time to time in the discretion of the commission. In the event the hearing is continued, the commission may make a preliminary determination of significance if the commission determines, based on the record before it that the historic resource is of significant value and likely to satisfy the criteria for designation set out in KMC 2.20.040. Such preliminary determination shall be effective as of the date of the public hearing at which it is made. Where the commission makes a preliminary determination it shall specify the boundaries of the nominated resource, the significant features thereof, and such other description of the historic resource as it deems appropriate. Within five working days after the commission has made a preliminary determination, the historic preservation officer shall file a written notice of such action with the manager and mail copies of the same, certified mail/return receipt requested, to the owner, the person submitting the nomination and interested persons of record. Such notice shall include:

1. A copy of the commission’s preliminary determination;

2. A statement that while proceedings pursuant to this chapter are pending, or six months from the date of the notice, whichever is shorter, and thereafter if the designation is approved by the commission, the certificate of appropriateness procedures set out in KMC 2.20.070, a copy of which shall be enclosed, shall apply to the described historic resource whether or not a building or other permit is required. The decision of the commission shall be made after the close of the public hearing or at the next regularly scheduled public meeting of the commission thereafter.

B. Whenever the commission approves the designation of an historic resource under consideration for designation as a landmark, it shall, within 14 calendar days of the public meeting at which the decision is made, issue a written designation report which shall include:

1. The boundaries of the nominated resource and such other description of the resource sufficient to identify its ownership and location;

2. The significant features and such other information concerning the historic resource as the commission deems appropriate;

3. Findings of fact and reasons supporting the designation with specific reference to the criteria for designation set forth in KMC 2.20.040;

4. A statement that no significant feature may be changed, whether or not a building or other permit is required, without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the commission pursuant to the provisions of KMC 2.20.070, a copy of which shall be included in the designation report. This subsection shall not apply to historic resources designated as community landmarks.

C. Whenever the commission rejects the nomination of an historic resource under consideration for designation as a landmark, it shall, within 14 calendar days of the public meeting at which the decision is made, issue a written decision including findings of fact and reasons supporting its determination that the criteria set forth in KMC 2.20.040 have not been met. If an historic resource has been nominated as a landmark and the commission designates such historic resource as a community landmark, such designation shall be treated as a rejection of the nomination for City of Kenmore landmark status and the foregoing requirement for a written decision shall apply. Nothing contained herein shall prevent renominating any historic resource rejected under this subsection as a City of Kenmore landmark at a future time.

D. A copy of the commission’s designation report or decision rejecting a nomination shall be delivered or mailed to the owner, to interested persons of record and the director within five working days after it is issued. If the commission rejects the nomination and it has made a preliminary determination of significance with respect to such nomination, it shall include in the notice to the director a statement that the provisions of KMC 2.20.070 no longer apply to the subject historic resources.

E. If the commission approves or amends a landmark designation, the provisions of KMC 2.20.070 shall apply as approved or amended. A copy of the commission’s designation report or designation amendment shall be filed with the division of records and elections together with a legal description of the designated resource and notification that the provisions of KMC 2.20.070 and 2.20.100 apply. If the commission terminates the designation of an historic resource, the provisions of KMC 2.20.070 shall no longer apply to said historic resource. [Ord. 98-0008 § 3(D) (KCC 20.62.070).]


2.20.070 Certificate of appropriateness procedure.

A. At any time after a designation report and notice has been filed with the director and for a period of six months after notice of a preliminary determination of significance has been mailed to the owner and filed with the director, a certificate of appropriateness must be obtained from the commission before any alterations may be made to the significant features of the landmark identified in the preliminary determination report or thereafter in the designation report. The designation report shall supersede the preliminary determination report. This requirement shall apply whether or not the proposed alteration also requires a building or other permit. The requirements of this section shall not apply to any historic resource located within the City of Kenmore, except as provided by applicable interlocal agreement.

B. Ordinary repairs and maintenance which do not alter the appearance of a significant feature and do not utilize substitute materials do not require a certificate of appropriateness. Repairs to or replacement of utility systems do not require a certificate of appropriateness; provided, that such work does not alter an exterior significant feature.

C. There shall be three types of certificates of appropriateness, as follows:

1. Type I, for restorations and major repairs which utilize in-kind materials.

2. Type II, for alterations in appearance, replacement of historic materials and new construction.

3. Type III, for demolition, moving and excavation of archaeological sites.

D. In addition, the commission shall establish and adopt an appeals process concerning Type I decisions made by the historic preservation officer with respect to the applications for certificates of appropriateness.

E. The historic preservation officer may approve Type I certificates of appropriateness administratively without public hearing, subject to procedures adopted by the commission. Alternatively the historic preservation officer may refer applications for Type I certificates of appropriateness to the commission for decision. The commission shall adopt an appeals procedure concerning Type I decisions made by the historic preservation officer.

F. Type II and III certificates of appropriateness shall be decided by the commission and the following general procedures shall apply to such commission actions:

1. Application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be made by filing an application for such certificate with the historic preservation officer on forms provided by the commission.

2. If an application is made to the director for a permit for any action which affects a landmark, the director shall promptly refer such application to the historic preservation officer, and such application shall be deemed an application for a certificate of appropriateness if accompanied by the additional information required to apply for such certificate. The director may continue to process such permit application, but shall not issue any such permit until the time has expired for filing with the director the notice of denial of a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of appropriateness has been issued pursuant to this chapter.

3. After the commission has commenced proceedings for the consideration of any application for a certificate of appropriateness by giving notice of a hearing pursuant to subsection (F)(4) of this section, no other application for the same or a similar alteration may be made until such proceedings and all administrative appeals therefrom pursuant to this chapter have been concluded.

4. Within 45 calendar days after the filing of an application for a certificate of appropriateness with the commission or the referral of an application to the commission by the director except those decided administratively by the historic preservation officer pursuant to subsection (F)(2) of this section, the commission shall hold a public hearing thereon. The historic preservation officer shall mail notice of the hearing to the owner, the applicant, if the applicant is not the owner, and parties of record at the designation proceedings, not less than 10 calendar days before the date of the hearing. No hearing shall be required if the commission, the owner and the applicant, if the applicant is not the owner, agree in writing to a stipulated certificate approving the requested alterations thereof. This agreement shall be ratified by the commission in a public meeting and reflected in the commission meeting minutes. If the commission grants a certificate of appropriateness, such certificate shall be issued forthwith and the historic preservation officer shall promptly file a copy of such certificate with the director.

5. If the commission denies the application for a certificate of appropriateness, in whole or in part, it shall so notify the owner, the person submitting the application and interested persons of record setting forth the reasons why approval of the application is not warranted. [Ord. 98-0008 § 3(E) (KCC 20.62.080).]


2.20.080 Evaluation of economic impact.

A. At the public hearing on any application for a Type II or Type III certificate of appropriateness, or Type I if referred to the commission by the historic preservation officer, the commission shall, when requested by the property owner, consider evidence of the economic impact on the owner of the denial or partial denial of a certificate. In no case may a certificate be denied, in whole or in part, when it is established that the denial or partial denial will, when available incentives are utilized, deprive the owner of a reasonable economic use of the landmark and there is no viable and reasonable alternative which would have less impact on the features of significance specified in the preliminary determination report or the designation report.

B. To prove the existence of a condition of unreasonable economic return, the applicant must establish and the commission must find both of the following:

1. The landmark is incapable of earning a reasonable economic return without making the alterations proposed. This finding shall be made by considering and the applicant shall submit to the commission evidence establishing each of the following factors:

a. The current level of economic return on the landmark as considered in relation to the following:

(1) The amount paid for the landmark, the date of purchase, and party from whom purchased, including a description of the relationship, if any, between the owner and the person from whom the landmark was purchased;

(2) The annual gross and net income, if any, from the landmark for the previous five years, itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous five years, and depreciation deduction and annual cash flow before and after debt service, if any, during the same period;

(3) The remaining balance on any mortgage or other financing secured by the landmark and annual debt service, if any, during the prior five years;

(4) Real estate taxes for the previous four years and assessed value of the landmark according to the two most recent assessed valuations;

(5) All appraisals obtained within the previous three years by the owner in connection with the purchase, financing or ownership of the landmark;

(6) The fair market value of the landmark immediately prior to its designation and the fair market value of the landmark (in its protected status as a designated landmark) at the time the application is filed;

(7) Form of ownership or operation of the landmark, whether sole proprietorship, for profit or not-for-profit corporation, limited partnership, joint venture, or both;

(8) Any State or federal income tax returns on or relating to the landmark for the past two years.

b. The landmark is not marketable or able to be sold when listed for sale or lease. The sale price asked, and offers received, if any, within the previous two years, including testimony and relevant documents shall be submitted by the property owner. The following also shall be considered:

(1) Any real estate broker or firm engaged to sell or lease the landmark;

(2) Reasonableness of the price or lease sought by the owner;

(3) Any advertisements placed for the sale or lease of the landmark.

c. The infeasibility of alternative uses that can earn a reasonable economic return for the landmark as considered in relation to the following:

(1) A report from a licensed engineer or architect with experience in historic restoration or rehabilitation as to the structural soundness of the landmark and its suitability for restoration or rehabilitation;

(2) Estimates of the proposed cost of the proposed alteration and an estimate of any additional cost that would be incurred to comply with the recommendation and decision of the commission concerning the appropriateness of the proposed alteration;

(3) Estimated market value of the landmark in the current condition after completion of the proposed alteration, and, in the case of proposed demolition, after renovation of the landmark for continued use;

(4) In the case of proposed demolition, the testimony of an architect, developer, real estate consultant, appraiser or other real estate professional experienced in historic restoration or rehabilitation as to the economic feasibility of rehabilitation or re-use of the existing landmark;

(5) The infeasibility of new construction around, above, or below the historic resource.

d. Potential economic incentives and/or funding available to the owner through federal, State, county, City or private programs.

2. The owner has the present intent and the secured financial ability, demonstrated by appropriate documentary evidence to complete the alteration.

C. Notwithstanding the foregoing enumerated factors, the property owner may demonstrate other appropriate factors applicable to economic return.

D. Upon reasonable notice to the owner, the commission may appoint an expert or experts to provide advice and/or testimony concerning the value of the landmark, the availability of incentives and the economic impacts of approval, denial or partial denial of a certificate of appropriateness.

E. Any adverse economic impact caused intentionally or by willful neglect shall not constitute a basis for granting a certificate of appropriateness. [Ord. 98-0008 § 3(F) (KCC 20.62.100).]


2.20.090 Appeal procedure.

A. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the commission designating or rejecting a nomination for designation of a landmark or issuing or denying a certificate of appropriateness may, within 35 calendar days of mailing of notice of such designation or rejection of nomination, or of such issuance or denial or approval of a certificate of appropriateness appeal such decision in writing to the council. The written notice of appeal shall be filed with the historic preservation officer and the city clerk and shall be accompanied by a statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal, supporting documents, and argument.

B. If, after examination of the written appeal and the record, the council determines that an error in fact may exist in the record, it shall remand the proceeding to the commission for reconsideration or, if the council determines that the decision of the commission is based on an error in judgment or conclusion, it may modify or reverse the decision of the commission.

C. The council’s decision shall be based solely upon the record; provided, that the council may at its discretion publicly request additional information of the appellant, the commission or the historic preservation officer.

D. The council shall take final action on any appeal from a decision of the commission by adoption of an ordinance, and when so doing, it shall make and enter findings of fact from the record and reasons therefrom which support its action. The council may adopt all or portions of the commission’s findings and conclusions.

E. The action of the council sustaining, reversing, modifying or remanding a decision of the commission shall be final unless within 20 calendar days from the date of the action an aggrieved person obtains a writ of certiorari from the superior court of King County, State of Washington, for the purpose of review of the action taken. [Ord. 98-0008 § 3(G) (KCC 20.62.110).]


2.20.100 Penalty for violation of KMC 2.20.070.

Any person violating or failing to comply with the provisions of KMC 2.20.070 shall incur a civil penalty of up to $500.00 per day and each day’s violation or failure to comply shall constitute a separate offense; provided, however, that no penalty shall be imposed for any violation or failure to comply which occurs during the pendency of legal proceedings filed in any court challenging the validity of the provision or provisions of this chapter, as to which such violations or failure to comply is charged. [Ord. 98-0008 § 3(H) (KCC 20.62.130).]


2.20.110 Special valuation for historic properties.

A. There is hereby established and implemented a special valuation for historic properties as provided in Chapter 221, 1986 Laws of Washington and Chapter 84.26 RCW.

B. The City of Kenmore landmarks and heritage commission is hereby designated as the “local review board” for the purposes related to Chapter 221, 1986 Laws of Washington, and is authorized to perform all functions required by Chapter 221, 1986 Laws of Washington, Chapter 84.26 RCW, and Chapter 254-20 WAC.

C. All City of Kenmore landmarks designated and protected under authority of King County Ordinance 4828 and this chapter shall be eligible for special valuation as set forth in Chapter 221, 1986 Laws of Washington and Chapter 84.26 RCW. [Ord. 98-0008 § 3(I) (KCC 20.62.140).]


2.20.120 Historic resources – Review process.

A. The City shall not approve any development proposal or otherwise issue any authorization to alter, demolish, or relocate any historic resource identified in the City historic resource inventory, pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. The development standards contained in KMC Title 18 may be modified, when necessary, to preserve the aesthetic, visual and historic integrity of the historic resource from the impacts of development on adjacent properties.

B. Upon receipt of an application for a development proposal located on or adjacent to a historic resource listed in the City of Kenmore historic resource inventory, the director shall follow the following procedure:

1. The development proposal application shall be circulated to the City of Kenmore historic preservation officer for comment on the impact of the project on historic resources and for recommendation on mitigation. This includes all permits for alterations to historic buildings, alteration to landscape elements, new construction on the same or abutting lots, or any other action requiring a permit which might affect the historic character of the resource. Information required for a complete permit application to be circulated to the historic preservation officer shall include:

a. A vicinity map;

b. A site plan showing the location of all buildings, structures, and landscape features;

c. A brief description of the proposed project together with architectural drawings showing the existing condition of all buildings, structures, landscape features and any proposed alteration to them;

d. Photographs of all buildings, structures, or landscape features on the site; and

e. An environmental checklist, except where categorically exempt under City of Kenmore SEPA guidelines.

2. Upon request, the historic preservation officer shall provide information about available grant assistance and tax incentives for historic preservation. The officer may also provide the owner, developer, or other interested party with examples of comparable projects where historic resources have been restored or rehabilitated.

3. In the event of a conflict between the development proposal and preservation of an historic resource, the historic preservation officer shall:

a. Suggest appropriate alternatives to the owner/developer which achieve the goals of historic preservation.

b. Recommend approval, or approval with conditions, to the director of the department of community development; or

c. Propose that a resource be nominated for City landmark designation according to procedures established in this chapter.

4. The director may continue to process the development proposal application, but shall not issue any development permits or issue a SEPA threshold determination until receiving a recommendation from the historic preservation officer. In no event shall review of the proposal by the historic preservation officer delay permit processing beyond any period required by law.

5. On known archaeological sites, before any disturbance of the site, including, but not limited to, test boring, site clearing, construction, grading or revegetation, the State Office of Archaeology and Historic Preservation (OAHP), and the City of Kenmore historic preservation officer, and appropriate Native American tribal organizations must be notified and State permits obtained, if required by law. The officer may require that a professional archaeological survey be conducted to identify site boundaries, resources and mitigation alternatives prior to any site disturbance and that a technical report be provided to the officer, OAHP and appropriate tribal organizations. The officer may approve, disapprove or require permits conditions, including professional archeological surveys, to mitigate adverse impacts to known archeological sites. [Ord. 11-0329 § 5; Ord. 98-0008 § 3(J) (KCC 20.62.150).]


2.20.130 Redesignation of existing landmarks.

All landmarks designated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter located within the Kenmore City limits shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 98-0008 § 4.]


Chapter 2.25 TRAVEL ADVANCES

Sections:

2.25.010    Account established.

2.25.020    Initial appropriation – Replenishment.

2.25.030    Finance director – Responsibilities.

2.25.040    Request for advance.

2.25.050    Claim for expense.

2.25.060    Lien against funds payable to officials and employees.

2.25.070    Purposes of travel expense advance.

2.25.080    Termination of account.

2.25.090    Rules authorized.


2.25.010 Account established.

Pursuant to RCW 42.24.120, et seq., there is hereby created and established a revolving account to be known as the “advance travel expense account.” Such account shall be used solely for the purpose of making advance payments for the travel expenses of elected officials and City employees in excess of $100.00. [Ord. 01-0112 § 1.]


2.25.020 Initial appropriation – Replenishment.

There will be an initial transfer within the General Fund #001 in the amount of $2,000 to the advance travel expense account. From time to time, as the account is depleted by advance payments for travel expenses, the account will be replenished by check or budgetary transfers from the appropriate City department. [Ord. 01-0112 § 2.]


2.25.030 Finance director – Responsibilities.

The finance director shall be the custodian of the account and responsible for supervising all transactions thereof. All advances made from the account shall be made in accordance with the rules and regulations prescribed by the State Auditor’s Office and the rules authorized to be established by this chapter. The advance travel expense account shall be maintained in the City bank account and advances to elected officials or City employees will be by check made payable to the official or employee. [Ord. 01-0112 § 3.]


2.25.040 Request for advance. 

Whenever it becomes necessary for an elected official or City employee to travel and incur expenses in excess of $100.00, that person may request a reasonable amount of funds in advance of said expenditure. The request for advances shall be made on forms prescribed by the finance director. [Ord. 01-0112 § 4.]


2.25.050 Claim for expense. 

On or before the fifteenth day following the close of the authorized travel period for which expenses have been advanced to any official or employee, that person shall submit to the finance director or city manager (for city council members) a fully itemized claim expense voucher for all reimbursable items legally expended, accompanied by vendor receipts and the unexpended portion of such advance, if any. Any advance made for this purpose, or any portion thereof, not repaid or accounted for in the time and manner specified herein shall bear interest at the rate of 10 percent per year from the date of default until paid. No advance of any kind shall be made to any official or employee at any time when that person is delinquent in accounting for or repaying a prior advance authorized under this chapter. [Ord. 01-0112 § 5.]


2.25.060 Lien against funds payable to officials and employees. 

To protect the City from any losses on account of travel expense advances, the City shall have a prior lien against a right to withhold any and all funds payable or to become payable by the City to any official or employee to whom such advance has been given up to the amount of such advance and interest at the rate of 10 percent per year until such time as repayment has been made. [Ord. 01-0112 § 6.]


2.25.070 Purposes of travel expense advance.

A travel expense advance shall be considered as having been made to an elected official or City employee to be expended as an agent of the City and for the City’s purposes only, and specifically to defray necessary costs in the performance of official duties. No such advance shall be considered as a personal loan to such official or employee and any expenditure thereof, other than for official business purposes, shall be considered a misappropriation of public funds. [Ord. 01-0112 § 7.]


2.25.080 Termination of account. 

In the event of termination of the advance travel expense account, any balance remaining in the account at the time of termination will revert to the general fund. [Ord. 01-0112 § 8.]


2.25.090 Rules authorized. 

The finance director is authorized to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the operation and management of the advance travel expense account and to prepare appropriate forms for transactions involving such account. [Ord. 01-0112 § 9.]


Chapter 2.30 PLANNING COMMISSION

Sections:

2.30.010    Planning commission created.

2.30.020    Membership.

2.30.030    Meeting.

2.30.040    Duties and responsibilities.


2.30.010 Planning commission created.

There is hereby created a planning commission consisting of seven voting members to provide guidance and recommendations to the City on policy matters relative to the amendment of the City’s comprehensive plan and related land use regulations. [Ord. 06-0255 § 2.]


2.30.020 Membership.

A. Number of Members. The planning commission shall consist of seven voting members, each of whom shall serve for a period of three years. The city council, when making initial appointments, may select some members for two- or three-year terms to stagger appointments.

B. Appointment. All members of the planning commission shall be appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of, a majority of the city council. All planning commission members shall serve without compensation. All members of the planning commission shall be Kenmore residents. The city council shall attempt, but shall not be obligated, to appoint planning commission members so that all geographic areas of the City are represented and the commission has broad demographic representation.

C. Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled by the city council.

D. Chair and Vice Chair. For the first year, the city council shall appoint from among the planning commission members a chair who shall preside at all meetings and a vice chair who shall preside in the absence of the chair. Thereafter, members of the planning commission shall nominate and vote for the chair and vice chair positions. Service as commission chair is limited to 36 months in every 48 consecutive months. [Ord. 19-0477 § 2; Ord. 06-0255 § 2.]


2.30.030 Meeting.

A. The planning commission shall hold such regular and special meetings as may be necessary to complete its responsibilities. A majority of the planning commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and a majority vote of voting members present shall be necessary to carry any motion.

B. The planning commission shall adopt such rules and regulations as are necessary for the conduct of its business. [Ord. 06-0255 § 2.]


2.30.040 Duties and responsibilities.

A. The planning commission shall be an advisory body to the city council responsible for the review and making policy recommendations relating to amendment to the comprehensive plan and related land use regulations.

The planning commission shall provide annual reports to the city council on execution of its duties and responsibilities.

B. The planning commission shall have the authority to review and study proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan and development regulations that are included in a city council- approved annual docket work program for each year. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing, deliberate, and make recommendations to the city council on said proposals. [Ord. 06-0255 § 2.]


Chapter 2.35 LIBRARY ADVISORY BOARD

(Repealed by Ord. 17-0439)


Chapter 2.40 SALARY COMMISSION

Sections:

2.40.010    Created – Appointment.

2.40.020    Membership – Term –Qualifications.

2.40.030    Duties – Process.

2.40.040    Vacancies.

2.40.050    Removal.


2.40.010 Created – Appointment.

There is created a salary commission for the City, consisting of three voting members who shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. [Ord. 10-0306 § 1.]


2.40.020 Membership – Term –Qualifications.

A. The term of a salary commission member shall be for one salary review, as provided in KMC 2.40.030. The term shall commence upon city council confirmation and shall terminate upon filing of the statement of salaries with the city clerk, as provided in KMC 2.40.030. A member shall serve without compensation.

B. For each salary review, conducted once every five years as provided in KMC 2.40.030, the mayor shall appoint and the city council shall approve a salary commission.

C. No member of the salary commission shall be appointed to more than two terms.

D. A member of the salary commission shall not be an officer, official or employee of the City or an immediate family member of an officer, official or employee of the City. For purposes of this section, “immediate family member” means the parents, spouse, siblings, children, or dependent relatives of an officer, official, or employee of the City, whether or not living in the household of the officer, official, or employee. [Ord. 10-0306 § 1.]


2.40.030 Duties – Process.

A. Every five years, commencing in 2010, the salary commission shall review and determine the salaries paid by the City to the mayor and city council. The salary commission shall convene and determine the salaries paid to the mayor and the city council within 45 days of confirmation by the city council. The 45-day review and determination time may be extended upon request of the salary commission and approval by the city council.

B. All meetings of the salary commission shall be conducted pursuant to Robert’s Rules of Order, Newly Revised 10th Edition. The meetings shall be subject to the Open Meetings Act and shall be open to the public. The meetings shall be held in the same location as city council regular meetings. The salary commission shall provide an opportunity for citizens of the City to comment on the salaries of the mayor and city council prior to taking a final vote on such salaries.

C. After determining the salaries of the mayor and the city council, the salary commission shall file a statement of the salaries with the city clerk. A salary increase shall be effective on the next payday for City employees. A salary decrease shall be effective at the commencement of the next subsequent term of office.

D. Any increase or decrease in salary shall become effective without further action of the city council, and shall supersede any salary set forth in a City ordinance related to the budget or the salaries of the mayor and city council members. [Ord. 10-0306 § 1.]


2.40.040 Vacancies.

In the event of a vacancy in the office of salary commissioner, the mayor shall appoint, subject to approval of the city council, a person to serve the unexpired portion of the term. [Ord. 10-0306 § 1.]


2.40.050 Removal.

The city council may remove a member of the salary commission from office for cause of incapacity, incompetence, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. [Ord. 10-0306 § 1.]


Chapter 2.45 CITY COUNCIL

Sections:

2.45.010    Regular meetings.


2.45.010 Regular meetings.

The city council shall hold its regular meetings, commencing at 7:00 p.m. on the second, third, and fourth Monday of each month. Meetings shall be held at the Northshore Utility District, 6830 NE 185th Street, Kenmore, Washington 98028, until the new City Hall is opened for business. Meetings shall be held at the new City Hall, 18120 68th Avenue NE, Kenmore, on or after the date City Hall is opened for business, as established by motion of the city council. Regular meetings may be held at such other times and locations as may be fixed by the city council. If a regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, the regular meeting shall be held on the first business day following such regular meeting date, at the same time and place. [Ord. 10-0307 § 1.]


Chapter 2.50 INDEMNIFICATION OF EMPLOYEES AND APPOINTED AND ELECTED CITY OFFICIALS

Sections: 

2.50.010    Authorization.

2.50.020    Definitions.

2.50.030    Legal representation.

2.50.040    Exclusions.

2.50.050    Determination of exclusion.

2.50.060    Representation and payment of claims – Conditions.

2.50.070    Effect of compliance with conditions.

2.50.080    Failure to comply with conditions.

2.50.090    Reimbursement of incurred expenses.

2.50.100    Conflict with provisions of insurance policies.

2.50.110    Pending claims.

2.50.120    Modification of chapter.


2.50.010 Authorization.

There is hereby created a procedure to provide for indemnification and for defense of claims of liability arising from acts or omissions of officials or employees of the City, while performed or in good faith purported to have been performed in the scope of the official duties of such officials or employees. [Ord. 13-0358 § 1 (Att. A).]


2.50.020 Definitions.

Unless the context indicates otherwise, the words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

A. “Employee” means any person who is or has been employed by the City.

B. “Official” means any person who is serving or has served as an elected City official, and any person who is serving or who has served as an appointed member of any City board, commission, committee or any other appointed position within the City. [Ord. 13-0358 § 1 (Att. A).]


2.50.030 Legal representation.

A. The City shall provide to an official or employee, subject to the conditions and requirements of this chapter and notwithstanding the fact that such official or employee may have concluded service or employment with the City, such legal representation as may be reasonably necessary to defend a claim or lawsuit filed against such official or employee resulting from any conduct, act or omission of such official or employee performed or omitted on behalf of the City in his or her capacity as a City official or employee, which act or omission is within the scope of his or her service or employment with the City.

B. The legal services shall be provided by the city attorney unless:

1. Any provision of an applicable policy of insurance provides otherwise; or

2. The city manager, upon consultation with the city attorney, appoints alternate legal counsel. [Ord. 13-0358 § 1 (Att. A).]


2.50.040 Exclusions.

A. Except as otherwise determined pursuant to KMC 2.50.030, in no event shall protection be offered under this chapter by the City to or involving:

1. Any dishonest, fraudulent, criminal, willful, intentional or malicious act or course of conduct of an official or employee;

2. Any act or course of conduct of an official or employee which is not performed on behalf of the City;

3. Any act or course of conduct which is outside the scope of an official or employee’s service or employment with the City;

4. Any lawsuit brought against an official or employee by or on behalf of the City; or

5. Any action or omission contrary to or not in furtherance of any adopted City policy.

B. The provisions of this chapter shall have no force or effect with respect to any accident, occurrence or circumstance for which the City or the official or employee is insured from whatever source against loss or damages; provided, that the provisions of this chapter shall apply in the event the loss or damages fall within the deductible or exclusion(s) of the City’s applicable policy of insurance. The provisions of this chapter are intended to be secondary to any contract or policy of insurance whether owned by or otherwise applicable to any official or employee. The City shall have the right to require an official or employee to fully utilize any such policy protection prior to requesting the protection afforded by this chapter. [Ord. 13-0358 § 1 (Att. A).]


2.50.050 Determination of exclusion.

The determination of whether an official or employee shall be afforded a defense by the City under the terms of this chapter shall be made by the city council on the recommendation of the city manager. The decision of the city council shall be rendered within 20 days of notice of the request for defense/indemnification, shall be final as a legislative determination and shall be based upon a finding that an official or employee meets or does not meet the criteria of this chapter. Nothing herein shall preclude the City from undertaking an official’s or employee’s defense under a reservation of rights. The determination as to whether a defense is to be furnished as provided under this chapter to a member or to members of the city council shall be made without the vote of such member or members of the city council unless the inclusion of such member or members is required for a quorum; provided, that if a claim or lawsuit affects a quorum or greater number of the members of the city council, all such affected members shall retain their voting privileges under this section. [Ord. 13-0358 § 1 (Att. A).]


2.50.060 Representation and payment of claims – Conditions.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply only when the following conditions are met:

A. In the event of any incident or course of conduct potentially giving rise to a claim for damages, or for the commencement of a lawsuit, the official or employee involved shall, as soon as practicable, give the city manager written notice thereof, identifying the official or employee involved, all information known to the official employee involved with respect to the date, time, place and circumstances surrounding the incident or conduct giving rise to the potential claim or lawsuit, as well as the names and addresses of all persons allegedly injured or otherwise damaged thereby, and the names and addresses of all witnesses;

B. Upon receipt thereof, the official or employee shall forthwith deliver any claim, demand, notice, summons or other process relating to any such incident or conduct to the city manager, and shall cooperate with the city attorney, or if the city attorney authorizes or designates another attorney to handle the matter, with that attorney, and, upon request, assist in making settlement of any suit and enforcing any claim for any right of subrogation against any persons or organizations that may be liable to the City because of any damages or claim of loss arising from the incident or course of conduct, including but not limited to rights of recovery for costs and attorney’s fees arising out of State or federal statute upon a determination that the lawsuit brought was frivolous in nature;

C. Such official or employee shall attend interviews, depositions, hearings and trials and shall assist in securing and giving evidence and obtaining assistance of witnesses, all without any additional compensation to the official or employee, and in the event that an employee has left the employ of the City, no fee or compensation shall be provided; and

D. Such official or employee shall not accept nor voluntarily make any payment, assume any obligation or incur any expense related to the claim or lawsuit, other than for first aid to others at the time of any incident or course of conduct giving rise to any such claim, loss or damage. Nothing herein shall be deemed to preclude any official or employee from retaining an attorney to represent his or her interests relating to such claim or lawsuit; however, all costs and expenses incurred thereby shall be paid by the official or employee. [Ord. 13-0358 § 1 (Att. A).]


2.50.070 Effect of compliance with conditions.

If legal representation of an official or employee is undertaken by the City, all of the conditions of representation are met, and a judgment is entered against the official or employee, or a settlement is made, the City shall pay such judgment or settlement; provided, that the City may at its discretion appeal as necessary any such judgment. [Ord. 13-0358 § 1 (Att. A).]


2.50.080 Failure to comply with conditions.

In the event that any official or employee fails or refuses to comply with any of the conditions set forth in KMC 2.50.060 or elects to provide his/her own representation with respect to any such claim or litigation, then all of the provisions of this chapter shall be inapplicable, and shall have no force or effect with respect to any such claim or litigation. [Ord. 13-0358 § 1 (Att. A).]


2.50.090 Reimbursement of incurred expenses.

A. If the City determines that an official or employee does not come within the provisions of this chapter, and a court of competent jurisdiction later determines that such a claim does come within the provisions of this chapter, then the City shall pay any judgment rendered against the official or employee and reasonable attorney’s fees incurred in defending against the claim. The City shall pay any costs and reasonable attorney’s fees incurred in obtaining the determination that such claim is covered by the provisions of this chapter; provided, that if a court of competent jurisdiction determines that such claim does not come within the provisions of this chapter, then the official or employee shall pay the City’s costs and reasonable attorney’s fees incurred in obtaining the determination that such claim is not covered under the provisions of this chapter.

B. If the City determines that a claim against an official or employee does come within the provisions of this chapter, and a court of competent jurisdiction later finds that such claim does not come within the provisions of this chapter, then the City shall be reimbursed by the official or employee for costs or expenses incurred in obtaining the determination that such claim is not covered by the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 13-0358 § 1 (Att. A).]


2.50.100 Conflict with provisions of insurance policies.

The indemnification provisions of this chapter do not constitute a policy of insurance, and nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to modify or amend any provision of any policy of insurance where the official or employee is the named insured. In the event of any conflict between this chapter and the provision of any such policy of insurance, the policy provisions shall be controlling; provided, that nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to limit or restrict any employee’s or official’s right to full coverage pursuant to this chapter, it being the intent of this chapter to provide the coverage detailed in this chapter only outside and beyond insurance policies which may be in effect while not compromising the terms and conditions of such policies by any conflicting provisions contained in this chapter. [Ord. 13-0358 § 1 (Att. A).]


2.50.110 Pending claims.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any claims or lawsuits filed against any official or employee, and any such claims or lawsuits hereinafter filed, irrespective of the date of the events or circumstances which are the basis of such claim or lawsuit. [Ord. 13-0358 § 1 (Att. A).]


2.50.120 Modification of chapter.

The provisions of this chapter shall be subject to amendment, modification and repeal, at the sole discretion of the city council; provided, that any such amendment, modification or repeal shall apply prospectively only, and shall have no effect on the obligation of the City to indemnify and/or defend against any claim which is based, in whole or in part, upon any action or omission of an official or employee occurring prior to the effective date of the amendment, modification or repeal. [Ord. 13-0358 § 1 (Att. A).]


Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE

Chapters:

3.05    Petty Cash Fund

3.10    Admissions and Entertainment Tax

3.15    Gambling Tax

3.20    Leasehold Excise Tax

3.25    Property Excise Tax

3.30    Sales and Use Tax

3.35    Utility Tax

3.40    Claims or Obligations

3.45    Insufficient Funds Checks

3.50    Public Art Fund

3.55    Disposal of Surplus Property

3.60    Interfund Loans

3.65    Multifamily Housing Property Tax Exemption

3.70    Biennial Budget

3.75    Business and Occupation Tax

3.80    Administrative Provisions for Business and Occupation Tax


Chapter 3.05 PETTY CASH FUND

Sections:

3.05.010    Established.

3.05.020    Purpose.

3.05.030    Charge to proper account.

3.05.040    Custodian.


3.05.010 Established.

A petty cash fund is hereby established in the amount of $500.00. [Ord. 98-0002 § 1.]


3.05.020 Purpose.

The use of the petty cash fund shall be restricted to miscellaneous petty or emergency expenditures, refunds legally payable by the City, and for cash change to be used in the transaction of the City’s official business. [Ord. 98-0002 § 2.]


3.05.030 Charge to proper account.

All expenditures made from the petty cash fund shall be charged to an existing appropriation for such purpose, except expenditures chargeable against funds for which no appropriation is required by law. All expenditures or refunds made from the petty cash fund shall be reimbursed out of and charged to the proper appropriation or fund at the close of each month and such other times as may be necessary. [Ord. 98-0002 § 3.]


3.05.040 Custodian.

The city manager or such employee of the City designated by the city manager in writing shall be the custodian of the petty cash fund. The custodian shall have full responsibility for the fund and its proper use. The custodian shall be covered by a surety bond in the full amount of the fund and any advances made to the fund at any time, and such bond shall be conditioned upon the proper accounting for and legal expenditure of all such funds, in addition to other conditions required by law. [Ord. 98-0002 § 4.]


Chapter 3.10 ADMISSIONS AND ENTERTAINMENT TAX

Sections:

3.10.010    Admission charge – Definition.

3.10.020    Admissions tax levied.

3.10.030    Collection – Remittance to city manager.

3.10.040    Violations.


3.10.010 Admission charge – Definition.

“Admission charge” shall mean a charge made for admission to any movie theater. [Ord. 98-0047 § 1.]


3.10.020 Admissions tax levied.

Effective the first day of the first full calendar month after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, there is hereby levied a five percent tax on the ticket price or other charge for admission to any movie theater in the City of Kenmore. [Ord. 98-0047 § 2.]


3.10.030 Collection – Remittance to city manager.

A. The tax imposed hereunder shall be collected from the theater paying the admission charge at the time the admission charge is paid, and such taxes shall be remitted by the theater collecting the tax to the city manager in quarterly remittances on or before the last day of the month succeeding the end of the quarterly period in which the tax is due.

B. Any theater receiving any payment for admissions shall make a return upon such forms and setting forth such information as the city manager may reasonably require, showing the amount of the tax upon admissions for which the theater is liable for the preceding quarterly period, and shall sign and transmit the same to the city manager, with a remittance for the amount; provided, that the city manager may at his discretion require verified annual returns from any theater receiving admission payments setting forth such additional information as the city manager may deem necessary to determine correctly the amount of tax collected and payable.

C. If the return provided for herein is not made and transmitted and the tax is not collected and remitted to the City by the last day of the month succeeding the end of the quarter in which the tax was due, the city manager shall add a penalty of 10 percent of the tax due, which penalty shall be added to the amount of the tax due, and remitted in the same manner.

D. Every theater liable for the collection and payment of the tax imposed by this chapter shall keep and preserve for a period of three years all unused tickets, ticket manifests, books and all other records from which can be determined the amount of admission tax which such theater was liable to remit under the provisions of this chapter, and all such tickets, books and records shall be open for examination and audit at all reasonable times by the city manager or his duly authorized agent.

E. The city manager shall have the authority to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with the terms of this chapter for carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the tax herein levied, and a copy of the rules and regulations shall be on file and available for public examination in the city clerk’s office. [Ord. 98-0047 § 3.]


3.10.040 Violations.

A. Violation a Misdemeanor. Each violation of or failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter constitutes a separate offense and is a misdemeanor.

B. Collection of Tax by Civil Action. Any tax due under the provisions of this chapter and all penalties thereon may be collected by civil action, which remedies shall be in addition to any and all other existing remedies. In the event of any civil action regarding unpaid taxes, the prevailing party shall be entitled to additionally recover its attorney fees and costs, expressly including expert witness fees for accountants or others used in the proceeding.

C. Violators Designated. Any person or entity who directly or indirectly performs or omits to perform any act in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or aids or abets the same, and every person or entity who directly or indirectly counsels, encourages, hires, commands, induces or otherwise procures another to commit such violation is and shall be a principal under the terms of this chapter and may be proceeded against as such. [Ord. 98-0047 § 4.]


Chapter 3.15 GAMBLING TAX

Sections:

3.15.010    Definitions.

3.15.020    Imposition of tax.

3.15.030    Exemptions – Charitable and nonprofit organizations.

3.15.040    Payment of tax.

3.15.050    Administration of collection.

3.15.060    Delinquent taxes – Lien authorized – Collection actions.

3.15.070    Late penalty – Interest.

3.15.080    Notice of intention to engage in gambling activity – Filing with City.

3.15.090    Inspection and audit of premises, paraphernalia, books and records.

3.15.100    Penalties.


3.15.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the terms used herein shall have the meanings provided in Chapter 9.46 RCW, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, and as further provided by the rules and regulations of the Washington State Gambling Commission, as set forth in WAC Title 230 as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, unless otherwise specifically provided herein. [Ord. 98-0013 § 1.]


3.15.020 Imposition of tax.

Pursuant to RCW 9.46.110 as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, there is levied upon all persons, associations or organizations conducting or operating in the City any of the activities listed below a tax to be paid to the City, in the amount hereinafter specified:

A. Bingo and Raffles. A tax in the amount equal to 10 percent of the gross receipts from a bingo game or raffle, less the amount awarded as cash or merchandise prizes.

B. Punchboards and Pulltabs.

1. Commercial stimulant operators shall pay a tax in an amount equal to five percent of the gross receipts from the operation of punchboards and pulltabs;

2. Bona fide charitable or nonprofit organizations shall pay a tax in an amount equal to 10 percent of the gross receipts from the operation of the games, less the amount awarded as prizes or merchandise.

C. Social Card Games. Operators shall pay a tax equal to 15 percent of the gross receipts from such games. An amount equal to four-fifteenths of the social card game tax paid by operators of social card games shall be dedicated to funding City capital facilities plan projects; provided, however, that revenue collected from this tax shall be expended primarily for the purpose of enforcement of gambling laws pursuant to RCW 9.46.113.

D. Amusement games which are authorized for operation pursuant to the provisions of the WAC shall be subject to the levy of a tax in the amount of two percent of the gross receipts from the amusement game, less the amount awarded as prizes. Such tax is for the purpose of providing for the City’s actual costs of enforcement of the laws of the State of Washington and the City’s ordinances. [Ord. 04-0223 § 1; Ord. 98-0013 § 2.]


3.15.030 Exemptions – Charitable and nonprofit organizations.

A. Bingo and amusement games conducted by a bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization shall be exempt from the tax imposed by KMC 3.15.020, when such organization has no paid operating or management personnel, and its gross receipts from bingo or amusement games, or a combination thereof, does not exceed $5,000 per year, less the amount awarded as cash or merchandise.

B. No tax may be imposed on the first $10,000 of gross receipts, less the amount awarded as cash or merchandise prizes, from raffles conducted by any bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization. [Ord. 98-0013 § 3.]


3.15.040 Payment of tax.

A. The tax imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable in quarterly installments, and remitted to the City’s finance director, together with the required information on the return form(s), as prescribed by the finance director, on or before the last day of the month next succeeding the quarterly period in which the tax accrued.

B. If the tax imposed by this chapter equals $500.00 or less in any quarterly period, then any such installment may be combined and paid with the next succeeding quarterly installment; provided, however, that no taxpayer shall fail to make payment for more than two consecutive calendar quarters.

Payments made according to this subsection shall be remitted to the City’s finance director, together with the required information on the return form(s), as prescribed by the finance director, on or before the last day of the month next succeeding the quarterly period in which the tax accrued.

C. Any tax remaining unpaid on the first day of the second month next succeeding the quarterly period in which the tax accrued shall be delinquent, provided, however:

1. Whenever an entity subject to the tax imposed by this chapter ceases the taxable activity for a period of more than two consecutive calendar months the tax shall become due and payable on the tenth calendar day of the next succeeding calendar month;

2. Whenever the finance director, upon the concurrence of the city manager, determines that the City’s ability to collect the tax owing from the taxpayer may be in jeopardy, based upon a history of delinquent payment, an assignment for the benefit of creditors, or other reasonable evidence, the finance director, after not less than 10 days’ written notice to the taxpayer, may require the taxpayer to remit taxes owing hereunder at a shorter interval than required herein. Notice shall be given by regular and certified mail. In the event that the certified mail is refused by the taxpayer and returned to the City, notice shall be deemed effective upon the date of mailing of the notice by regular mail. [Ord. 98-0049 § 1; Ord. 98-0013 § 4.]


3.15.050 Administration of collection.

A. The finance director is hereby authorized to create a gambling tax return form which shall be available to the public in reasonable numbers in the finance director’s office during regular business hours. Taxes paid hereunder shall be accompanied by the gambling tax return form and a copy of the taxpayer’s quarterly report to the Washington State Gambling Commission for the period in which the tax has accrued. The taxpayer shall be required to swear and affirm under penalty of perjury under the laws of the State of Washington that the information given in the return is true, accurate and complete.

B. The finance director is authorized, but not required, to mail to taxpayers gambling tax return forms for remitting the tax owing hereunder. Failure of the taxpayer to receive such a form shall not excuse timely payment of all taxes due and owing hereunder. [Ord. 98-0013 § 5.]


3.15.060 Delinquent taxes – Lien authorized – Collection actions.

Whenever any tax imposed hereunder shall become delinquent, the finance director is authorized to file a lien upon the personal and real property used in the gambling activity taxable by this chapter in the same manner as provided for under RCW 84.60.010, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. Pursuant to RCW 9.46.110 as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, the lien shall attach on the date the tax becomes due and shall relate back and have priority against real and personal property to the same extent as ad valorem taxes. The finance director is further authorized to bring a civil action to collect fees, interest, penalties and delinquent taxes owing hereunder pursuant to RCW 9.46.350, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. [Ord. 98-0013 § 6.]


3.15.070 Late penalty – Interest.

A. A penalty equivalent to 25 percent of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be added to said tax in the event of a late filed gambling tax return form, or late payment of taxes.

B. In addition to an assessment of late penalties, any quarterly tax payment not paid by the due date shall bear interest at the greater of 12 percent per annum or the maximum legal rate. [Ord. 98-0049 § 3.]


3.15.080 Notice of intention to engage in gambling activity – Filing with City.

For the purposes of identifying those subject to the taxes imposed by this chapter, each person, association or organization intending to conduct or operate any gambling activity which requires a license pursuant to Chapter 9.46 RCW, as the same exists or may hereafter be amended, shall no later than five days prior to the commencement of any such gambling activity file with the finance director a sworn declaration of intent to conduct or operate such activity on a form to be prescribed by the finance director, together with a copy of any license issued for that gambling activity by the Washington State Gambling Commission or its designee. [Ord. 98-0013 § 8.]


3.15.090 Inspection and audit of premises, paraphernalia, books and records.

A. The premises and paraphernalia, and all the books and records of any person, association or organization conducting gambling activities pursuant to Chapter 9.46 RCW as now existing or hereafter amended, and any person, association or organization receiving profits therefrom or having any interest therein shall be subject to inspection and audit at any reasonable time, with or without notice, upon demand, by the finance director, or his or her designee for the purpose of determining compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter, Chapter 9.46 RCW, and any rules or regulations adopted thereunder. A reasonable time for the purpose of this section shall be:

1. If the items or records to be inspected or audited are located anywhere upon a premises, any portion of which is regularly open to the public or members and guests, then at any time when the premises are so open, or which they are usually open; or

2. If the items or records to be inspected or audited are not located upon the premises set out in subsection (A)(1) of this section, then at any time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.

B. Each person, organization or association engaging in any gambling activity taxable under this chapter shall maintain records respecting that activity which truly, completely and accurately disclose all information necessary for the City to determine the taxpayer’s tax liability hereunder during each base tax period. Such records shall be kept and maintained for a period of not less than five years.

C. It shall be the responsibility of each individual taxpayer, and for organizations, associations, or corporations the responsibility of each owner, officer, director or manager thereof, to make available at the times set forth above such financial records and information as the finance director or his or her designee may require in order to determine full compliance with this chapter. [Ord. 98-0013 § 9.]


3.15.100 Penalties.

A. Whoever, in any application for a license or in any book or record required to be maintained by this chapter or by the Washington State Gambling Commission or in any report required to be submitted to said commission or to the City hereunder, shall make any false or misleading statement, or make any false or misleading entry or willfully fail to maintain or make any entry required to be maintained or made, or who willfully refuses to produce for inspection by the finance director or his or her designee, any book, record or document required to be maintained or made by federal or State law, or this chapter, shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor subject to the penalties set forth in RCW 9A.20.021, as now existing or hereafter amended.

B. RCW 9.46.185, 9.46.190 and 9.46.195, as now existing or hereafter amended, are hereby adopted by this reference as if set forth fully herein.

C. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this chapter, any person, association or organization violating any provision of this chapter may be subject to loss of its business license. [Ord. 98-0013 § 10.]


Chapter 3.20 LEASEHOLD EXCISE TAX

Sections:

3.20.010    Imposed.

3.20.020    Contract authorized.

3.20.030    Penalty.


3.20.010 Imposed.

Pursuant to RCW 82.29A.040, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, the City hereby imposes a leasehold excise tax as authorized by Chapter 82.29A RCW, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. Said tax shall be equal to four percent of taxable rent. [Ord. 98-0015 § 1.]


3.20.020 Contract authorized.

Pursuant to RCW 82.29A.080, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, the city manager is authorized to enter into a contract prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter with the Department of Revenue for the administration and collection of said tax. [Ord. 98-0015 § 2.]


3.20.030 Penalty.

Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof punished pursuant to State law or City ordinance. [Ord. 98-0015 § 3.]


Chapter 3.25 PROPERTY EXCISE TAX

Sections:

Article I. One-Quarter-Percent Tax

3.25.010    One-quarter-percent excise tax on real estate sales.

3.25.020    Tax is obligation of seller.

3.25.030    Tax lien on real property.

3.25.040    County to collect payment.

3.25.050    Payment due.

3.25.060    Refunds.

3.25.070    Creation of special capital improvement fund.

3.25.080    Penalty.

3.25.090    Referendum.

Article II. Additional One-Quarter-Percent Tax

3.25.100    Additional one-quarter-percent excise tax on real estate sales.

3.25.110    Tax is obligation of seller.

3.25.120    Tax lien on real property.

3.25.130    County to collect payment.

3.25.140    Payment due.

3.25.150    Refunds.

3.25.160    Creation of comprehensive plan capital improvement fund.

3.25.170    Penalty.

Article I. One-Quarter-Percent Tax


3.25.010 One-quarter-percent excise tax on real estate sales.

A. Imposition. Pursuant to RCW 82.46.010, there is imposed an excise tax on each sale of real property in the City constituting a taxable event, as defined in Chapter 82.45 RCW (as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended). The tax imposed under this section shall be collected from persons who are taxable by the State under Chapter 82.45 RCW, and such tax shall comply with all applicable rules, regulations, laws and court decisions regarding real estate taxes as imposed by the State under Chapters 82.45 and 82.46 RCW, and Chapter 458-61 WAC (as the same now exist or may hereafter be amended).

B. Tax Rate. The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be one-quarter of one percent of the selling price of all real property upon which this tax is imposed.

C. Deposit into Special Capital Improvement Fund. All proceeds from the tax imposed by this section shall be placed by the city manager or authorized designee in the City’s special capital improvement fund established under KMC 3.25.090. [Ord. 98-0003 § 1.]


3.25.020 Tax is obligation of seller.

The taxes imposed by this article are the obligation of the seller and may be enforced through the action of debt against the seller or in the manner prescribed for the foreclosure of mortgages. Resort to one course of enforcement is not an election not to pursue the other. [Ord. 98-0003 § 2.]


3.25.030 Tax lien on real property.

The taxes imposed by this article and any interest or penalties thereon is a specific lien upon each piece of real property sold from the time of sale until the tax is paid, which lien may be enforced in the manner prescribed for the foreclosure of mortgages. Resort to one course of enforcement is not an election not to pursue the other. [Ord. 98-0003 § 3.]


3.25.040 County to collect payment.

The county treasurer shall collect the taxes imposed by this article as follows:

A. The county treasurer shall place one percent of the proceeds of the taxes imposed and collected by this article in the county’s current expense fund to defray costs of collection. The remaining proceeds from City taxes imposed by this article shall be distributed to the City monthly.

B. The county treasurer shall cause a stamp evidencing satisfaction of the lien to be affixed to the instrument of sale or conveyance prior to its recording, or to the real estate excise tax affidavit in the case of used mobile home sales. A receipt issued by the county treasurer for the payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidence of the satisfaction of the lien imposed by this article and may be recorded in the manner prescribed for recording satisfactions of mortgages.

C. No instrument of sale or conveyance evidencing a sale subject to the tax may be accepted by the King County department of records and elections for filing or recording until the tax is paid and the stamp affixed thereto. In case the tax is not due on the transfer, the instrument shall not be accepted until suitable notation of this fact is made on the instrument by the county treasurer. [Ord. 98-0003 § 4.]


3.25.050 Payment due.

The tax imposed by this article shall become due and payable immediately at the time of the sale, and if not so paid within 30 days thereafter, shall bear interest at the maximum rate permitted by law from the time of sale until the date of payment. [Ord. 98-0003 § 5.]


3.25.060 Refunds.

If, upon written application by a taxpayer to the county treasurer for a refund, it appears that tax has been paid in excess of the amount actually due or upon and a sale or other transfer declared to be exempt, such excess amount or improper payment shall be refunded by the county treasurer to the taxpayer; provided, that no refund shall be made unless the State has first authorized the refund of an excessive amount or an improper amount paid, unless such improper amount was paid as a result of miscalculation. Any refund made shall be withheld from the next monthly distribution to the City. [Ord. 98-0003 § 6.]


3.25.070 Creation of special capital improvement fund.

A. There is created a special fund to be known as the “special capital improvement fund,” into which shall be deposited all proceeds of the taxes imposed under KMC 3.25.010 (pursuant to RCW 82.46.010).

B. Revenues in the special capital improvement fund shall be used solely for financing capital projects as defined in RCW 82.46.010 (as the same exists or may hereafter be amended), as specified in the capital facilities plan element of the City’s comprehensive plan or for housing relocation assistance under RCW 59.18.440 and 59.18.450. [Ord. 98-0003 § 7.]


3.25.080 Penalty.

It is unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to pay taxes with intent to violate the provisions of this article. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, punished pursuant to State law or City ordinance. [Ord. 98-0003 § 8.]


3.25.090 Referendum.

A. Any referendum petition to repeal a county or City ordinance imposing a tax or altering the rate of the tax authorized under KMC 3.25.010 shall be filed with the city manager within seven days of passage of the ordinance codified in this article. Within 10 days, the city manager shall confer with the petitioner concerning form and style of the petition, issue an identification number for the petition, and write a ballot title for the measure, which shall conform to RCW 82.46.021.

B. After this notification, the petitioner shall have 30 days in which to secure on petition forms the signatures of not less than 15 percent of the registered voters of the City, and to file the signed petitions with the filing officer. Each petition form shall contain the ballot title and the full text of the measure to be referred. The filing officer shall verify the sufficiency of the signatures on the petitions. If sufficient valid signatures are properly submitted, the filing officer shall submit the referendum measure to the City voters at an election, pursuant to RCW 82.46.021. [Ord. 98-0003 § 9.]

Article II. Additional One-Quarter-Percent Tax


3.25.100 Additional one-quarter-percent excise tax on real estate sales.

A. Imposition. Pursuant to RCW 82.46.035, there is imposed an excise tax on each sale of real property constituting a taxable event as defined in Chapter 82.45 RCW (as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended), and occurring within the corporate limits of the City. The tax imposed under this section shall be in addition to the real estate excise tax imposed by Article I of this chapter and collected from persons who are taxable by the State under Chapter 82.45 RCW and such tax shall comply with all applicable rules, regulations, laws and court decisions regarding real estate excise takes as imposed by the State under Chapters 82.45 and 82.46 RCW and Chapter 458-61 WAC (as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended).

B. Tax Rate. The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be one-quarter of one percent of the selling price of all real property upon which this tax is imposed by subsection (A) of this section.

C. Deposit into Comprehensive Plan Capital Improvement Fund. All proceeds from the tax imposed by this section shall be placed by the city manager or authorized designee in the City’s comprehensive plan capital improvement fund established under KMC 3.25.160. [Ord. 98-0004 § 1.]


3.25.110 Tax is obligation of seller.

The taxes imposed by this article are the obligation of the seller and may be enforced through the action of debt against the seller or in the manner prescribed for the foreclosure of mortgages. Resort to one course of enforcement is not an election not to pursue the other. [Ord. 98-0004 § 2.]


3.25.120 Tax lien on real property.

The taxes imposed by this article and any interest or penalties thereon is a specific lien upon each piece of real property sold from the time of sale until the tax is paid, which lien may be enforced in the manner prescribed for the foreclosure of mortgages. Resort to one course of enforcement is not an election not to pursue the other. [Ord. 98-0004 § 3.]


3.25.130 County to collect payment.

The county treasurer shall collect the taxes imposed by this article as follows:

A. The county treasurer shall place one percent of the proceeds of the taxes imposed and collected by this article in the county’s current expense fund to defray costs of collection. The remaining proceeds from City taxes imposed by this article shall be distributed to the City monthly.

B. The county treasurer shall cause a stamp evidencing satisfaction of the lien to be affixed to the instrument of sale or conveyance prior to its recording, or to the real estate excise tax affidavit in the case of used mobile home sales. A receipt issued by the county treasurer for the payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidence of the satisfaction of the lien imposed by this article and may be recorded in the manner prescribed for recording satisfactions of mortgages.

C. No instrument of sale or conveyance evidencing a sale subject to the tax may be accepted by the King County department of records and elections for filing or recording until the tax is paid and the stamp affixed thereto. In case the tax is not due on the transfer, the instrument shall not be accepted until suitable notation of this fact is made on the instrument by the county treasurer. [Ord. 98-0004 § 4.]


3.25.140 Payment due.

The tax imposed by this article shall become due and payable immediately at the time of the sale, and if not so paid within 30 days thereafter, shall bear interest at the maximum rate permitted by law from the time of sale until the date of payment. [Ord. 98-0004 § 5.]


3.25.150 Refunds.

If, upon written application by a taxpayer to the county treasurer for a refund, it appears that tax has been paid in excess of the amount actually due or upon and a sale or other transfer declared to be exempt, such excess amount or improper payment shall be refunded by the county treasurer to the taxpayer; provided, that no refund shall be made unless the State has first authorized the refund of an excessive amount or an improper amount paid, unless such improper amount was paid as a result of miscalculation. Any refund made shall be withheld from the next monthly distribution to the City. [Ord. 98-0004 § 6.]


3.25.160 Creation of comprehensive plan capital improvement fund.

A. There is created a special fund to be known as the “comprehensive plan capital improvement fund” into which shall be deposited all proceeds of the tax imposed under KMC 3.25.100 (pursuant to RCW 82.46.035).

B. Revenues in the comprehensive plan improvement fund shall be used exclusively for those purposes as referenced in RCW 82.46.035 (as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended). [Ord. 98-0004 § 7.]


3.25.170 Penalty.

It is unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to pay taxes with intent to violate the provisions of this article. Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, punished pursuant to State law or City ordinance. [Ord. 98-0004 § 8.]


Chapter 3.30 SALES AND USE TAX

Sections:

Article I. Designated

3.30.010    Imposition of sales and use tax as authorized by RCW 82.14.030(1).

3.30.020    Administration – Collection.

3.30.030    Inspection of records – Agreement with Department of Revenue.

3.30.040    Penalty.

Article II. Additional

3.30.050    Imposition of additional sales and use tax as authorized by RCW 82.14.030(2).

3.30.060    Administration – Collection.

3.30.070    Inspection of records – Agreement with Department of Revenue.

3.30.080    Subject to referendum.

3.30.090    Penalty.

Article III. Imposition of Sale and Use Tax as Authorized by RCW 82.14.540

3.30.100    Imposition of sales and use tax as authorized by RCW 82.14.540.

3.30.110    Penalty.

Article I. Designated


3.30.010 Imposition of sales and use tax as authorized by RCW 82.14.030(1).

A. Imposition. There is hereby imposed a sales and/or use tax, as the case may be, upon every taxable event, as defined in Chapter 82.14 RCW as the same exists or may hereafter be amended, which occurs within the City limits of Kenmore. The tax shall be imposed upon and collected from those persons from whom the State sales and/or use tax is collected pursuant to Chapters 82.04, 82.08 and 82.12 RCW as the same now exist or may hereafter be amended.

B. Tax Rate. The rate of tax imposed by subsection (A) of this section shall be one-half of one percent of the selling price of or value of the article used as the case may be; provided, however, that during such period as there is in effect a sales or use tax imposed by King County pursuant to RCW 82.14.030(1), then the rate imposed by this article shall be as provided in RCW 82.14.030(1) as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. The rate as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article shall be 425/1000th of one percent. [Ord. 98-0005 § 1.]


3.30.020 Administration – Collection.

The administration and collection of the tax imposed by this article shall be in accordance with the provisions of RCW 82.14.050 as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. [Ord. 98-0005 § 2.]


3.30.030 Inspection of records – Agreement with Department of Revenue.

The City of Kenmore consents to the inspection of such records as are necessary to qualify the City for inspection of records of the Department of Revenue, pursuant to RCW 82.32.330 as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. The city manager is authorized to enter into an agreement with the Department of Revenue for the administration of the tax. [Ord. 98-0005 § 3.]


3.30.040 Penalty.

Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof punished pursuant to State law or City ordinance. [Ord. 98-0005 § 4.]

Article II. Additional


3.30.050 Imposition of additional sales and use tax as authorized by RCW 82.14.030(2).

A. Imposition. In addition to other taxes which may be imposed by the City, there is hereby imposed a separate sales and/or use tax, as the case may be, upon the same taxable events, and upon which the tax imposed pursuant to RCW 82.14.030(1) as the same exists or may hereafter been amended, is levied, and as specifically authorized by RCW 82.14.030(2).

B. Rate of Tax. The rate of tax imposed by this section, which shall be in addition to the rate of tax permitted to be imposed by City ordinance pursuant to RCW 82.14.030(1), as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, shall be one-half of one percent of the selling price (in the case of a sales tax) or value of the article used (in the case of a use tax); provided, however, that in the event King County shall impose a sales and/or use tax pursuant to RCW 82.14.030(2), as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, at a rate that is equal to or greater than the rate imposed under this article, then said county shall receive 15 percent of the City tax; provided, further, that in the event King County shall impose a sales and/or use tax pursuant to RCW 82.14.030(2), at a rate that is less than the rate imposed under this article, the county shall receive that amount of revenues from the City tax equal to 15 percent of the rate of tax imposed by the county. [Ord. 98-0006 § 1.]


3.30.060 Administration – Collection.

The administration and collection of the tax imposed by this article shall be in accordance with the provisions of RCW 82.14.050 as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. [Ord. 98-0006 § 2.]


3.30.070 Inspection of records – Agreement with Department of Revenue.

The City of Kenmore consents to the inspection of such records as are necessary to qualify the City for inspection of records of the Department of Revenue, pursuant to RCW 82.32.330 as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. The city manager is authorized to enter into an agreement with the Department of Revenue for the administration of the tax. [Ord. 98-0006 § 3.]


3.30.080 Subject to referendum.

Pursuant to RCW 82.14.036, the tax imposed by this article is subject to referendum. A referendum petition to repeal the tax imposed by this article must be filed with the city clerk or the city manager within seven days of passage of the ordinance codified in this article. Within 10 days of the filing with the identified filing officer or officers of the referendum petition, the interim city manager shall confer with the petitioner concerning the form and style of the petition, issue an identification number for the petition and write a ballot title for the measure. The ballot title shall be posed as a question so that an affirmative answer to the question and an affirmative vote on the measure results in the tax or tax rate increase being imposed, and a negative answer to the question and a negative vote on the measure results in the tax or tax rate increase not being imposed. The petitioner shall be notified of the identification number and ballot title within said 10-day period.

After notification of the identification number and ballot title, the petitioner shall have 30 days in which to secure on petition forms the signatures of not less than 15 percent of the registered voters of the City and to file the signed petitions with the designated filing officer or officers.

Each petition form must contain the ballot title and the full text of the measure to be referred. [Ord. 98-0006 § 4.]


3.30.090 Penalty.

Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof punished pursuant to State law or City ordinance. [Ord. 98-0006 § 5.]

Article III. Imposition of Sale and Use Tax as Authorized by RCW 82.14.540


3.30.100 Imposition of sales and use tax as authorized by RCW 82.14.540.

A. Imposition. In addition to other taxes which may be imposed by the City, there is hereby authorized, fixed and imposed a separate sales and use tax in accordance with RCW 82.14.540 (Chapter 338, Laws of 2019). Such tax shall be assessed on the selling price in the case of a sales tax, or value of the article used, in the case of a use tax, upon every taxable event that occurs within the City limits of Kenmore.

B. Tax Rate – Term. The rate of the sales and use tax authorized by this section shall be 0.0073 percent. The tax imposed by the City under this section shall expire 20 years after the date on which the tax is first imposed.

C. Tax Receipts – Administration. The maximum amount to be received by the City from the tax in each year shall be equal to the taxable retail sales within the City limits of Kenmore in State fiscal year 2019 multiplied by the tax rate. The tax imposed by this section shall be deducted from the amount of tax otherwise required to be collected or paid to the Washington State Department of Revenue (“DOR”) under Chapter 82.08 or 82.12 RCW, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. DOR shall collect and administer the tax on behalf of the City at no cost to the City. In the event that the amount of tax exceeds the maximum amount allowed to the City under RCW 82.14.540, any excess shall be remitted to the State Treasurer in accordance with RCW 82.14.540. The city manager is authorized to enter into an agreement with DOR for the administration of the tax. [Ord. 19-0496 § 1.]


3.30.110 Penalty.

Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof punished pursuant to State law or City ordinance. [Ord. 19-0496 § 1.]


Chapter 3.35 UTILITY TAX

Sections:

3.35.010    Use and accountability of tax proceeds.

3.35.020    Utility tax.

3.35.030    Definitions.

3.35.040    Occupations subject to tax – Amount.

3.35.050    Tax year.

3.35.060    Exceptions and deductions.

3.35.070    Monthly installments.

3.35.080    Taxpayer’s records.

3.35.090    Failure to make returns or to pay the tax in full.

3.35.100    Penalty for delinquent payment.

3.35.110    Overpayment of tax.

3.35.120    Noncompliance – Penalty.

3.35.130    Appeal to hearing examiner.

3.35.140    City manager to make rules.

3.35.150    Referendum procedure.

3.35.160    Exclusive procedure.

3.35.170    Repealed.


3.35.010 Use and accountability of tax proceeds.

All revenues collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited into the general fund, and shall be used for the funding of general City services or capital facilities as the council shall direct through its annual budget process. [Ord. 98-0037 § 1.]


3.35.020 Utility tax.

The tax provided for in this chapter shall be known as the “utility tax,” and is levied upon the privilege of conducting an electrical energy, natural gas, telephone, or cellular telephone business within the City of Kenmore. [Ord. 98-0037 § 2.]


3.35.030 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter clearly requires otherwise, the words or phrases defined in this section shall have the indicated meanings.

A. “Cellular telephone service” means any two-way voice and data telephone or similar communications system based in whole or in substantial part on wireless radio communications, including cellular mobile service, and which is not subject to regulation by the Washington State Utilities and Transportation Commission. Cellular mobile service includes other wireless radio communications services including specialized mobile radio, personal communications services, and other wireless radio communications technology evolving after the effective date of the ordinance that accomplishes a purpose substantially similar to cellular mobile service.

B. “City manager” means the city manager of the City of Kenmore, Washington, or his or her designee.

C. “Gross income” means the value proceeding or accruing from the performance of the particular business involved, excluding receipts or proceeds from the use or sale of tangible property and real property or any interest therein, proceeds from the sale of notes, bonds, mortgages or other evidence of indebtedness, or stock and the like, receipts from operations incidental to the performance of the particular business involved, and with a deduction on the amount of credit loss and uncollectibles actually sustained.

D. “Person” means any person, firm, corporation, association, or entity of any type engaged in a business subject to taxation under this chapter. [Ord. 98-0037 § 3.]


3.35.040 Occupations subject to tax – Amount.

There is levied upon, and shall be collected from, a person, because of certain business activities engaged in or carried on in the City, taxes in the amount to be determined by the application of rates given against gross income as follows:

A. Upon a person engaged in or carrying on the business of selling, furnishing, or transmitting electric energy, a tax equal to four percent of the total gross income from such business in the City during the period for which the tax is due;

B. Upon a person engaged in or carrying on the business of selling, furnishing, or transmitting natural gas, a tax equal to four percent of the total gross income from such business in the City during the period for which the tax is due;

C. Upon a person engaged in or carrying on the business of selling, furnishing, or transmitting telephone service, a tax equal to six percent of the total gross income from such business in the City during the period for which the tax is due; and

D. Upon a person engaged in or carrying on the business of selling, furnishing, or transmitting cellular telephone service, a tax equal to six percent of the total gross income from such business in the City during the period for which the tax is due. [Ord. 04-0222 § 1; Ord. 00-0090 § 1; Ord. 99-0066 § 1; Ord. 98-0037 § 4.]


3.35.050 Tax year.

The tax year for purposes of this utility tax shall commence January 1st and shall end on December 31st. [Ord. 98-0037 § 5.]


3.35.060 Exceptions and deductions.

There is excepted and deducted from the total gross income upon which the tax is computed the amount of the total gross income that is derived from business which the City is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution or laws of the United States and the Constitution or laws of the State of Washington. [Ord. 98-0037 § 6.]


3.35.070 Monthly installments.

The tax imposed by KMC 3.35.040 shall be due and payable in monthly installments, and remittance therefor shall be made on or before the last day of the month following the end of the monthly period in which the tax is accrued. On or before said due date, the taxpayer shall file with the city manager a written return upon such form setting forth such information as the city manager shall reasonably require relating to the accurate computation and collection of this tax, together with the payment of the amount. [Ord. 98-0037 § 7.]


3.35.080 Taxpayer’s records.

Each taxpayer shall keep records reflecting the amount of the taxpayer’s gross income on sales and services within the City, and such records shall be open at all reasonable times for the inspection of the city manager or his or her designee to verify information provided on any utility tax return, or to determine whether such return is required to be filed. [Ord. 98-0037 § 8.]


3.35.090 Failure to make returns or to pay the tax in full.

If a taxpayer fails, neglects, or refuses to make his return as and when required in this chapter, the city manager is authorized to determine the amount of the tax payable under provisions of KMC 3.35.040, and to notify such taxpayer of the amount so determined. The amount so fixed shall thereupon be the tax and be immediately due and payable, together with penalty and interest. Delinquent taxes, including any penalties, are subject to an interest charge of 12 percent per year on the unpaid balance from the date any such taxes became due as provided in KMC 3.35.070. [Ord. 98-0037 § 9.]


3.35.100 Penalty for delinquent payment.

If a person subject to this tax fails to pay any tax required by this chapter within 15 days after the due date thereof, there shall be added to such tax a penalty of 10 percent of the amount of such tax, and any tax due under this chapter that is unpaid and all penalties thereon shall constitute a debt to the City and may be collected by court proceedings, which remedy shall be in addition to all other remedies. [Ord. 98-0037 § 10.]


3.35.110 Overpayment of tax.

Money paid to the City through error, or otherwise not in payment of the tax imposed by this chapter, or in excess of such tax, shall, upon discovery, be credited against any tax due or to become due from such taxpayer hereunder; provided, however, that overpayments extending beyond one year prior to notification of the City shall not be refunded. If such taxpayer has ceased doing business in the City, any such overpayment shall be refunded to the taxpayer. [Ord. 98-0037 § 11.]


3.35.120 Noncompliance – Penalty.

A. No person subject to this chapter shall fail or refuse to file tax returns or to pay tax when due, nor shall any person make a false statement or representation in, or in connection with, any such tax return, or otherwise violate or refuse to comply with this chapter or with any rule promulgated pursuant to KMC 3.35.140.

B. In addition to the interest and delinquent filing penalties set forth above, a willful violation of or failure to comply with this chapter is a civil infraction, subject to a fine of up to $250.00 for each day that a violation continues. [Ord. 98-0037 § 12.]


3.35.130 Appeal to hearing examiner.

A taxpayer aggrieved by the amount of the tax, penalties, interest, or civil infraction fine determined to be due by the city manager or his or her designee, under the provisions of this chapter, may appeal such determination to the hearing examiner in accordance with the applicable chapters of this code, as now in effect or as may subsequently be amended. [Ord. 98-0037 § 13.]


3.35.140 City manager to make rules.

The city manager shall have the power to adopt and enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or with the law for the purposes of carrying out the provisions thereof. [Ord. 98-0037 § 14.]


3.35.150 Referendum procedure.

The provisions of this chapter are subject to the referendum procedure as follows:

A. A referendum petition seeking to repeal the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall be designated the person to receive petitions of all types, within seven days of the passage by the city council of the ordinance codified in this chapter or publication thereof, whichever is later.

B. Within 10 days, the city clerk shall confer with the petitioner concerning the form and style of the petition, issue an identification number for the petition, and cause to be written a ballot title for the measure.

C. The ballot title shall be posed as a question, so that an affirmative answer to the question and an affirmative vote on the measure results in the tax or tax rate increase being imposed, and a negative answer to the question and a negative vote on the measure results in the tax or tax rate increase not being imposed. The petitioner shall be notified of the identification number and ballot title within this 10-day period.

D. After notification of the identification number and ballot title, the petitioner shall have 30 days in which to secure on petition forms the signatures of not less than 15 percent of the registered voters of the City and to file the signed petitions with the city clerk.

E. Each petition form shall contain the ballot title and the full text of the measure to be referred. The city clerk shall verify the sufficiency of the signatures on the petitions. If sufficient, valid signatures are properly submitted, the city clerk shall cause the referendum measure to be submitted to the City voters at a general or special election held on one of the dates provided in RCW 29.13.010, as determined by the city council, which election shall not take place later than 120 days after the signed petition has been filed with the city clerk. [Ord. 98-0037 § 15.]


3.35.160 Exclusive procedure.

Pursuant to RCW 35.21.706, the referendum procedure set forth in KMC 3.35.150 shall be the exclusive referendum procedure for the utility tax imposed herein, and shall supersede the procedures, to the extent applicable, under Chapters 35.17 and 35A.11 RCW and all other statutory or charter provisions for initiative or referendum which might otherwise apply. [Ord. 98-0037 § 16.]


3.35.170 Utility tax relief program.

Repealed by Ord. 19-0495. [Ord. 00-0084 § 1; Ord. 98-0037 § 19.]


Chapter 3.40 CLAIMS OR OBLIGATIONS

Sections:

3.40.010    Payment.


3.40.010 Payment.

Pursuant to RCW 35A.40.020, payment of claims or obligations of the City shall be by check. The qualified public depository, whereon such checks are to be drawn, shall be Bank of America, Kenmore branch. The City officers authorized to sign checks shall be the mayor, deputy mayor, finance director, the city manager or the city clerk. Checks shall be signed by any two of the foregoing authorized signatories. [Ord. 98-0001 § 1.]


Chapter 3.45 INSUFFICIENT FUNDS CHECKS

Sections:

3.45.010    Insufficient funds and other dishonored checks. 


3.45.010 Insufficient funds and other dishonored checks. 

A charge imposed by the city council by resolution shall be assessed against any person who has made payment to the City by check for any fee or charge when such check is returned by the bank against which it has been drawn due to insufficient funds on account, closure of the account, or any other reason resulting in the nonpayment of the check. The charge imposed by the city council by resolution shall be applied prior to the application of any payment against the fee or charge initially assessed. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 01-0116 § 1.]


Chapter 3.50 PUBLIC ART FUND

Sections:

3.50.010    One Percent for the Arts program – Established.

3.50.020    Established.

3.50.030    Definitions.

3.50.040    Deposits.

3.50.050    Method of calculation of total construction or remodeling project cost.

3.50.060    General obligation bond proceeds.

3.50.070    Uses.


3.50.010 One Percent for the Arts program – Established. 

There is hereby established the One Percent for the Arts program to set aside one percent of the funds to be expended on public projects within the City for the funding of art for public places. [Ord. 01-0115 § 1.]


3.50.020 Established. 

There is hereby established in the City treasury a subfund of the capital projects fund to be known and designated as the “public art fund” for the purpose of providing funds for One Percent for the Arts projects. [Ord. 01-0115 § 2.]


3.50.030 Definitions. 

As used in connection with the public art fund and the One Percent for the Arts program, the following terms have the meanings set forth below:

A. “Acquisition of real property” means the purchase of parcels of land or existing buildings and structures, including associated costs such as appraisals or negotiations.

B. “Art in public places” means any expression by an artist of visual works of art available to the public in areas designated as public areas within any City-owned facility, or on non-City-owned property if the work of art is installed or financed, either in whole or in part, by the City.

C. “Demolition costs” means the cost of removing buildings or other structures from the property.

D. “Equipment” means equipment or furnishings that are portable.

E. “Qualifying capital improvement project” means projects funded wholly or in part by the City at a cost exceeding $10,000 for the construction or remodel of any public buildings, decorative or commemorative structures, parks or any portion thereof; and projects involving the construction, renovation or repair of public streets, sidewalks, parking facilities, and water, sewer and storm drainage improvements. [Ord. 01-0115 § 3.]


3.50.040 Deposits. 

All authorizations and/or appropriations for qualifying capital improvement projects shall include an amount of not less than one percent of the total project cost to be set aside for transfer to the public art fund. [Ord. 01-0115 § 4.]


3.50.050 Method of calculation of total construction or remodeling project cost. 

For qualifying capital improvement projects, the minimum amount to be appropriated for art in public places shall be the total amount of the awarded construction contract as originally approved by the city council or as subsequently amended multiplied by one percent; provided, however, that any City-funded amount for the acquisition of real property or equipment or for demolition shall be excluded for the purposes of this calculation. [Ord. 01-0115 § 5.]


3.50.060 General obligation bond proceeds. 

In the case of a City project which involves the use of general obligation bond proceeds, funds appropriated shall be used for projects and for capital purposes consistent with the authorizing resolution or ordinance approved by the city council. [Ord. 01-0115 § 6.]


3.50.070 Uses.

A. The appropriations from qualifying capital improvement projects shall be pooled into the public art fund. From time to time, the city council shall select an ad hoc committee that will make recommendations for use of the one percent deposit. The city council shall review the procedures and art selection criteria established by that committee, and the city council shall approve all expenditures for One Percent for the Arts projects. These funds shall be used for:

1. Selection, acquisition, and installation or display of original works of visual art, including works of art on loan to the City or temporarily displayed at public facilities, which may be an integral part of the project, or be placed in, on or about the project or in another public facility;

2. Repairs and maintenance of public art acquired with art in public places funds; 

3. Funding for performing arts events to occur in, on or about a public facility; and

4. Other project-specific expenses of selection and acquisition of public art; provided, that no part of the funds shall be used to pay administrative staffing expenses of the program.

B. Any unexpended funds which remain in the public art fund at the end of any budget year shall not be transferred to the general fund or otherwise lapse, but said unexpended funds shall be carried forward from year to year until expended for the purposes set forth in this section, unless otherwise directed by the city council. [Ord. 01-0115 § 7.]


Chapter 3.55 DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS PROPERTY

Sections:

3.55.010    Authority to sell.

3.55.015    Declaration of surplus – Determination of value, disposition of property.

3.55.020    Public hearing.

3.55.030    Minimum price.

3.55.040    Method of sale.

3.55.050    Call for bids – Notice.

3.55.060    Opening bids – Rejection.

3.55.070    Execution of instruments of conveyance.

3.55.080    City councilmembers and staff establishing value barred from purchasing property.


3.55.010 Authority to sell.

A. Whenever it shall appear to the city council that it is in the best interests of the City that any property, whether real, personal or mixed, belonging to the City should be sold, the city council may declare such property surplus and authorize its sale.

B. The city manager, or designee, is hereby authorized to declare surplus, and to sell by any method authorized under this chapter, City personal property, the value of which the city manager, or designee, determines to be $10,000 or less. “Surplus,” as used in this chapter, is defined as any tangible, City-owned personal property that is no longer needed at present or in the foreseeable future, or that is no longer of value or use to the City. [Ord. 19-0491 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 01-0121 § 1.]


3.55.015 Declaration of surplus – Determination of value, disposition of property.

A. The city manager, or designee, may declare an item of personal property or similarly described group of items with a value of $10,000 or less surplus within the meaning of this chapter. The declaring official must document such declaration, together with a determination of value. The determined value must be the reasonable fair market value in “as is, where is” condition. The documentation shall be submitted to the city manager to evaluate the disposal request. If the request and the value are determined to be reasonable, the city manager, or designee, may sell or dispose of the surplus personal property in any commercially reasonable manner determined to be in the City’s best interest.

B. If any surplus personal property is purchased with grant funds, the city manager, or designee, shall ensure that sale or disposal of said property is consistent with any grant requirements or restrictions prior to such sale or disposal.

C. When the cost of disposing of the personal property is equal to, or exceeds, the current fair market value of the property, the city manager may authorize the donation of surplus personal property to a nonprofit charitable organization that serves the poor and/or infirm and is tax exempt under Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3). [Ord. 19-0491 § 1 (Exh. 1).]


3.55.020 Public hearing.

Prior to any sale or transfer authorized under KMC 3.55.010, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the sale or transfer if:

A. The property to be declared surplus was originally acquired for public utility purposes (RCW 35.94.040); or

B. The property is to be surplussed by means of an intergovernmental transfer of property, and the value of the property exceeds $50,000 (RCW 39.33.020). [Ord. 19-0491 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 01-0121 § 2.]


3.55.030 Minimum price.

Except for property surplussed under KMC 3.55.010(B) and 3.55.015, the city council shall set a minimum price at which all surplus property may be sold. In setting the minimum price, the city council may first require that an appraisal be made. [Ord. 19-0491 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 01-0121 § 3.]


3.55.040 Method of sale.

Property declared surplus under this chapter may be sold upon competitive bids, on a negotiated basis, or auctioned or exchanged for goods and services, as the council may direct. If the council does not direct a method of sale, or the city manager, or designee, declares the property surplus under KMC 3.55.010(B) and 3.55.015, the city manager, or designee, shall determine the method of sale. [Ord. 19-0491 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 01-0121 § 4.]


3.55.050 Call for bids – Notice.

If the property is to be sold upon competitive bids, the city clerk shall give notice that the City will invite bids for purchase of the property by one publication thereof in the City’s official newspaper, posting at City Hall, and/or such other means as the council may direct, if any. The notice shall be posted and published at least 10 days before the date the bids are to be opened. [Ord. 19-0491 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 01-0121 § 5.]


3.55.060 Opening bids – Rejection.

The bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the notice. The city council or the city manager, or designee, for property sold under KMC 3.55.010(B), may reject any or all bids, or the bid for any one or more of the parcels or items of property, real or personal, included in the aforesaid call for bids. [Ord. 19-0491 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 01-0121 § 6.]


3.55.070 Execution of instruments of conveyance.

Upon the council’s acceptance of an offer to purchase property surplussed under KMC 3.55.010(A) or upon the city manager’s, or designee’s, acceptance of an offer to purchase property surplussed under KMC 3.55.010(B), the city manager, or designee, is hereby authorized to cause the necessary instruments for conveyance of the property to be prepared and to execute such instruments. [Ord. 19-0491 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 01-0121 § 7.]


3.55.080 City councilmembers and staff establishing value barred from purchasing property.

Members of the city council may not purchase property from the City, regardless of the value. Any City employee that had a role in establishing the value of surplus personal property may not purchase said property. Otherwise, City employees may purchase City property; provided, employees shall not be given preferential treatment in the terms or conditions of the sale. [Ord. 19-0491 § 1 (Exh. 1); Ord. 01-0121 § 8.]


Chapter 3.60 INTERFUND LOANS

Sections:

3.60.010    Interfund loan authority.

3.60.020    Interest.


3.60.010 Interfund loan authority.

A. The finance director, after consulting with the city manager, is authorized to make interfund loans from one City fund to another City fund for periods not exceeding three months.

B. Each interfund loan shall be documented with a financial plan reflecting a repayment schedule. The financial plan shall also reflect that the loaning fund will have adequate cash balances to continue to meet current expenses payable from the fund after the loan is made and until repayment thereof and that the loan is necessary to enable the receiving fund to meet current expenses payable from the receiving funds.

C. Appropriate accounting records shall be maintained to reflect the balances of loans in every fund affected by such transaction.

D. Any extension of an interfund loan beyond the three-month period shall required city council approval by resolution.

E. The finance director shall include the status of any interfund loan in his or her monthly financial report to the city council. [Ord. 07-0269 § 1.]


3.60.020 Interest.

Interfund loans authorized under KMC 3.60.010 shall be without interest unless interest is required by law, in which case the finance director shall designate the appropriate rate based the current investment earning rates of City investments. [07-0269 § 1.]


Chapter 3.65 MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION

Sections:

3.65.010    Purpose.

3.65.020    Definitions.

3.65.030    Residential targeted areas – Criteria – Designation – Rescission.

3.65.040    Project eligibility.

3.65.050    Application procedure – Fee.

3.65.060    Application review – Issuance of conditional certificate – Denial – Appeal.

3.65.070    Amendment of contract.

3.65.080    Extension of conditional certificate.

3.65.090    Final certificate – Application – Issuance – Denial and appeal.

3.65.100    Exemption – Duration – Limits.

3.65.105    Affordable housing requirements.

3.65.110    Annual certification – Cancellation of exemption.

3.65.120    Appeals to hearing examiner.

3.65.130    Annual reporting.


3.65.010 Purpose.

A. The purposes of this chapter are:

l. To encourage more multifamily housing opportunities, including affordable housing, within the City;

2. To stimulate the construction of new multifamily housing, including affordable housing, and the rehabilitation of existing vacant and underutilized buildings for multifamily housing;

3. To increase the supply of multifamily housing opportunities within the City for low- and moderate-income households; and

4. To accomplish the planning goals required under the Growth Management Act, Chapter 36.70A RCW, as implemented by the City’s comprehensive plan.

B. Any one or a combination of these purposes may be furthered by the designation of a residential targeted area under this chapter. [Ord. 19-0479 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 07-0271 § 1.]


3.65.020 Definitions.

A. “Affordable housing” means housing reserved for occupancy by eligible households having monthly housing expenses less than or equal to 30 percent of the monthly household income adjusted for household size. Housing expenses for ownership housing include mortgage and mortgage insurance, property taxes, property insurance and homeowner’s dues. Housing expenses for rental housing include rent and appropriate utility allowance.

B. “Assessor” means the King County assessor.

C. “City manager” means the City of Kenmore city manager or his or her designee(s).

D. “Eligible household” means a household that meets all qualifications for occupying affordable housing as set forth in the agreement referenced in KMC 3.65.040(F), including limits on household annual income at the time of initial occupancy and, if applicable, any requirements for recertification of income eligibility.

E. “Household” means a single person, family, or unrelated persons living together.

F. “Household annual income” means the aggregate annual income of all persons in the household over 18 years of age for a period of at least four months.

G. “King County median income” means the median family income for the Seattle-Bellevue, WA HUD Metro FMR Area as most recently determined by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) under Section 8(f)(3) of the United States Housing Act of 1937, as amended, or if programs under said Section 8(f)(3) are terminated, median family income is determined under the method used by the Secretary prior to such termination. In the event that HUD no longer publishes median family income figures for the Seattle-Bellevue, WA HUD Metro FMR Area or King County, the City may use any other method for determining the King County median income, adjusted for household size.

H. “Multifamily housing” means a building or townhouse project having four or more dwelling units designed for permanent residential occupancy resulting from new construction or rehabilitation or conversion of vacant, underutilized, or substandard buildings.

I. “Owner” means the owner of the real property on which the project proposed for tax exemption is located, and its successors and assigns. If tax exemption is requested or authorized for 12 years pursuant to this chapter, “owner” also means a nonprofit corporation that will own or owns the affordable housing units.

J. “Permanent residential occupancy” means multifamily housing that provides either rental or owner occupancy for a period of at least one month, and excludes hotels and motels that predominantly offer rental accommodation on a daily or weekly basis.

K. “Rehabilitation improvements” means:

1. Modifications to an existing structure, the residential portion of which has been vacant for at least 12 months prior to application for exemption under this chapter, that are made to achieve a condition of substantial compliance with the applicable building and construction codes contained in KMC Title 15; or

2. Modifications to an existing occupied residential structure or mixed use structure that contains occupied residential units and that adds at least four multifamily dwelling units.

L. “Residential targeted area” means an area within an urban center as defined by Chapter 84.14 RCW that has been so designated by the city council pursuant to this chapter.

M. “Substantial compliance” means compliance with the applicable building and construction codes contained in KMC Title 15 that is typically required for rehabilitation as opposed to new construction. [Ord. 19-0479 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 13-0363 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 07-0271 § 1.]


3.65.030 Residential targeted areas – Criteria – Designation – Rescission.

A. Following notice and public hearing as prescribed in RCW 84.14.040, the city council may designate one or more residential targeted areas, in addition to the areas stated in subsection D of this section, upon a finding by the city council that the residential targeted area meets the following criteria:

1. The residential targeted area is within an urban center as defined by Chapter 84.14 RCW;

2. The residential targeted area lacks sufficient available, desirable and convenient residential housing, including affordable housing, to meet the needs of the public who would be likely to live in the urban center if affordable, desirable, attractive and livable residences were available; and

3. Providing additional housing opportunity, including affordable housing, in the residential targeted area will assist in achieving one or more of the following purposes:

a. Encourage increased residential opportunities, including affordable housing opportunities, within the City; or

b. Stimulate the construction of new multifamily housing; or

c. Encourage the rehabilitation of existing vacant and underutilized buildings for multifamily housing.

B. In designating a residential targeted area, the city council may also consider other factors, including:

1. Whether additional housing in the residential targeted area will attract and maintain an increase in the number of permanent residents;

2. Whether providing additional housing opportunities for low- and moderate-income households would meet the needs of citizens likely to live in the area if affordable housing were available;

3. Whether an increased permanent residential population in the residential targeted area will help to achieve the planning goals mandated by the Growth Management Act under Chapter 36.70A RCW, as implemented through the City’s comprehensive plan; or

4. Whether encouraging additional housing in the residential targeted area supports better jobs and housing balance.

C. At any time the city council may, by ordinance, amend or rescind the designation of a residential targeted area pursuant to the same procedural requirements as set forth in this chapter for original designation.

D. The following areas meet the criteria of this chapter on residential targeted areas and are designated as such:

1. Kenmore Village. The parcels lying northwest of the intersection of Northeast 181st Street and 68th Avenue Northeast, which are shown on the map attached to Ordinance No. 07-271; and

2. Transit Oriented Development District. The parcels lying within the transit oriented development district overlay, which are shown on the map attached to Ordinance No. 15-0406. [Ord. 19-0479 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 07-0271 § 1.]


3.65.040 Project eligibility.

To be eligible for exemption from property taxation under this chapter, the property shall satisfy all of the following requirements:

A. The property must be located in a residential targeted area.

B. A building or buildings in the project on the property shall have at least four dwelling units. Any project may be proposed in phases. If applicable, the affordable housing units may be located in all or some of the buildings in the project.

C. For new construction, a minimum of four new dwelling units must be created; for rehabilitation or conversion of existing occupied structures, a minimum of four additional dwelling units must be added.

D. Existing dwelling units proposed for rehabilitation shall have been unoccupied for a minimum of 12 months prior to submission of an application and shall fail to comply with one or more requirements of the building code as set forth in KMC Title 15.

E. No application may result in the net loss of existing affordable housing which receives housing assistance through Federal low- or moderate-income housing programs (e.g., HUD Section 8 program).

F. Prior to issuing a certificate of occupancy, an agreement in a form acceptable to the city attorney that addresses eligible household qualifications and any other applicable topics of the affordable housing units shall be recorded with the King County department of records and elections. This agreement shall be a covenant running with the land and shall be binding on the assigns and successors of the owners.

G. The project shall comply with all applicable zoning, land use, building and housing requirements contained in this code, including, but not limited to, if the project is on property located in the transit oriented development district overlay, the project shall comply with Chapter 18.29 KMC and all other applicable zoning regulations.

H. New construction of multifamily housing and rehabilitation improvements shall be scheduled to be completed within three years from the date of approval of the application, or within an authorized extension of this time limit. [Ord. 19-0487§ 1; Ord. 19-0479 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 07-0271 § 1.]


3.65.050 Application procedure – Fee.

A. The owner of property applying for exemption under this chapter shall submit an application to the city manager, on a form established by the city manager. The owner shall verify the application by oath or affirmation. The application shall contain such information as the city manager may deem necessary or useful, and shall include:

1. A brief written description of the project, including phasing if applicable, and preliminary schematic site and floor plans of the multifamily units and the structure(s) in which they are proposed to be located;

2. A statement from the owner acknowledging the potential tax liability when the property ceases to be eligible for exemption under this chapter;

3. In the case of rehabilitation of an existing vacant structure, verification of noncompliance with applicable building and housing codes, and an affidavit from the owner verifying that the existing dwelling units have been vacant for a period of 12 months prior to filing the application; and

4. If tax exemption for 12 years is proposed, and the owner of the affordable housing units will be different from the owner applying for the exemption, a description of the person or entity that will own the affordable housing units and an explanation of the financing plan for such units.

B. At the time of application under this section, the owner shall pay an initial application fee as established by resolution and pursuant to the provisions of RCW 84.14.080.

C. The city manager shall notify the owner within 28 days of the application being filed if the city manager determines that an application is not complete, and shall identify what additional information is required before the application will be complete. Within 14 days of receiving additional information, the city manager shall notify the owner in writing if the city manager determines that the application is still not complete, and what additional information is necessary. An application shall be deemed to be complete if the city manager does not notify the applicant in writing by the deadlines in this section that the application is incomplete; however, a determination of completeness does not preclude the city manager from requiring additional information during the review process if more information is needed to evaluate the application according to the criteria in this chapter.

D. The application shall be submitted any time before, but no later than, the date the building or other construction permit is issued under KMC Title 15. [Ord. 19-0479 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 07-0271 § 1.]


3.65.060 Application review – Issuance of conditional certificate – Denial – Appeal.

A. The city manager shall approve or deny an application under this chapter. If the application is approved, the owner shall enter into a contract with the City, subject to approval by resolution of the city council regarding the terms and conditions of the project and eligibility for exemption under this chapter. If tax exemption for 12 years is requested, the owner of the affordable housing units, if different from the owner of the other multifamily housing units, also shall enter into such contract. The city council’s resolution to approve the owner’s contract with the City shall be adopted within 90 days of the city manager’s receipt of the completed application. Upon city council approval of the contract, the city manager shall execute the contract which shall be substantially in the form of the contract as approved by the city council, and shall issue a conditional certificate of acceptance of tax exemption. The conditional certificate shall expire three years from the date of approval unless an extension is granted as provided in this chapter.

B. If the application is denied, the city manager shall state in writing the reasons for the denial and send notice of denial to the owner’s last known address within 10 days of the denial.

C. An owner may appeal the city manager’s denial of the application to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk along with the appeal fee as established by resolution within 30 days of the date of the denial. The appeal before the city council shall be based upon the record before the city manager, and the city manager’s decision shall be upheld unless the owner can show that there is no substantial evidence on the record to support the city manager’s decision. The city council’s decision on appeal is final. [Ord. 19-0479 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 07-0271 § 1.]


3.65.070 Amendment of contract.

A. Any owner seeking an amendment to the contract may do so by submitting a request in writing to the city manager at any time within three years of the date of the city council’s approval of the contract.

B. The city manager shall have authority to approve amendments to the contract that are reasonably within the scope and intent of the contract approved by the city council. Amendments that are not reasonably within the scope and intent of the approved contract, as determined by the city manager, shall be submitted to the city council for approval by resolution.

C. Any owner seeking amendments to the contract, which in the sole discretion of the city manager require approval by the city council, shall pay to the City an amendment application fee as established by resolution.

D. The date for expiration of the conditional certificate shall not be extended by contract amendment unless: (1) all the conditions for extension set forth in KMC 3.65.080 are met; or (2) the conditions set forth in KMC 3.65.080(A) and (B) are met and the city council specifically approves the extension. [Ord. 19-0479 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 07-0271 § 1.]


3.65.080 Extension of conditional certificate.

The conditional certificate may be extended by the city manager for a period not to exceed 24 consecutive months. The owner shall submit a written request stating the grounds for the extension together with a fee as established by resolution. The city manager may grant an extension if the city manager determines that:

A. The anticipated failure to complete construction or rehabilitation within the required time period is due to circumstances beyond the control of the owner;

B. The owner has been acting and could reasonably be expected to continue to act in good faith and with due diligence; and

C. All the conditions of the original contract between the applicant and the City will be satisfied upon completion of the project. [Ord. 19-0479 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 07-0271 § 1.]


3.65.090 Final certificate – Application – Issuance – Denial and appeal.

A. Upon completion of the rehabilitation improvements or new construction as provided in the contract between the applicant and the City, and upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the owner may request a final certificate of tax exemption. The owner shall file with the city manager such information as the city manager may deem necessary or useful to evaluate eligibility for the final certificate, and shall include:

1. A statement of expenditures made with respect to each multifamily housing unit and to each affordable housing unit, and the total expenditures made with respect to the entire property;

2. A description of the completed work and a statement of qualification for the exemption;

3. A statement that the work was completed within the required three-year period or any approved extension; and

4. If applicable, a statement that the project meets the city affordable housing unit requirements. In addition, at the time of application for final certificate under this section, the owner shall pay a fee in the amount necessary to cover the assessor’s administrative costs. If the city manager approves the application, the City shall forward the fee for the assessor’s administrative costs to the assessor. If the city manager denies the application, the City shall refund the fee for the assessor’s administrative costs to the owner.

B. Within 30 days of receipt of all materials required for a final certificate, the city manager shall determine whether the completed work is consistent with the application and contract approved by the city council and is qualified for exemption under Chapter 84.14 RCW, and which specific improvements completed meet the requirements of this chapter and the required findings of RCW 84.14.060.

C. If the city manager determines that the project has been completed in accordance with subsection A of this section, the City shall file a final certificate of tax exemption with the assessor within 10 days of the expiration of the 30-day period provided under subsection B of this section.

D. The city manager is authorized to cause to be recorded, or to require the owner to record, in the real property records of the King County department of records and elections, the contract with the City required under KMC 3.65.060(A), and such other documents as will identify such terms and conditions of eligibility for exemption under this chapter as the city manager deems appropriate for recording, including requirements under this chapter relating to affordability of units.

E. The city manager shall notify the owner in writing that the City will not file a final certificate if the city manager determines (1) that the project was not completed within the required three-year period or any approved extension or was not completed in accordance with subsection B of this section or (2) that the owner’s property is not otherwise qualified under this chapter.

F. Within 30 days of the date of notice of denial of final certificate, the owner may file a notice of appeal with the city clerk along with the appeal fee as established by resolution specifying the factual and legal basis for the appeal. The appeal shall be heard by the City’s hearing examiner pursuant to KMC 3.65.120. [Ord. 19-0479 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 07-0271 § 1.]


3.65.100 Exemption – Duration – Limits.

A. The value of new housing construction and rehabilitation improvements qualifying under this chapter shall be exempt from ad valorem property taxation:

l. For eight successive years beginning January 1st of the year immediately following the calendar year of issuance of the certificate; or

2. For 12 successive years beginning January 1st of the year immediately following the calendar year of issuance of the certificate, if (a) the owner commits to renting or selling at least 25 percent of the multifamily housing units as affordable housing units to low- and moderate-income households whose adjusted income is equal to or less than 60 percent of the King County median income and (b) the owners and renters of the affordable housing units meet the income and eligibility requirements of this chapter. If the original owner of the property transfers title to the portion of the property on which the affordable housing units are located to the nonprofit corporation that owns such units, such transfer shall not affect the 12-year tax exemption for the new housing construction and rehabilitation improvements qualifying under this chapter.

B. The exemptions in subsections (A)(1) and (2) of this section do not apply to the value of land or to the value of improvements not qualifying under this chapter; to increases in assessed valuation of land and nonqualifying improvements, or to increases made by lawful order of the King County board of equalization, Washington State Department of Revenue, State Board of Tax Appeals, or King County; or to a class of property throughout the county or a specific area of the county to achieve uniformity of assessment or appraisal as required by law. In the case of rehabilitation of existing buildings, the exemption does not include the value of improvements constructed prior to submission of the completed application required under this chapter. [Ord. 19-0479 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 13-0363 § 3; Ord. 07-0271 § 1.]


3.65.105 Affordable housing requirements.

The following  shall apply to any affordable housing required under this chapter:

A. Affordable housing units shall remain affordable for the life of the project from the date of initial occupancy.

B. The mix and configuration of affordable housing units (e.g., studios, one-bedroom units, two-bedroom units, etc.) shall be substantially proportional at each affordability level to the mix and configuration of the units in the entire project, unless otherwise approved by the city manager.

C. The locations of the affordable housing units shall be approved by the city manager with the intent that they generally be intermingled with all other dwelling units in the development.

D. If the percentage of affordable units results in a fraction, the number of affordable units shall be rounded up to the next whole number. [Ord. 19-0479 § 1 (Exh. A).]


3.65.110 Annual certification – Cancellation of exemption.

A. A property that receives a tax exemption under this chapter shall continue to comply with the contract and the requirements of this chapter, as this chapter existed on the date the final certificate of tax exemption was issued, in order to retain its property tax exemption.

B. Thirty days after the anniversary of the date the City filed the final certificate of tax exemption and each year for the tax exemption period, the owner shall file a certification with the city manager, verified upon oath or affirmation, which shall contain such information as the city manager may deem necessary or useful, and shall include the following information:

1. A statement of occupancy and vacancy of the rehabilitated or newly constructed property during the previous year;

2. Information demonstrating compliance of the owners and renters of the affordable housing units with the requirements of KMC 3.65.100(A)(2), this chapter as it existed on the date the final certificate of tax exemption was issued, and the contract with the City, if applicable;

3. A certification that the property has not changed use since the date of filing of the final certificate of tax exemption;

4. A description of any improvements or improvements constructed after the filing of the final certificate or last declaration;

5. The income of each renter household at the time of initial occupancy and the income of each initial purchaser of owner-occupied units at the time of purchase for each of the units receiving a tax exemption; and

6. Any additional information requested by the City in regard to the units receiving a tax exemption.

C. Failure to submit the annual declaration may result in cancellation of the tax exemption.

D. For the duration of the exemption granted under this chapter, the property shall have no violation of applicable zoning, land use and building and housing code requirements of this code for which the designated City department or contract agency shall have issued a notice of violation or notice of civil infraction that is not resolved by a certificate of compliance, certificate of release, or withdrawal within the time period for compliance provided in such notice of violation or notice of civil infraction and any extension of the time period for compliance granted by the city manager.

E. For owner-occupied affordable housing units, in addition to any other requirements in this chapter, the affordable owner-occupied units must continue to meet the income eligibility conditions of this chapter, as it existed on the date the final certificate of tax exemption was issued. In the event of a sale of an affordable owner-occupied unit to a household other than an eligible household, the property tax exemption for that affordable owner-occupied unit shall be cancelled pursuant to this section.

F. For renter-occupied affordable housing units, in addition to any other requirements in this chapter, the affordable renter-occupied units must continue to meet the income eligibility conditions of this chapter, as it existed on the date the final certificate or tax exemption was issued. In the event of a rental of an affordable renter-occupied unit to a household other than an eligible household, the property tax exemption for the property shall be cancelled pursuant to this section.

G. If the owner converts the multifamily housing to another use, the owner shall notify the city manager and the assessor within 60 days of the change in use. Upon such change in use, the tax exemption shall be cancelled and additional taxes, interest and penalty imposed pursuant to State law.

H. The city manager shall cancel the tax exemption for any property or individual unit that no longer complies with the terms of the contract or with the requirements of this chapter. Upon cancellation, additional taxes, interest and penalties may be imposed pursuant to State law. Upon determining that a tax exemption shall be cancelled, the city manager shall notify the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested. The owner may appeal the determination by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk along with the appeal fee established by resolution, within 30 days of the date of notice of cancellation, specifying the factual and legal basis for the appeal. The appeal shall be heard by the hearing examiner pursuant to KMC 3.65.120.

I. The City reserves the right to establish in the affordable housing agreement referred to in KMC 3.65.040 fees for monitoring the affordable housing units and the owner’s compliance with the agreement. The purpose of any monitoring fee is for the review and processing of documents to maintain compliance with income and affordability restrictions of the affordable housing agreement. The City may adjust the monitoring fee over time to account for inflation. [Ord. 19-0479 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 07-0271 § 1.]


3.65.120 Appeals to hearing examiner.

A. The City’s hearing examiner is provided jurisdiction to hear appeals of the decisions of the city manager on the final certificate of tax exemption and cancellation thereof.

B. The hearing examiner’s procedures shall apply to hearings under this chapter to the extent that they are consistent with the requirements of this chapter and Chapter 84.14 RCW. The hearing examiner shall give substantial weight to the city manager’s decision and the burden of overcoming the weight shall be on the appellant. The decision of the hearing examiner constitutes the final decision of the City. An aggrieved party may appeal the decision to superior court under RCW 34.05.510 through 34.05.598 if the appeal is properly filed within 30 days of the date of the notification by the City to the appellant of that decision. [Ord. 19-0479 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 07-0271 § 1.]


3.65.130 Annual reporting.

A. If the City issues tax exemption certificates pursuant to this chapter, the city manager shall submit annually by December 31st of each year to the Department of Community, Trade and Economic Development the report required by RCW 84.14.l00.

B. Annually, beginning in 2010, the city manager shall review the program established by this chapter and provide a report to the city council outlining development activity, types and numbers of units produced and their locations, rent and sales prices, information regarding the number of low- and moderate-income households benefiting from the program, and other appropriate factors. The report may include recommendations on whether any neighborhoods should be added or removed and whether affordability limits should be changed in certain areas, and shall analyze any issues related to the use of the program for home-ownership units. The annual report shall be submitted to the city council no later than March 30th of each year the program is in effect, starting in 2010. Each report shall include information for the previous year. [Ord. 19-0479 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 13-0363 § 4; Ord. 07-0271 § 1.]


Chapter 3.70 BIENNIAL BUDGET

Sections:

3.70.010    Biennial budget established.

3.70.020    Mid-biennial review.


3.70.010 Biennial budget established.

Pursuant to Chapter 35A.34 RCW, the city council hereby establishes, beginning January 1, 2009, a two-year biennial budget for the City of Kenmore. The 2009-2010 biennial budget and all subsequent budgets shall be prepared, considered, and adopted under the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 35A.34 RCW. [Ord. 08-0281 § 1.]


3.70.020 Mid-biennial review.

Pursuant to Chapter 35A.34 RCW, the city council hereby provides for a mid-biennial review and modification of the biennial budget which shall occur no sooner that September 1st nor later than the conclusion of the first year of the fiscal biennium. The city manager shall prepare the proposed budget modifications which shall be distributed to members of the city council, shall make copies available to the public, shall provide for publication of notice of hearings consistent with publication of notices for adoption of other City ordinances, and shall provide for public hearings on the proposed budget modifications. The budget modification shall be by ordinance approved in the same manner as other ordinances of the City. [Ord. 08-0281 § 2.]


Chapter 3.75 BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION TAX

Sections:

3.75.010    Purpose.

3.75.020    Exercise of revenue license power.

3.75.028    Administrative provisions.

3.75.030    Definitions.

3.75.050    Imposition of the tax – Tax or fee levied.

3.75.070    Multiple activities credit when activities take place in one or more cities with eligible gross receipts taxes.

3.75.075    Deductions to prevent multiple taxation of manufacturing.

3.75.076    Assignment of gross income derived from intangibles.

3.75.077    Allocation and apportionment of income when activities take place in more than one jurisdiction.

3.75.090    Exemptions.

3.75.100    Deductions.

3.75.120    Tax part of overhead.


3.75.010 Purpose.

This chapter implements Washington Constitution Article XI, Section 12, and RCW 35A.82.020 and 35A.11.020, which give municipalities the authority to license for revenue. In the absence of a legal or constitutional prohibition, municipalities have the power to define taxation categories as they see fit in order to respond to the unique concerns and responsibilities of local government. It is intended that this chapter be as uniform as possible among the various municipalities and consistent with the mandatory requirements of Chapter 35.102 RCW for municipalities. Uniformity with provisions of State tax laws should not be presumed, and references in this chapter to statutory or administrative rule changes do not mean State tax statutes or rules promulgated by the Department of Revenue. [Ord. 15-0414 § 1.]


3.75.020 Exercise of revenue license power.

The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the power of the City to license for revenue. The provisions of this chapter are subject to periodic statutory or administrative rule changes or judicial interpretations of the ordinances or rules. The responsibility rests with the licensee or taxpayer to reconfirm tax computation procedures and remain in compliance with the City code. [Ord. 15-0414 § 1.]


3.75.028 Administrative provisions.

The administrative provisions contained in Chapter 3.80 KMC shall be fully applicable to the provisions of this chapter except as expressly stated to the contrary herein. [Ord. 15-0414 § 1.]


3.75.030 Definitions.

In construing the provisions of this chapter, the following definitions shall be applied. Words in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular.

A. “Business” includes all activities engaged in with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage to the taxpayer or to another person or class, directly or indirectly.

B. “Business and occupation tax” or “gross receipts tax” means a tax imposed on or measured by the value of products, the gross income of the business, or the gross proceeds of sales, as the case may be, and that is the legal liability of the business.

C. “Commercial or industrial use” means the following uses of products, including by-products, by the extractor or manufacturer thereof:

1. Any use as a consumer; and

2. The manufacturing of articles, substances or commodities.

D.  “Delivery” means the transfer of possession of tangible personal property between the seller and the buyer or the buyer’s representative. Delivery to an employee of a buyer is considered delivery to the buyer. Transfer of possession of tangible personal property occurs when the buyer or the buyer’s representative first takes physical control of the property or exercises dominion and control over the property. “Dominion and control” means the buyer has the ability to put the property to the buyer’s own purposes. It means the buyer or the buyer’s representative has made the final decision to accept or reject the property, and the seller has no further right to possession of the property and the buyer has no right to return the property to the seller, other than under a warranty contract. A buyer does not exercise dominion and control over tangible personal property merely by arranging for shipment of the property from the seller to itself. A buyer’s representative is a person, other than an employee of the buyer, who is authorized in writing by the buyer to receive tangible personal property and take dominion and control by making the final decision to accept or reject the property. Neither a shipping company nor a seller can serve as a buyer’s representative. It is immaterial where the contract of sale is negotiated or where the buyer obtains title to the property. Delivery terms and other provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code (RCW Title 62A) do not determine when or where delivery of tangible personal property occurs for purposes of taxation.

E. “Digital automated service,” “digital code,” and “digital goods” have the same meaning as in RCW 82.04.192. 

F. “Digital products” means digital goods, digital codes, digital automated services, and the services described in RCW 82.04.050(2)(g) and (6)(b).

G. “Eligible gross receipts tax” means a tax which:

1. Is imposed on the act or privilege of engaging in business activities within KMC 3.75.050; and

2. Is measured by the gross volume of business, in terms of gross receipts and is not an income tax or value added tax; and

3. Is not, pursuant to law or custom, separately stated from the sales price; and

4. Is not a sales or use tax, business license fee, franchise fee, royalty or severance tax measured by volume or weight, or concession charge, or payment for the use and enjoyment of property, property right or a privilege; and

5. Is a tax imposed by a local jurisdiction, whether within or without the State of Washington, and not by a country, state, province, or any other nonlocal jurisdiction above the county level.

H. Engaging in Business.

1. “Engaging in business” means commencing, conducting, or continuing in business, and also the exercise of corporate or franchise powers, as well as liquidating a business when the liquidators thereof hold themselves out to the public as conducting such business.

2. This subsection sets forth examples of activities that constitute engaging in business in the City, and establishes safe harbors for certain of those activities so that a person who meets the criteria may engage in de minimis business activities in the City without having to register and obtain a business license or pay City business and occupation taxes. The activities listed in this subsection are illustrative only and are not intended to narrow the definition of “engaging in business” in subsection (H)(1) of this section. If an activity is not listed, whether it constitutes engaging in business in the City shall be determined by considering all the facts and circumstances and applicable law.

3. Without being all inclusive, any one of the following activities conducted within the City by a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker or another acting on its behalf, constitutes engaging in business and may subject them to pay City business and occupation tax:

a. Owning, renting, leasing, maintaining, or having the right to use, or using, tangible personal property, intangible personal property, or real property permanently or temporarily located in the City.

b. Owning, renting, leasing, using, or maintaining an office, place of business, or other establishment in the City.

c. Soliciting sales.

d. Making repairs or providing maintenance or service to real or tangible personal property, including warranty work and property maintenance.

e. Providing technical assistance or service, including quality control, product inspections, warranty work, or similar services on or in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf.

f. Installing, constructing, or supervising installation or construction of real or tangible personal property.

g. Soliciting, negotiating, or approving franchise, license, or other similar agreements.

h. Collecting current or delinquent accounts.

i. Picking up and transporting tangible personal property, solid waste, construction debris, or excavated materials.

j. Providing disinfecting and pest control services, employment and labor pool services, home nursing care, janitorial services, appraising, landscape architectural services, security system services, surveying, and real estate services including the listing of homes and managing real property.

k. Rendering professional services such as those provided by accountants, architects, attorneys, auctioneers, consultants, engineers, professional athletes, barbers, baseball clubs and other sports organizations, chemists, consultants, psychologists, court reporters, dentists, doctors, detectives, laboratory operators, teachers, and veterinarians.

l. Meeting with customers or potential customers, even when no sales or orders are solicited at the meetings.

m. Training or recruiting agents, representatives, independent contractors, brokers or others, domiciled or operating on a job in the City, acting on its behalf, or for customers or potential customers.

n. Investigating, resolving, or otherwise assisting in resolving customer complaints.

o. In-store stocking or manipulating products or goods, sold to and owned by a customer, regardless of where sale and delivery of the goods took place.

p. Delivering goods in vehicles owned, rented, leased, used, or maintained by the person or another acting on its behalf.

4. If a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker or another acting on the person’s behalf, engages in no other activities in or with the City but the following, it need not register and obtain a business license and pay tax:

a. Meeting with suppliers of goods and services as a customer.

b. Meeting with government representatives in their official capacity, other than those performing contracting or purchasing functions.

c. Attending meetings, such as board meetings, retreats, seminars, and conferences, or other meetings wherein the person does not provide training in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf. This provision does not apply to any board of director member or attendee engaging in business such as a member of a board of directors who attends a board meeting.

d. Renting tangible or intangible property as a customer when the property is not used in the City.

e. Attending, but not participating in, a “trade show” or “multiple vendor events.” Persons participating at a trade show shall review the City’s trade show or multiple vendor event ordinances.

f. Conducting advertising through the mail.

g. Soliciting sales by phone from a location outside the City.

5. A seller located outside the City merely delivering goods into the City by means of common carrier is not required to register and obtain a business license; provided, that it engages in no other business activities in the City. Such activities do not include those in subsection (H)(4) of this section.

The City expressly intends that engaging in business include any activity sufficient to establish nexus for purposes of applying the tax under the law and the constitutions of the United States and the State of Washington. Nexus is presumed to continue as long as the taxpayer benefits from the activity that constituted the original nexus generating contact or subsequent contacts. 

I. “Extracting” is the activity engaged in by an extractor and is reportable under the extracting classification.

J. “Extractor” means every person who from the person’s own land or from the land of another under a right or license granted by lease or contract, either directly or by contracting with others for the necessary labor or mechanical services, for sale or for commercial or industrial use, mines, quarries, takes or produces coal, oil, natural gas, ore, stone, sand, gravel, clay, mineral or other natural resource product; or fells, cuts or takes timber, Christmas trees, other than plantation Christmas trees, or other natural products; or takes fish, shellfish, or other sea or inland water foods or products. “Extractor” does not include persons performing under contract the necessary labor or mechanical services for others; or persons meeting the definition of farmer.

K. “Extractor for hire” means a person who performs under contract necessary labor or mechanical services for an extractor.

L. “Gross income of the business” means the value proceeding or accruing by reason of the transaction of the business engaged in and includes gross proceeds of sales, compensation for the rendition of services, gains realized from trading in stocks, bonds, or other evidences of indebtedness, interest, discount, rents, royalties, fees, commissions, dividends, and other emoluments however designated, all without any deduction on account of the cost of tangible property sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs, interest, discount, delivery costs, taxes, or any other expense whatsoever paid or accrued and without any deduction on account of losses.

M. “Gross proceeds of sales” means the value proceeding or accruing from the sale of tangible personal property, digital goods, digital codes, digital automated services or for other services rendered, without any deduction on account of the cost of property sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs, interest, discount paid, delivery costs, taxes, or any other expense whatsoever paid or accrued and without any deduction on account of losses.

N. “Heavy manufacturing” as defined in KMC 18.20.1676 means an establishment engaged in the mechanical, physical, or chemical transformation of materials, substances, or components into new products that is likely to generate levels of truck traffic, noise, pollution, vibration, dust, fumes, odors, radiation, poisons, pesticides, or other hazardous materials, fire or explosion hazards, or other undesirable conditions that would be injurious to health or offensive to the senses, or would be an obstruction to the free use of surrounding property and essentially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property. Heavy manufacturing facilities use larger quantities of raw materials and may require significant outdoor storage. Examples include concrete manufacture, asphalt batch plants, mass production of commercial or recreational vehicles or large machinery, production of industrial organic and inorganic chemicals, animal slaughtering, and refining, extruding, rolling, or drawing of ferrous or nonferrous metals.

O. “Manufacturing” means the activity conducted by a manufacturer and is reported under the manufacturing classification. 

P. Manufacturer, to Manufacture.

1. “Manufacturer” means every person who, either directly or by contracting with others for the necessary labor or mechanical services, manufactures for sale or for commercial or industrial use from the person’s own materials or ingredients any products. When the owner of equipment or facilities furnishes, or sells to the customer prior to manufacture, materials or ingredients equal to less than 20 percent of the total value of all materials or ingredients that become a part of the finished product, the owner of the equipment or facilities will be deemed to be a processor for hire, and not a manufacturer. 

2. “To manufacture” means all activities of a commercial or industrial nature wherein labor or skill is applied, by hand or machinery, to materials or ingredients so that as a result thereof a new, different or useful product is produced for sale or commercial or industrial use, and shall include:

a. The production of special made or custom made articles;

b. The production of dental appliances, devices, restorations, substitutes, or other dental laboratory products by a dental laboratory or dental technician;

c. Crushing and/or blending of rock, sand, stone, gravel, or ore; and

d. The producing of articles for sale, or for commercial or industrial use from raw materials or prepared materials by giving such materials, articles, and substances of trade or commerce new forms, qualities, properties or combinations including, but not limited to, such activities as making, fabricating, processing, refining, mixing, slaughtering, packing, aging, curing, mild curing, preserving, canning, and the preparing and freezing of fresh fruits and vegetables.

“To manufacture” shall not include the production of digital goods or the production of computer software if the computer software is delivered from the seller to the purchaser by means other than tangible storage media, including the delivery by use of a tangible storage media where the tangible storage media is not physically transferred to the purchaser. 

Q. “Person” means any individual, receiver, administrator, executor, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust, estate, firm, copartnership, joint venture, club, company, joint stock company, business trust, municipal corporation, political subdivision of the State of Washington, corporation, limited liability company, association, society, or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit, or otherwise and the United States or any instrumentality thereof.

R. “Retailing” means the activity of engaging in making sales at retail and is reported under the retailing classification.

S. “Retail service” shall include the sale of or charge made for personal, business, or professional services including amounts designated as interest, rents, fees, admission, and other service emoluments however designated, received by persons engaging in the following business activities:

1. Amusement and recreation services including but not limited to golf, pool, billiards, skating, bowling, swimming, bungee jumping, ski lifts and tows, basketball, racquetball, handball, squash, tennis, batting cages, day trips for sightseeing purposes, and others, when provided to consumers. “Amusement and recreation services” also include the provision of related facilities such as basketball courts, tennis courts, handball courts, swimming pools, and charges made for providing the opportunity to dance. The term “amusement and recreation services” does not include instructional lessons to learn a particular activity such as tennis lessons, swimming lessons, or archery lessons;

2. Abstract, title insurance, and escrow services;

3. Credit bureau services;

4. Automobile parking and storage garage services;

5. Landscape maintenance and horticultural services but excluding (a) horticultural services provided to farmers and (b) pruning, trimming, repairing, removing, and clearing of trees and brush near electric transmission or distribution lines or equipment, if performed by or at the direction of an electric utility;

6. Service charges associated with tickets to professional sporting events; and

7. The following personal services: physical fitness services, tanning salon services, tattoo parlor services, steam bath services, Turkish bath services, escort services, and dating services.

8. The term shall also include the renting or leasing of tangible personal property to consumers and the rental of equipment with an operator.

T. Sale, Casual or Isolated Sale.

1. “Sale” means any transfer of the ownership of, title to, or possession of, property for a valuable consideration and includes any activity classified as a “sale at retail,” “retail sale,” or “retail service.” It includes renting or leasing, conditional sale contracts, leases with option to purchase, and any contract under which possession of the property is given to the purchaser but title is retained by the vendor as security for the payment of the purchase price. It also includes the furnishing of food, drink, or meals for compensation whether consumed upon the premises or not.

2. “Casual or isolated sale” means a sale made by a person who is not engaged in the business of selling the type of property involved on a routine or continuous basis.

U. Sale at Retail, Retail Sale. 

1. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” means every sale of tangible personal property (including articles produced, fabricated, or imprinted) to all persons irrespective of the nature of their business and including, among others, without limiting the scope hereof, persons who install, repair, clean, alter, improve, construct, or decorate real or personal property of or for consumers, other than a sale to a person who presents a resale certificate under RCW 82.04.470 and who:

a. Purchases for the purpose of resale as tangible personal property in the regular course of business without intervening use by such person; or

b. Installs, repairs, cleans, alters, imprints, improves, constructs, or decorates real or personal property of or for consumers, if such tangible personal property becomes an ingredient or component of such real or personal property without intervening use by such person; or

c. Purchases for the purpose of consuming the property purchased in producing for sale a new article of tangible personal property or substance, of which such property becomes an ingredient or component or is a chemical used in processing, when the primary purpose of such chemical is to create a chemical reaction directly through contact with an ingredient of a new article being produced for sale; or

d. Purchases for the purpose of consuming the property purchased in producing ferrosilicon which is subsequently used in producing magnesium for sale, if the primary purpose of such property is to create a chemical reaction directly through contact with an ingredient of ferrosilicon; or

e. Purchases for the purpose of providing the property to consumers as part of competitive telephone service, as defined in RCW 82.04.065. The term shall include every sale of tangible personal property which is used or consumed or to be used or consumed in the performance of any activity classified as a “sale at retail” or “retail sale” even though such property is resold or utilized as provided in subsection (U)(1)(a), (b), (c), (d), or (e) of this section following such use; or

f. Purchases for the purpose of satisfying the person’s obligations under an extended warranty as defined in subsection (U)(7) of this section, if such tangible personal property replaces or becomes an ingredient or component of property covered by the extended warranty without intervening use by such person.

2. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” also means every sale of tangible personal property to persons engaged in any business activity which is taxable under KMC 3.75.050(A)(1), at such time as the City imposes a business and occupation tax on retail sales under that section.

3. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall include the sale of or charge made for tangible personal property consumed and/or for labor and services rendered in respect to the following:

a. The installing, repairing, cleaning, altering, imprinting, or improving of tangible personal property of or for consumers, including charges made for the mere use of facilities in respect thereto, but excluding charges made for the use of coin-operated laundry facilities when such facilities are situated in an apartment house, rooming house, or mobile home park for the exclusive use of the tenants thereof, and also excluding sales of laundry service to nonprofit health care facilities, and excluding services rendered in respect to live animals, birds and insects;

b. The constructing, repairing, decorating, or improving of new or existing buildings or other structures under, upon, or above real property of or for consumers, including the installing or attaching of any article of tangible personal property therein or thereto, whether or not such personal property becomes a part of the realty by virtue of installation, and shall also include the sale of services or charges made for the clearing of land and the moving of earth excepting the mere leveling of land used in commercial farming or agriculture;

c. The charge for labor and services rendered in respect to constructing, repairing, or improving any structure upon, above, or under any real property owned by an owner who conveys the property by title, possession, or any other means to the person performing such construction, repair, or improvement for the purpose of performing such construction, repair, or improvement and the property is then reconveyed by title, possession, or any other means to the original owner;

d. The sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered in respect to the cleaning, fumigating, razing or moving of existing buildings or structures, but shall not include the charge made for janitorial services; and for purposes of this section the term “janitorial services” shall mean those cleaning and caretaking services ordinarily performed by commercial janitor service businesses including, but not limited to, wall and window washing, floor cleaning and waxing, and the cleaning in place of rugs, drapes and upholstery. The term “janitorial services” does not include painting, papering, repairing, furnace or septic tank cleaning, snow removal or sandblasting;

e. The sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered in respect to automobile towing and similar automotive transportation services, but not in respect to those required to report and pay taxes under Chapter 82.16 RCW;

f. The sale of and charge made for the furnishing of lodging and all other services, except telephone business and cable service, by a hotel, rooming house, tourist court, motel, or trailer camp, and the granting of any similar license to use real property, as distinguished from the renting or leasing of real property, and it shall be presumed that the occupancy of real property for a continuous period of one month or more constitutes a rental or lease of real property and not a mere license to use or enjoy the same. For the purposes of this subsection, it shall be presumed that the sale of and charge made for the furnishing of lodging for a continuous period of one month or more to a person is a rental or lease of real property and not a mere license to enjoy the same;

g. The installing, repairing, altering, or improving of digital goods for consumers;

h. The sale of or charge made for tangible personal property, labor and services to persons taxable under subsections (U)(3)(a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), and (g) of this section when such sales or charges are for property, labor and services which are used or consumed in whole or in part by such persons in the performance of any activity defined as a “sale at retail” or “retail sale” even though such property, labor and services may be resold after such use or consumption. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to modify subsection (U)(1) of this section and nothing contained in subsection (U)(1) of this section shall be construed to modify this subsection.

4. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include the providing of competitive telephone service to consumers.

5.a. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include the sale of prewritten software other than a sale to a person who presents a resale certificate under RCW 82.04.470, regardless of the method of delivery to the end user. For purposes of this subsection (U)(5)(a), the sale of prewritten computer software includes the sale of or charge made for a key or an enabling or activation code, where the key or code is required to activate prewritten computer software and put the software into use. There is no separate sale of the key or code from the prewritten computer software, regardless of how the sale may characterized by the vendor or by the purchaser.

The term “sale at retail” or “retail sale” does not include the sale of or charge made for:

(1) Custom software; or

(2) The customization of prewritten software.

b.(1) The term also includes the charge made to consumers for the right to access and use prewritten computer software, where possession of the software is maintained by the seller or a third party, regardless of whether the charge for the service is on a per use, per user, per license, subscription, or some other basis.

(2)(a) The service described in subsection (U)(5)(b)(1) of this section includes the right to access and use prewritten software to perform data processing.

(b) For purposes of this subsection (U)(5)(b)(2) “data processing” means the systematic performance of operations on data to extract the required information in an appropriate form or to convert the data to usable information. Data processing includes check processing, image processing, form processing, survey processing, payroll processing, claim processing, and similar activities.

6. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include the sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered in respect to the building, repairing, or improving of any street, place, road, highway, easement, right-of-way, mass public transportation terminal or parking facility, bridge, tunnel, or trestle which is owned by a municipal corporation or political subdivision of the State, the State of Washington, or by the United States and which is used or to be used primarily for foot or vehicular traffic including mass transportation vehicles of any kind.

7. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include the sale of or charge made for an extended warranty to a consumer. For purposes of this subsection, “extended warranty” means an agreement for a specified duration to perform the replacement or repair of tangible personal property at no additional charge or a reduced charge for tangible personal property, labor, or both, or to provide indemnification for the replacement or repair of tangible personal property, based on the occurrence of specified events. The term “extended warranty” does not include an agreement, otherwise meeting the definition of extended warranty in this subsection, if no separate charge is made for the agreement and the value of the agreement is included in the sales price of the tangible personal property covered by the agreement.

8. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include the sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered in respect to the constructing, repairing, decorating, or improving of new or existing buildings or other structures under, upon, or above real property of or for the United States, any instrumentality thereof, or a county or city housing authority created pursuant to Chapter 35.82 RCW, including the installing or attaching of any article of tangible personal property therein or thereto, whether or not such personal property becomes a part of the realty by virtue of installation (government contracting).

9. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall not include the sale of services or charges made for the clearing of land and the moving of earth of or for the United States, any instrumentality thereof, or a county or city housing authority. Nor shall the term include the sale of services or charges made for cleaning up for the United States, or its instrumentalities, radioactive waste and other byproducts of weapons production and nuclear research and development. (This should be reported under the service and other classification.)

10. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall not include the sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered for environmental remedial action. (This should be reported under the service and other classification.)

11. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include the following sales to consumers of digital goods, digital codes, and digital automated services:

a. Sales in which the seller has granted the purchaser the right of permanent use;

b. Sales in which the seller has granted the purchaser a right of use that is less than permanent;

c. Sales in which the purchaser is not obligated to make continued payment as a condition of the sale; and

d. Sales in which the purchaser is obligated to make continued payment as a condition of the sale.

A retail sale of digital goods, digital codes, or digital automated services under this subsection (U)(11) includes any services provided by the seller exclusively in connection with the digital goods, digital codes, or digital automated services, whether or not a separate charge is made for such services.

For purposes of this subsection, “permanent” means perpetual or for an indefinite or unspecified length of time. A right of permanent use is presumed to have been granted unless the agreement between the seller and the purchaser specifies or the circumstances surrounding the transaction suggest or indicate that the right to use terminates on the occurrence of a condition subsequent.

12. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include the installing, repairing, altering, or improving of digital goods for consumers.

V. “Sale at wholesale” or “wholesale sale” means any sale of tangible personal property, digital goods, digital codes, digital automated services, prewritten computer software, or services described in subsection (U)(5)(b)(1) of this section, which is not a retail sale, and any charge made for labor and services rendered for persons who are not consumers, in respect to real or personal property and retail services, if such charge is expressly defined as a retail sale or retail service when rendered to or for consumers. Sale at wholesale also includes the sale of telephone business to another telecommunications company as defined in RCW 80.04.010 for the purpose of resale, as contemplated by RCW 35.21.715. 

W. “Services” mean those activities that do not fall within one of the other tax classifications defined by this chapter.

X. “Taxpayer” means any “person,” as herein defined, required to have a business license under this chapter or liable for the collection of any tax or fee under this chapter, or who engages in any business or who performs any act for which a tax or fee is imposed by this chapter.

Y. “Value proceeding or accruing” means the consideration, whether money, credits, rights, or other property expressed in terms of money, a person is entitled to receive or which is actually received or accrued. The term shall be applied, in each case, on a cash receipts or accrual basis according to which method of accounting is regularly employed in keeping the books of the taxpayer. 

Z. Value of Products.

1. The value of products, including by-products, extracted or manufactured, shall be determined by the gross proceeds derived from the sale thereof whether such sale is at wholesale or at retail, to which shall be added all subsidies and bonuses received from the purchaser or from any other person with respect to the extraction, manufacture, or sale of such products or by-products by the seller.

2. Where such products, including by-products, are extracted or manufactured for commercial or industrial use; and where such products, including by-products, are shipped, transported or transferred out of the City, or to another person, without prior sale or are sold under circumstances such that the gross proceeds from the sale are not indicative of the true value of the subject matter of the sale; the value shall correspond as nearly as possible to the gross proceeds from sales in this state of similar products of like quality and character, and in similar quantities by other taxpayers, plus the amount of subsidies or bonuses ordinarily payable by the purchaser or by any third person with respect to the extraction, manufacture, or sale of such products. In the absence of sales of similar products as a guide to value, such value may be determined upon a cost basis. In such cases, there shall be included every item of cost attributable to the particular article or article extracted or manufactured, including direct and indirect overhead costs. The director may prescribe rules for the purpose of ascertaining such values. 

3. Notwithstanding subsection (Z)(2) of this section, the value of a product manufactured or produced for purposes of serving as a prototype for the development of a new or improved product shall correspond to (a) the retail selling price of such new or improved product when first offered for sale; or (b) the value of materials incorporated into the prototype in cases in which the new or improved product is not offered for sale. 

AA. “Wholesaling” means engaging in the activity of making sales at wholesale, and is reported under the wholesaling classification. [Ord. 19-0504 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 15-0414 § 1.]


3.75.050 Imposition of the tax – Tax or fee levied. 

A. Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, there is hereby levied upon and shall be collected from every person a tax for the act or privilege of engaging in business activities within the City, whether the person’s office or place of business is within or without the City. The tax shall be in amounts to be determined by application of rates against gross proceeds of sale, gross income of business, or value of products, including by-products, as the case may be, as follows:

1. Commencing on April 1, 2016, upon every person engaging within the City in business as a heavy manufacturer, as to such persons the amount of the tax with respect to such business shall be equal to the value of the products, including by-products, manufactured within the City, multiplied by the rate of 0.002. The measure of the tax is the value of the products, including by-products, so manufactured, regardless of the place of sale or the fact that deliveries may be made to points outside the City.

B. The gross receipts tax imposed in this section shall not apply to any person whose gross proceeds of sales, gross income of the business, and value of products, including by-products, as the case may be, from all activities conducted within the City during any calendar year is equal to or less than $20,000, or is equal to or less than $5,000 during any quarter if on a quarterly reporting basis. [Ord. 15-0414 § 1.]


3.75.070 Multiple activities credit when activities take place in one or more cities with eligible gross receipts taxes.

A. Persons who engage in business activities that are within the purview of two or more subsections of KMC 3.75.050 shall be taxable under each applicable subsection, if at any time there are two or more subsections of KMC 3.75.050.

B. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, if imposition of the City’s tax would place an undue burden upon interstate commerce or violate Constitutional requirements, a taxpayer shall be allowed a credit to the extent necessary to preserve the validity of the City’s tax, and still apply the City tax to as much of the taxpayer’s activities as may be subject to the City’s taxing authority.

C. To take the credit authorized by this section, a taxpayer must be able to document that the amount of tax sought to be credited was paid upon the same gross receipts used in computing the tax against which the credit is applied.

D. Credit for Persons That Sell in the City Products That They Extract or Manufacture. Persons taxable under the heavy manufacturing classification with respect to selling products in this City shall be allowed a credit against those taxes for any eligible gross receipts taxes paid (1) with respect to the manufacturing of the products sold in the City, and (2) with respect to the extracting of the products, or the ingredients used in the products, sold in the City. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the tax liability arising under this chapter with respect to the sale of those products.

E. Credit for Persons That Manufacture Products in the City Using Ingredients They Extract. Persons taxable under the heavy manufacturing classification with respect to manufacturing products in this City shall be allowed a credit against those taxes for any eligible gross receipts taxes paid with respect to extracting the ingredients of the products manufactured in the City. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the tax liability arising under this chapter with respect to the manufacturing of those products. 

F. Credit for Persons That Sell within the City Products That They Print, or Publish and Print. Persons taxable under the heavy manufacturing classification with respect to selling products in this City shall be allowed a credit against those taxes for any eligible gross receipts taxes paid with respect to the printing, or the printing and publishing, of the products sold within the City. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the tax liability arising under this chapter with respect to the sale of those products. [Ord. 15-0414 § 1.]


3.75.075 Deductions to prevent multiple taxation of manufacturing.

Person Manufacturing Products within and Without. A person manufacturing products within the City using products manufactured by the same person outside the City may deduct from the measure of the manufacturing tax the value of products manufactured outside the City and included in the measure of an eligible gross receipts tax paid to the other jurisdiction with respect to manufacturing such products. [Ord. 15-0414 § 1.]


3.75.076 Assignment of gross income derived from intangibles.

Gross income derived from the sale of intangibles such as royalties, trademarks, patents, or goodwill shall be assigned to the jurisdiction where the person is domiciled (its headquarters is located). [Ord. 15-0414 § 1.]


3.75.077 Allocation and apportionment of income when activities take place in more than one jurisdiction.

Gross income, other than persons subject to the provisions of Chapter 82.14A RCW, shall be allocated and apportioned as follows:

A. Gross income derived from all activities shall be allocated to the location where the activity takes place.

B. In the case of sales of tangible personal property, the activity takes place where delivery to the buyer occurs.

C. In the case of sales of digital products, the activity takes place where delivery to the buyer occurs. The delivery of digital products will be deemed to occur at:

1. The seller’s place of business if the purchaser receives the digital product at the seller’s place of business;

2. If not received at the seller’s place of business, the location where the purchaser or the purchaser’s donee, designated as such by the purchaser, receives the digital product, including the location indicated by instructions for delivery to the purchaser or donee, known to the seller;

3. If the location where the purchaser or the purchaser’s donee receives the digital product is not known, the purchaser’s address maintained in the ordinary course of the seller’s business when use of this address does not constitute bad faith;

4. If no address for the purchaser is maintained in the ordinary course of the seller’s business, the purchaser’s address obtained during the consummation of the sale, including the address of a purchaser’s payment instrument, if no other address is available, when use of this address does not constitute bad faith; and

5. If no address for the purchaser is obtained during the consummation of the sale, the address where the digital good or digital code is first made available for transmission by the seller or the address from which the digital automated service or service described in RCW 82.04.050(2)(g) or (6)(b) was provided, disregarding for these purposes any location that merely provided the digital transfer of the product sold.

D. If none of the methods in subsection C of this section for determining where the delivery of digital products occurs are available after a good faith effort by the taxpayer to apply the methods provided in subsections (C)(1) through (C)(5) of this section, then the City and the taxpayer may mutually agree to employ any other method to effectuate an equitable allocation of income from the sale of digital products. The taxpayer will be responsible for petitioning the City to use an alternative method under this subsection D. The City may employ an alternative method for allocating the income from the sale of digital products if the methods provided in subsections (C)(1) through (C)(5) of this section are not available and the taxpayer and the City are unable to mutually agree on an alternative method to effectuate an equitable allocation of income from the sale of digital products.

E. For purposes of subsections (C)(1) through (C)(5) of this section. the following definitions apply:

1. “Digital automated services,” “digital codes,” and “digital goods” have the same meaning as in RCW 82.04.192;

2. “Digital products” means digital goods, digital codes, digital automated services, and the services described in RCW 82.04.050(2)(g) and (6)(c): and

3. “Receive” has the same meaning as in RCW 82.32.730.

F. Gross income derived from activities taxed as services and other activities (City does not tax retail services) shall be apportioned to the City by multiplying apportionable income by a fraction, the numerator of which is the payroll factor plus the service income factor and the denominator of which is two.

1. The payroll factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the total amount paid in the City during the tax period by the taxpayer for compensation and the denominator of which is the total compensation paid everywhere during the tax period. Compensation is paid in the City if:

a. The individual is primarily assigned within the City;

b. The individual is not primarily assigned to any place of business for the tax period and the employee performs 50 percent or more of his or her service for the tax period in the City; or

c. The individual is not primarily assigned to any place of business for the tax period, the individual does not perform 50 percent or more of his or her service in any city and the employee resides in the City.

2. The service income factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the total service income of the taxpayer in the City during the tax period, and the denominator of which is the total service income of the taxpayer everywhere during the tax period. Service income is in the City if the customer location is in the City.

3. Gross income of the business from engaging in an apportionable activity must be excluded from the denominator of the service income factor if, in respect to such activity, at least some of the activity is performed in the City, and the gross income is attributable under subsection (F)(2) of this section to a city or unincorporated area of a county within the United States, or to a foreign country in which the taxpayer is not taxable. For purposes of subsection (F)(2) of this section, “not taxable” means that the taxpayer is not subject to a business activities tax by that city or county within the United States or by that foreign country, except that a taxpayer is taxable in a city or county within the United States or in a foreign country in which it would be deemed to have a substantial nexus with the city or county within the United States or with the foreign country under the standards in RCW 35.102.050, regardless of whether that city or county within the United States or that foreign country imposes such a tax.

4. If the allocation and apportionment provisions of this subsection F do not fairly represent the extent of the taxpayer’s business activity in the City, the taxpayer may petition for, or the tax administrators may require, in respect to all or any part of the taxpayer’s business activity, if reasonable:

a. Separate accounting;

b. The exclusion of any one or more of the factors;

c. The inclusion of one or more additional factors that will fairly represent the taxpayer’s business activity in the City; or

d. The employment of any other method to effectuate an equitable allocation and apportionment of the taxpayer’s income.

5. The party petitioning for, or the tax administrator requiring, the use of any method to effectuate an equitable allocation and apportionment of the taxpayer’s income pursuant to subsection (F)(4) of this section must prove by a preponderance of the evidence: (a) that the allocation and apportionment provisions of this subsection F do not fairly represent the extent of the taxpayer’s business activity in the City; and (b) that the alternative to such provisions is reasonable.

The same burden of proof shall apply whether the taxpayer is petitioning for, or the tax administrator is requiring, the use of an alternative, reasonable method to effectuate an equitable allocation and apportionment of the taxpayer’s income.

6. If the tax administrator requires any message to effectuate an equitable allocation and apportionment of the taxpayer’s income, the tax administrator cannot impose any civil or criminal penalty with reference to the tax due that is attributable to the taxpayer’s reasonable reliance solely on the allocation and apportionment provisions of this subsection F.

7. A taxpayer that has received written permission from the tax administrator to use a reasonable method to effectuate an equitable allocation and apportionment of the taxpayer’s income shall not have that permission revoked with respect to transactions and activities that have already occurred unless there has been a material change in, or a material misrepresentation of, the facts provided by the taxpayer upon which the tax administrator reasonably relied in approving a reasonable alternative method.

G. The definitions in this subsection apply throughout this section.

1. “Apportionable income” means the gross income of the business taxable under the service classifications of a city’s gross receipts tax, including income received from activities outside the city if the income would be taxable under the service classification if received from activities within the city, less any exemptions or deductions available.

2. “Business activities tax” means a tax measured by the amount of, or economic results of, business activity conducted in a city or county within the United States or within a foreign country. The term includes taxes measured in whole or in part on net income or gross income or receipts. “Business activities tax” does not include a sales tax, use tax, or a similar transaction tax, imposed on the sale or acquisition of goods or services, whether or not denominated a gross receipts tax or a tax imposed on the privilege of doing business.

3. “Compensation” means wages, salaries, commissions, and any other form of remuneration paid to individuals for personal services that are or would be included in the individual’s gross income under the Federal Internal Revenue Code.

4. “Customer” means a person or entity to whom the taxpayer makes a sale or renders services or from whom the taxpayer otherwise receives gross income of the business.

5. “Customer location” means the following:

a. For a customer not engaged in business, if the service requires the customer to be physically present, where the service is performed.

b. For a customer not engaged in business, if the service does not require the customer to be physically present:

(1) The customer’s residence; or

(2) If the customer’s residence is not known, the customer’s billing/mailing address.

c. For a customer engaged in business:

(1) Where the services are ordered from;

(2) At the customer’s billing/mailing address if the location from which the services are ordered is not known; or

(3) At the customer’s commercial domicile if none of the above are known.

6. “Individual” means any individual who, under the usual common-law rules applicable in determining the employer-employee relationship, has the status of an employee of that taxpayer.

7. “Customer location” means the city or unincorporated area of a county where the majority of the contacts between the taxpayer and the customer take place.

8. “Primarily assigned” means the business location of the taxpayer where the individual performs his or her duties.

9. “Service-taxable income” or “service income” means gross income of the business subject to tax under either the service or royalty classification.

10. “Tax period” means the calendar year during which tax liability is accrued. If taxes are reported by a taxpayer on a basis more frequent than once per year, taxpayers shall calculate the factors for the previous calendar year for reporting in the current calendar year and correct the reporting for the previous year when the factors are calculated for that year, but not later than the end of the first quarter of the following year.

H. Assignment or apportionment of revenue under this section shall be made in accordance with and in full compliance with the provisions of the interstate commerce clause of the United States Constitution where applicable. [Ord. 19-0504 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 15-0414 § 1.]


3.75.090 Exemptions.

A. Public Utilities. This chapter shall not apply to any person in respect to a business activity with respect to which tax liability is specifically imposed.

B. Investments – Dividends from Subsidiary Corporations. This chapter shall not apply to amounts derived by persons, other than those engaging in banking, loan, security, or other financial businesses, from investments or the use of money as such, and also amounts derived as dividends by a parent from its subsidiary corporations.

C. Insurance Business. This chapter shall not apply to amounts received by any person who is an insurer or their appointed insurance producer upon which a tax based on gross premiums is paid to the state pursuant to RCW 48.14.020; and provided further, that the provisions of this subsection shall not exempt any bonding company from tax with respect to gross income derived from the completion of any contract as to which it is a surety, or as to any liability as successor to the liability of the defaulting contractor.

D. Employees.

1. This chapter shall not apply to any person in respect to the person’s employment in the capacity as an employee or servant as distinguished from that of an independent contractor. For the purposes of this subsection, the definition of “employee” shall include those persons that are defined in the Internal Revenue Code, as hereafter amended.

2. A booth renter is an independent contractor for purposes of this chapter.

E. Amounts Derived from Sale of Real Estate. This chapter shall not apply to gross proceeds derived from the sale of real estate. This, however, shall not be construed to allow an exemption of amounts received as commissions from the sale of real estate, nor as fees, handling charges, discounts, interest or similar financial charges resulting from, or relating to, real estate transactions. This chapter shall also not apply to amounts received for the rental of real estate if the rental income is derived from a contract to rent for a continuous period of 30 days or longer.

F. Mortgage Brokers’ Third-Party Provider Services Trust Accounts. This chapter shall not apply to amounts received from trust accounts to mortgage brokers for the payment of third-party costs if the accounts are operated in a manner consistent with RCW 19.146.050 and any rules adopted by the director of financial institutions.

G. Amounts Derived from Manufacturing, Selling or Distributing Motor Vehicle Fuel. This chapter shall not apply to the manufacturing, selling, or distributing of motor vehicle fuel, as the term “motor vehicle fuel” is defined in RCW 82.38.020 and exempt under RCW 82.38.280; provided, that any fuel not subjected to the state Fuel Excise Tax, or any other applicable deduction or exemption, will be taxable under this chapter. 

H. Amounts Derived from Liquor, and the Sale or Distribution of Liquor. This chapter shall not apply to liquor as defined in RCW 66.04.010 and exempt in RCW 66.08.120.

I. Casual and Isolated Sales. This chapter shall not apply to the gross proceeds derived from casual or isolated sales.

J. Accommodation Sales. This chapter shall not apply to sales for resale by persons regularly engaged in the business of making retail sales of the type of property so sold to other persons similarly engaged in the business of selling such property where (1) the amount paid by the buyer does not exceed the amount paid by the seller to the vendor in the acquisition of the article and (2) the sale is made as an accommodation to the buyer to enable the buyer to fill a bona fide existing order of a customer or is made within 14 days to reimburse in kind a previous accommodation sale by the buyer to the seller.

K. Taxes Collected as Trust Funds. This chapter shall not apply to amounts collected by the taxpayer from third parties to satisfy third party obligations to pay taxes such as the retail sales tax, use tax, and admission tax. [Ord. 19-0504 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 15-0414 § 1.]


3.75.100 Deductions.

In computing the license fee or tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax the following items:

A. Receipts from Tangible Personal Property Delivered Outside the State. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax under retailing or wholesaling amounts derived from the sale of tangible personal property that is delivered by the seller to the buyer or the buyer’s representative at a location outside the State of Washington.

B. Cash Discount Taken by Purchaser. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax the cash discount amounts actually taken by the purchaser. This deduction is not allowed in arriving at the taxable amount under the extracting or manufacturing classifications with respect to articles produced or manufactured, the reported values of which, for the purposes of this tax, have been computed according to the “value of product” provisions.

C. Credit Losses of Accrual Basis Taxpayers. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax the amount of credit losses actually sustained by taxpayers whose regular books of account are kept upon an accrual basis.

D. Constitutional Prohibitions. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of the tax amounts derived from business which the City is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution of the State of Washington or the Constitution of the United States.

E. Receipts from the Sale of Tangible Personal Property and Retail Services Delivered Outside the City but Within Washington. Amounts included in the gross receipts reported on the tax return derived from the sale of tangible personal property delivered to the buyer or the buyer’s representative outside the City but within the State of Washington may be deducted from the measure of tax under the retailing, retail services, or wholesaling classification.

F. Professional Employer Services. In computing the tax, a professional employer organization may deduct from the calculation of gross income the gross income of the business derived from performing professional employer services that is equal to the portion of the fee charged to a client that represents the actual cost of wages and salaries, benefits, workers’ compensation, payroll taxes, withholding, or other assessments paid to or on behalf of a covered employee by the professional employer organization under a professional employer agreement.

G. Interest on Investments or Loans Secured by Mortgages or Deeds of Trust. In computing tax, to the extent permitted by Chapter 82.14A RCW, there may be deducted from the measure of tax by those engaged in banking, loan, security or other financial businesses amounts derived from interest received on investments or loans primarily secured by first mortgages or trust deeds on nontransient residential properties. [Ord. 15-0414 § 1.]


3.75.120 Tax part of overhead.

It is not the intention of this chapter that the taxes or fees herein levied upon persons engaging in business be construed as taxes or fees upon the purchasers or customer, but that such taxes or fees shall be levied upon, and collectible from, the person engaging in the business activities herein designated and that such taxes or fees shall constitute a part of the cost of doing business of such persons. [Ord. 15-0414 § 1.]


Chapter 3.80 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS FOR BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION TAX

Sections:

3.80.010    Purpose.

3.80.015    Application of chapter stated.

3.80.020    Definitions.

3.80.021    Definitions – References to Chapter 82.32 RCW.

3.80.030    Registration/license requirements.

3.80.040    When due and payable – Reporting periods – Monthly, quarterly, and annual returns – Threshold provisions or relief from filing requirements – Computing time periods – Failure to file returns.

3.80.050    Payment methods – Mailing returns or remittances – Time extension – Deposits – Recording payments – Payment must accompany return – NSF checks.

3.80.060    Records to be preserved – Examination – Estoppel to question assessment.

3.80.070    Accounting methods.

3.80.080    Public work contracts – Payment of fee and tax before final payment for work.

3.80.090    Underpayment of tax, interest, or penalty – Interest.

3.80.095    Time in which assessment may be made.

3.80.100    Overpayment of tax, penalty, or interest – Credit or refund – Interest rate – Statute of limitations.

3.80.110    Late payment – Disregard of written instructions – Evasion – Penalties.

3.80.120    Cancellation of penalties.

3.80.130    Taxpayer quitting business – Liability of successor.

3.80.140    Administrative appeal – Judicial review.

3.80.160    Director to make rules.

3.80.170    Ancillary allocation authority of director.

3.80.180    Mailing of notices.

3.80.190    Tax declared additional.

3.80.200    Public disclosure – Confidentiality – Information sharing.

3.80.210    Tax constitutes debt.

3.80.220    Unlawful actions – Violation – Penalties.

3.80.230    Suspension or revocation of business registration.

3.80.240    Closing agreement provisions.

3.80.250    Charge-off of uncollectible taxes.


3.80.010 Purpose.

The provisions of this chapter are an exercise of the police and taxation powers of the City to license for revenue purposes and to govern the privilege of engaging in business in the City. [Ord. 16-0416 § 1.]


3.80.015 Application of chapter stated.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply with respect to the taxes imposed under Chapter 3.75 KMC and under other titles, chapters, and sections of the City code in such manner and to such extent as indicated in each such title, chapter or section. [Ord. 16-0416 § 1.]


3.80.020 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter:

The definitions contained in Chapter 3.75 KMC shall apply equally to the provisions of this chapter unless the term is defined otherwise in this chapter. In addition, the following definitions will apply:

A. “Director” means the city’s finance director or the director’s designee.

B. “Reporting period” means:

1. A one-month period beginning the first day of each calendar month (monthly); or

2. A three-month period beginning the first day of January, April, July or October of each year (quarterly); or

3. A 12-month period beginning the first day of January of each year (annual).

C. “Return” means any document a person is required by the City to file to satisfy or establish a tax or fee obligation that is administered or collected by the City and that has a statutorily defined due date.

D. “Successor” means any person to whom a taxpayer quitting, selling out, exchanging, or disposing of a business sells or otherwise conveys, directly or indirectly, in bulk and not in the ordinary course of the taxpayer’s business, any part of the materials, supplies, merchandise, inventory, fixtures, or equipment of the taxpayer. Any person obligated to fulfill the terms of a contract shall be deemed a successor to any contractor defaulting in the performance of any contract as to which such person is a surety or guarantor.

E. “Tax year” or “taxable year” means the calendar year. [Ord. 16-0416 § 1.]


3.80.021 Definitions – References to Chapter 82.32 RCW.

Where provisions of Chapter 82.32 RCW are incorporated in KMC 3.80.090, “department” as used in the RCW shall refer to the “director” as defined in KMC 3.80.020 and “warrant” as used in the RCW shall mean “citation or criminal complaint.” [Ord. 16-0416 § 1.]


3.80.030 Registration/license requirements.

See KMC Title 5 for applicable business registration and licensing requirements. [Ord. 16-0416 § 1.]


3.80.040 When due and payable – Reporting periods – Monthly, quarterly, and annual returns – Threshold provisions or relief from filing requirements – Computing time periods – Failure to file returns.

A. Other than any annual license fee or registration fee assessed in accordance with KMC Title 5, the tax imposed by Chapter 3.75 KMC, or by any other section, chapter or title providing that the tax or fee is administered under this chapter, shall be due and payable in quarterly installments. At the director’s discretion, businesses may be assigned to a monthly or annual reporting period depending on the tax amount owing or type of tax. Tax payments are due on or before the last day of the next month following the end of the assigned reporting period covered by the return.

B. Taxes shall be paid as provided in this chapter and accompanied by a return on forms as prescribed by the director. The return shall be signed by the taxpayer personally or by a responsible officer or agent of the taxpayer. The individual signing the return shall swear or affirm that the information in the return is complete and true.

C. Tax returns must be filed and returned by the due date whether or not any tax is owed.

D. For purposes of the tax imposed by Chapter 3.75 KMC, any person whose value of products, gross proceeds of sales, or gross income of the business, subject to tax after all allowable deductions, is equal to or less than $5,000 in the current quarter shall file a return, declare no tax due on their return, and submit the return to the director. The gross receipts and deduction amounts shall be entered on the tax return even though no tax may be due.

E. A taxpayer that commences to engage in business activity shall file a return and pay the tax or fee for the portion of the reporting period during which the taxpayer is engaged in business activity.

F. Except as otherwise specifically provided by any other provision of this chapter, in computing any period of days prescribed by this chapter the day of the act or event from which the designated period of time runs shall not be included. The last day of the period shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or City or federal legal holiday, in which case the last day of such period shall be the next succeeding day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday, or City or federal legal holiday.

G. If any taxpayer fails, neglects or refuses to make a return as and when required in this chapter, the director is authorized to determine the amount of the tax or fees payable by obtaining facts and information upon which to base the director’s estimate of the tax or fees due. Such assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct and shall be the amount of tax owed to the City by the taxpayer. The director shall notify the taxpayer by mail of the amount of tax so determined, together with any penalty, interest, and fees due; the total of such amounts shall thereupon become immediately due and payable. [Ord. 16-0416 § 1.]


3.80.050 Payment methods – Mailing returns or remittances – Time extension – Deposits – Recording payments – Payment must accompany return – NSF checks.

A. Taxes shall be paid to the director in United States currency by bank draft, certified check, cashier’s check, personal check, money order, cash, or by wire transfer or electronic payment if such wire transfer or electronic payment is authorized by the director. If payment so received is not paid by the bank on which it is drawn, the taxpayer, by whom such payment is tendered, shall remain liable for payment of the tax and for all legal penalties, the same as if such payment had not been tendered. Acceptance of any sum by the director shall not discharge the tax or fee due unless the amount paid is the full amount due.

B. A return or remittance that is transmitted to the City by United States mail shall be deemed filed or received on the date shown by the cancellation mark stamped by the Post Office upon the envelope containing it. The director may allow electronic filing of returns or remittances from any taxpayer. A return or remittance which is transmitted to the City electronically shall be deemed filed or received according to procedures set forth by the director.

C. If a written request is received prior to the due date, the director, for good cause, may grant, in writing, additional time within which to make and file returns.

D. The director shall keep full and accurate records of all funds received or refunded. The director shall apply payments first against all penalties and interest owing, and then upon the tax, without regard to any direction of the taxpayer.

E. For any return not accompanied by a remittance of the tax shown to be due thereon, the taxpayer shall be deemed to have failed or refused to file a return and shall be subject to the penalties and interest provided in this chapter.

F. Any payment made that is returned for lack of sufficient funds or for any other reason will not be considered received until payment by certified check, money order, or cash of the original amount due, plus a “nonsufficient funds” (NSF) charge of $20.00 is received by the director. Any license issued upon payment with a NSF check will be considered void, and shall be returned to the director. No license shall be reissued until payment (including the $20.00 NSF fee) is received.

G. The director is authorized, but not required, to mail tax return forms to taxpayers, but failure of the taxpayer to receive any such forms shall not excuse the taxpayer from filing returns and making payment of the taxes or fees, when and as due under this chapter. [Ord. 16-0416 § 1.]


3.80.060 Records to be preserved – Examination – Estoppel to question assessment.

Every person liable for any fee or tax administered under this chapter shall keep and preserve, for a period of five years after filing a tax return, such records as may be necessary to determine the amount of any fee or tax for which the person may be liable; which records shall include copies of all federal income tax and State tax returns and reports made by the person. All books, records, papers, invoices, vendor lists, inventories, stocks of merchandise, and other data including federal income tax and State tax returns and reports shall be open for examination at any time by the director or its duly authorized agent. Every person’s business premises shall be open for inspection or examination by the director or a duly authorized agent.

A. If a person does not keep the necessary books and records within the City, it shall be sufficient if such person (1) produces within the City such books and records as may be required by the director, or (2) bears the cost of examination by the director’s agent at the place where such books and records are kept; provided, that the person electing to bear such cost shall pay in advance to the director the estimated amount thereof including round-trip fare, lodging, meals and incidental expenses, subject to adjustment upon completion of the examination.

B. Any person who fails, or refuses a department request, to provide or make available records, or to allow inspection or examination of the business premises, shall be forever barred from questioning in any court action the correctness of any assessment of taxes made by the City for any period for which such records have not been provided, made available or kept and preserved, or in respect of which inspection or examination of the business premises has been denied. The director is authorized to determine the amount of the tax or fees payable by obtaining facts and information upon which to base the estimate of the tax or fees due. Such fee or tax assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct and shall be the amount of tax owing the City by the taxpayer. The director shall notify the taxpayer by mail the amount of tax so determined, together with any penalty, interest, and fees due; the total of such amounts shall thereupon become immediately due and payable. [Ord. 16-0416 § 1.]


3.80.070 Accounting methods.

A. A taxpayer may file tax returns in each reporting period with amounts based upon cash receipts only if the taxpayer’s books of account are kept on a cash receipts basis. A taxpayer that does not regularly keep books of account on a cash receipts basis must file returns with amounts based on the accrual method.

B. The taxes administered and the returns required hereunder shall be upon a calendar year basis. [Ord. 16-0416 § 1.]


3.80.080 Public work contracts – Payment of fee and tax before final payment for work.

The director may, before issuing any final payment to any person performing any public work contract for the City, require such person to pay in full all license fees or taxes due under this title or KMC Title 5 from such person on account of such contract or otherwise, and may require such taxpayer to file with the director a verified list of all subcontractors supplying labor and/or materials to the person in connection with said public work. [Ord. 16-0416 § 1.]


3.80.090 Underpayment of tax, interest, or penalty – Interest.

A. If, upon examination of any returns, or from other information obtained by the director, it appears that a tax or penalty less than that properly due has been paid, the director shall assess the additional amount found to be due and shall add thereto interest on the tax only. The director shall notify the person by mail of the additional amount, which shall become due and shall be paid within 30 days from the date of the notice, or within such time as the director may provide in writing.

B. For tax periods after December 31, 2004, the director shall compute interest in accordance with RCW 82.32.050 as it now exists or as it may be amended.

C. If subsection B of this section is held to be invalid, then the provisions of RCW 82.32.050 existing at the effective date of this chapter shall apply. [Ord. 16-0416 § 1.]


3.80.095 Time in which assessment may be made.

The director shall not assess, or correct an assessment for, additional taxes, penalties, or interest due more than four years after the close of the calendar year in which they were incurred, except that the director may issue an assessment:

A. Against a person who is not currently registered or licensed or has not filed a tax return as required by this chapter for taxes due within the period commencing 10 years prior to the close of the calendar year in which the person was contacted in writing by the director;

B. Against a person that has committed fraud or who misrepresented a material fact; or

C. Against a person that has executed a written waiver of such limitations. [Ord. 16-0416 § 1.]


3.80.100 Overpayment of tax, penalty, or interest – Credit or refund – Interest rate – Statute of limitations.

A. If, upon receipt of an application for a refund, or during an audit or examination of the taxpayer’s records and tax returns, the director determines that the amount of tax, penalty, or interest paid is in excess of that properly due, the excess amount shall be credited to the taxpayer’s account or shall be refunded to the taxpayer. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, no refund or credit shall be made for taxes, penalties, or interest paid more than four years prior to the beginning of the calendar year in which the refund application is made or examination of records is completed.

B. The execution of a written waiver shall extend the time for applying for, or making a refund or credit of any taxes paid during, or attributable to, the years covered by the waiver if, prior to the expiration of the waiver period, an application for refund of such taxes is made by the taxpayer or the director discovers that a refund or credit is due.

C. Refunds shall be made by means of vouchers approved by the director and by the issuance of a City check or warrants drawn upon and payable from such funds as the City may provide.

D. Any final judgment for which a recovery is granted by any court of competent jurisdiction for tax, penalties, interest, or costs paid by any person shall be paid in the same manner, as provided in subsection C of this section, upon the filing with the director a certified copy of the order or judgment of the court.

E. For tax periods after December 31, 2004, the director shall compute interest on refunds or credits of amounts paid or other recovery allowed a taxpayer in accordance with RCW 82.32.060 as it now exists or as it may be amended.

F. If subsection E of this section is held to be invalid, then the provisions of RCW 82.32.060 existing at the effective date of this chapter shall apply. [Ord. 16-0416 § 1.]


3.80.110 Late payment – Disregard of written instructions – Evasion – Penalties.

A. If payment of any tax due on a return to be filed by a taxpayer is not received by the director by the due date, the director shall add a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(1), as it now exists or as it may be amended.

B. If director determines that any tax has been substantially underpaid as defined in RCW 82.32.090(2), there shall be added a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(2), as it now exists or as it may be amended.

C. If a citation or criminal complaint is issued by the director for the collection of taxes, fees, assessments, interest or penalties, there shall be added thereto a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(3), as it now exists or as it may be amended.

D. If the director finds that a person has engaged in any business or performed any act upon which a tax is imposed under this title and that person has not obtained from the director a license as required by KMC Title 5, the director shall impose a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(4), as it now exists or as it may be amended. No penalty shall be imposed under this subsection D if the person who has engaged in business without a license obtains a license prior to being notified by the director of the need to be licensed.

E. If the director determines that all or any part of a deficiency resulted from the taxpayer’s failure to follow specific written tax reporting instructions, there shall be assessed a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(5), as it now exists or as it may be amended.

F. If the director finds that all or any part of the deficiency resulted from an intent to evade the tax payable, the director shall assess a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(6), as it now exists or as it may be amended.

G. The penalties imposed under subsections A through E of this section can each be imposed on the same tax found to be due. This subsection does not prohibit or restrict the application of other penalties authorized by law.

H. The director shall not impose both the evasion penalty and the penalty for disregarding specific written instructions on the same tax found to be due.

I. For the purposes of this section, “return” means any document a person is required by the City to file to satisfy or establish a tax or fee obligation that is administered or collected by the City, and that has a statutorily defined due date.

J. If incorporation into the Kenmore Municipal Code of future changes to RCW 82.32.090 is deemed invalid, then the provisions of RCW 82.32.090 existing at the time this chapter is effective shall apply. [Ord. 16-0416 § 1.]


3.80.120 Cancellation of penalties.

A. The director may cancel any penalties imposed under KMC 3.80.110(A) if the taxpayer shows that its failure to timely file or pay the tax was due to reasonable cause and not willful neglect. Willful neglect is presumed unless the taxpayer shows that it exercised ordinary business care and prudence in making arrangements to file the return and pay the tax but was, nevertheless, due to circumstances beyond the taxpayer’s control, unable to file or pay by the due date. The director has no authority to cancel any other penalties or to cancel penalties for any other reason except as provided in subsection C of this section.

B. A request for cancellation of penalties must be received by the director within 30 days after the date the department mails the notice that the penalties are due. The request must be in writing and contain competent proof of all pertinent facts supporting a reasonable cause determination. In all cases the burden of proving the facts rests upon the taxpayer.

C. The director may cancel the penalties imposed under KMC 3.80.110(A) one time if a person:

1. Is not currently licensed and filing returns;

2. Was unaware of its responsibility to file and pay tax; and

3. Obtained business licenses and filed past due tax returns within 30 days after being notified by the department.

D. The director shall not cancel any interest charged upon amounts due. [Ord. 16-0416 § 1.]


3.80.130 Taxpayer quitting business – Liability of successor.

A. Whenever any taxpayer quits business, sells out, exchanges, or otherwise disposes of his business or his stock of goods, any tax payable hereunder shall become immediately due and payable. Such taxpayer shall, within 10 days thereafter, make a return and pay the tax due.

B. Any person who becomes a successor shall become liable for the full amount of any tax owing. The successor shall withhold from the purchase price a sum sufficient to pay any tax due to the City from the taxpayer until such time as: (1) the taxpayer shall produce a receipt from the City showing payment in full of any tax due or a certificate that no tax is due, or (2) more than six months has passed since the successor notified the director of the acquisition and the director has not issued and notified the successor of an assessment.

C. Payment of the tax by the successor shall, to the extent thereof, be deemed a payment upon the purchase price. If such payment is greater in amount than the purchase price, the amount of the difference shall become a debt due such successor from the taxpayer.

D. Notwithstanding the above, if a successor gives written notice to the director of the acquisition, and the department does not within six months of the date it received the notice issue an assessment against the taxpayer and mail a copy of that assessment to the successor, the successor shall not be liable for the tax.

E. Each person’s account will remain on an active status and be subject to all license fees and penalties until such time as the director is notified in writing that the person has discontinued business activity within the City. [Ord. 16-0416 § 1.]


3.80.140 Administrative appeal – Judicial review.

A. Any person, except one who has failed to comply with KMC 3.80.060, aggrieved by the amount of the fee or tax determined by the director to be required under the provisions of this chapter may pay the amount due and appeal such determination to the hearing examiner by filing a written notice of appeal in accordance with KMC 19.30.070, 19.30.080, 19.30.090, and 19.30.100. The notice of appeal, and the appeal fee in the amount established by resolution of the City of Kenmore, must be filed with the city clerk within 14 days of the issuance of the director’s decision determining the amount of the fee or tax. 

B. Any party aggrieved by the decision of the hearing examiner may obtain judicial review of the hearing examiner’s decision by applying for a writ of review in the King County superior court within 21 days of the date of the hearing examiner’s decision in accordance with the procedure set forth in Chapter 7.16 RCW, other applicable law, and court rules. [Ord. 16-0416 § 1.]


3.80.160 Director to make rules.

The director shall have the power, from time to time, to adopt, publish and enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or with law for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter and it shall be unlawful to violate, or fail to comply with, any such rule or regulation. [Ord. 16-0416 § 1.]


3.80.170 Ancillary allocation authority of director.

The director is authorized to enter into agreements with other Washington cities which impose an “eligible gross receipts tax”:

A. To conduct an audit or joint audit of a taxpayer by using an auditor employed by the City of Kenmore, another city, or a contract auditor; provided, that such contract auditor’s pay is not in any way based upon the amount of tax assessed;

B. To allocate or apportion in a manner that fairly reflects the gross receipts earned from activities conducted within the respective cities the gross proceeds of sales, gross receipts, or gross income of the business, or taxes due from any person that is required to pay an eligible gross receipts tax to more than one Washington city.

C. To apply the City’s tax prospectively where a taxpayer has no office or place of business within the City and has paid tax on all gross income to another Washington city where the taxpayer is located; provided, that the other city maintains an eligible gross receipts tax, and the income was not derived from contracts with the City. [Ord. 16-0416 § 1.]


3.80.180 Mailing of notices.

Any notice required by this chapter to be mailed to any taxpayer or licensee shall be sent by ordinary mail, addressed to the address of the taxpayer or licensee as shown by the records of the director. Failure of the taxpayer or licensee to receive any such mailed notice shall not release the taxpayer or licensee from any tax, fee, interest, or any penalties thereon, nor shall such failure operate to extend any time limit set by the provisions of this chapter. It is the responsibility of the taxpayer to inform the director in writing about a change in the taxpayer’s address. [Ord. 16-0416 § 1.]


3.80.190 Tax declared additional.

The license fee and tax herein levied and administered shall be additional to any license fee or tax imposed or levied under any law or any other ordinance of the City except as herein otherwise expressly provided. [Ord. 16-0416 § 1.]


3.80.200 Public disclosure – Confidentiality – Information sharing.

A. For purposes of this section defined terms shall be as set forth in KMC 3.80.020 and 3.80.021. In addition:

1. “Disclose” means to make known to any person in any manner whatever a return or tax information.

2. “Tax information” means:

a. A taxpayer’s identity;

b. The nature, source, or amount of the taxpayer’s income, payments, receipts, deductions, exemption, credits, assets, liability, net worth, tax liability deficiencies, over assessments, or tax payments, whether taken from the taxpayer’s books and records or any other source;

c. Whether the taxpayer’s return was, is being, or will be examined or subject to other investigation or processing; or

d. Other data received by, recorded by, prepared by, or provided to the City with respect to the determination or the existence, or possible existence, of liability, or the amount thereof, of a person under Chapter 3.75 KMC or this chapter for a tax, penalty, interest, fine, forfeiture, or other imposition, or offense. However, data, material, or documents that do not disclose information related to a specific or identifiable taxpayer do not constitute tax information under this section. Nothing in this chapter requires any person possessing data, material, or documents made confidential and privileged by this section to delete information from such data, material or documents so as to permit its disclosure.

3. “City agency” means every City office, department, division, bureau, board, commission, or other City agency.

4. “Taxpayer identity” means the taxpayer’s name, address, telephone number, registration number, or any combination thereof, or any other information disclosing the identity of the taxpayer.

B. Returns and tax information are confidential and privileged, and except as authorized by this section, neither the director nor any other person may disclose any return or tax information.

C. This section does not prohibit the director from:

1. Disclosing such return or tax information in a civil or criminal judicial proceeding or an administrative proceeding:

a. In respect of any tax imposed under Chapter 3.75 KMC if the taxpayer or its officer or other person liable under this title is a party in the proceeding; or

b. In which the taxpayer about whom such return or tax information is sought and another State agency are adverse parties in the proceeding;

2. Disclosing, subject to such requirements and conditions as the director prescribes by rules adopted pursuant to KMC 3.80.160, such return or tax information regarding a taxpayer to such taxpayer or to such person or persons as that taxpayer may designate in a request for, or consent to, such disclosure, or to any other person, at the taxpayer’s request, to the extent necessary to comply with a request for information or assistance made by the taxpayer to such other person. However, tax information not received from the taxpayer must not be so disclosed if the director determines that such disclosure would compromise any investigation or litigation by any federal, State, or local government agency in connection with the civil or criminal liability of the taxpayer or another person, or that such disclosure would identify a confidential informant, or that such disclosure is contrary to any agreement entered into by the department that provides for the reciprocal exchange of information with other government agencies which agreement requires confidentiality with respect to such information unless such information is required to be disclosed to the taxpayer by the order of any court;

3. Publishing statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular returns or reports or items thereof;

4. Disclosing such return or tax information, for official purposes only, to the mayor, the city manager, or city attorney, or to any City agency, or to any member of the city council or their authorized designees dealing with matters of taxation, revenue, trade, commerce, the control of industry or the professions;

5. Permitting the City’s records to be audited and examined by the proper State officer, his or her agents and employees;

6. Disclosing any such return or tax information to a peace officer as defined in RCW 9A.04.110 or county prosecuting attorney, for official purposes. The disclosure may be made only in response to a search warrant, subpoena, or other court order, unless the disclosure is for the purpose of criminal tax enforcement. A peace officer or county prosecuting attorney who receives the return or tax information may disclose that return or tax information only for use in the investigation and a related court proceeding, or in the court proceeding for which the return or tax information originally was sought or where otherwise allowed to be disclosed under this section;

7. Disclosing any such return or tax information to the proper officer of the internal revenue service of the United States, the Canadian government or provincial governments of Canada, or to the proper officer of the tax department of any state or city or town or county, for official purposes, but only if the statutes of the United States, Canada or its provincial governments, or of such other state or city or town or county, as the case may be, grants substantially similar privileges to the proper officers of the City;

8. Disclosing any such return or tax information to the United States Department of Justice; including the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives; the Department of Defense; the Immigration and Customs Enforcement and the Customs and Border Protection Agencies of the United States Department of Homeland Security; the United States Coast Guard; the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau of the United States Department of Treasury; and the United States Department of Transportation, or any authorized representative of these federal agencies or their successors, for official purposes;

9. Publishing or otherwise disclosing the text of a written determination designated by the director as a precedent pursuant to RCW 82.32.410;

10. Disclosing, in a manner that is not associated with other tax information, the taxpayer name, entity type, business address, mailing address, revenue tax registration numbers and the active/closed status of such registrations, state or local business license registration identification and the active/closed status and effective dates of such licenses, reseller permit numbers and the expiration date and status of such permits, North American industry classification system or standard industrial classification code of a taxpayer, and the dates of opening and closing of business; except that this subsection may not be construed as giving authority to the City or any recipient to give, sell, or provide access to any list of taxpayers for any commercial purpose;

11. Disclosing such return or tax information that is also maintained by another Washington State or local governmental agency as a public record available for inspection and copying under the provisions of Chapter 42.56 RCW or is a document maintained by a court of record and is not otherwise prohibited from disclosure;

12. Disclosing such return or tax information to the United States Department of Agriculture, or successor department or agency, for the limited purpose of investigating food stamp fraud by retailers;

13. Disclosing to a financial institution, escrow company, or title company, in connection with specific real property that is the subject of a real estate transaction, current amounts due the City for a filed tax warrant, judgment, or lien against the real property;

14. Disclosing to a person against whom the department has asserted liability as a successor under KMC 3.80.130 return or tax information pertaining to the specific business of the taxpayer to which the person has succeeded;

15. Disclosing real estate excise tax affidavit forms filed under Chapter 3.25 KMC in the possession of the City, including real estate excise tax affidavit forms for transactions exempt or otherwise not subject to tax; and

16. Disclosing such return or tax information to the court or hearing examiner in respect to the City’s application for a subpoena if there is probable cause to believe that the records in possession of a third party will aid the director in connection with its official duties under this title or a civil or criminal investigation.

D. 1. The director may disclose return or taxpayer information to a person under investigation or during any court or administrative proceeding against a person under investigation as provided in this subsection D. The disclosure must be in connection with the department’s official duties under this title, or a civil or criminal investigation. The disclosure may occur only when the person under investigation and the person in possession of data, materials, or documents are parties to the return or tax information to be disclosed. The department may disclose return or tax information such as invoices, contracts, bills, statements, resale or exemption certificates, or checks. However, the department may not disclose general ledgers, sales or cash receipt journals, check registers, accounts receivable/payable ledgers, general journals, financial statements, expert’s work papers, income tax returns, State tax returns, tax return work papers, or other similar data, materials, or documents.

2. Before disclosure of any tax return or tax information under this subsection D, the director must, through written correspondence, inform the person in possession of the data, materials, or documents to be disclosed. The correspondence must clearly identify the data, materials, or documents to be disclosed. The director may not disclose any tax return or tax information under this subsection D until the time period allowed in subsection (D)(3) of this section has expired or until the court has ruled on any challenge brought under subsection (D)(3) of this section.

3. The person in possession of the data, materials, or documents to be disclosed by the department has 20 days from the receipt of the written request required under subsection (D)(2) of this section to petition the superior court of the county in which the petitioner resides for injunctive relief. The court must limit or deny the request of the director if the court determines that:

a. The data, materials, or documents sought for disclosure are cumulative or duplicative, or are obtainable from some other source that is more convenient, less burdensome, or less expensive;

b. The production of the data, materials, or documents sought would be unduly burdensome or expensive, taking into account the needs of the department, the amount in controversy, limitations on the petitioner’s resources, and the importance of the issues at stake; or

c. The data, materials, or documents sought for disclosure contain trade secret information that, if disclosed, could harm the petitioner.

4. The director must reimburse reasonable expenses for the production of data, materials, or documents incurred by the person in possession of the data, materials, or documents to be disclosed.

5. Requesting information under subsection (D)(2) of this section that may indicate that a taxpayer is under investigation does not constitute a disclosure of tax return or tax information under this section.

E. Service of a subpoena issued by the court does not constitute a disclosure of return or tax information under this section. Notwithstanding anything else to the contrary in this section, a person served with a subpoena issued by the court may disclose the existence or content of the subpoena to that person’s legal counsel.

F. Any person acquiring knowledge of any return or tax information in the course of his or her employment with the City and any person acquiring knowledge of any return or tax information as provided under subsection (C)(4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (9), or (11) of this section, who discloses any such return or tax information to another person not entitled to knowledge of such return or tax information under the provisions of this section, is guilty of a misdemeanor. If the person guilty of such violation is an officer or employee of the City, such person must forfeit such office or employment and is incapable of holding any public office or employment in this City for a period of two years thereafter. [Ord. 16-0416 § 1.]


3.80.210 Tax constitutes debt.

Any license fee or tax due and unpaid under this chapter, and all interest and penalties thereon, shall constitute a debt to the City of Kenmore and may be collected in the same manner as any other debt in like amount, which remedy shall be in addition to all other existing remedies. [Ord. 16-0416 § 1.]


3.80.220 Unlawful actions – Violation – Penalties.

A. It shall be unlawful for any person liable for fees or taxes imposed or administered under this chapter (or other chapters as listed):

1. To violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or any lawful rule or regulation adopted by the director;

2. To make any false statement on any license application or tax return;

3. To aid or abet any person in any attempt to evade payment of a license fee or tax;

4. To fail to appear or testify in response to a subpoena issued by the City’s hearing examiner;

5. To testify falsely in any investigation, audit, or proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter.

B. Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a gross misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter may be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000, imprisonment not to exceed one year, or both fine and imprisonment. Penalties or punishments provided in this chapter shall be in addition to all other penalties provided by law.

C. Any person, or officer of a corporation, convicted of continuing to engage in business after the revocation of a license shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine not to exceed $5,000, or imprisonment not to exceed one year, or both fine and imprisonment. [Ord. 16-0416 § 1.]


3.80.230 Suspension or revocation of business registration.

The city manager, or designee, shall have the power and authority to suspend or revoke any business license or registration in accordance with KMC Title 5. [Ord. 16-0416 § 1.]


3.80.240 Closing agreement provisions. 

The director may enter into an agreement in writing with any person relating to the liability of such person in respect of any tax imposed by any of the chapters within this title and administered by this chapter for any taxable period(s). Upon approval of such agreement, evidenced by execution thereof by the director and the person so agreeing, the agreement shall be final and conclusive as to the tax liability or tax immunity covered thereby, and, except upon a showing of fraud or malfeasance, or misrepresentation of a material fact:

A. The case shall not be reopened as to the matters agreed upon, or the agreement modified, by the director or the taxpayer; and

B. In any suit, action or proceeding, such agreement, or any determination, assessment, collection, payment, abatement, refund, or credit made in accordance therewith, shall not be annulled, modified, set aside, or disregarded. [Ord. 16-0416 § 1.]


3.80.250 Charge-off of uncollectible taxes.

The director may charge off any tax, penalty, or interest that is owed by a taxpayer, if the director reasonably ascertains that the cost of collecting such amounts would be greater than the total amount that is owed or likely to be collected from the taxpayer. [Ord. 16-0416 § 1.]


Title 4 (Reserved)

 


Title 5 REGULATORY BUSINESS LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGISTRATION

Chapters: 

5.05    General Licensing Provisions

5.10    Heavy Manufacturing Businesses

5.15    Amusement Places

5.20    –

5.35    Repealed

5.40    Junk Dealers

5.43    Marijuana Businesses

5.45    Massage Businesses, Massage Practitioners and Public Bathhouses

5.50    Repealed

5.55    Pawnbrokers

5.60    Secondhand Dealers

5.65    Theaters

5.70    Charitable Solicitations

5.75    Violation – Penalties

5.80    Panoram Premises

5.85    Peddlers, Solicitors and Transient Merchants

5.90    Adult Cabarets

5.95    Adult Retail Businesses

5.100    Social Card Games

5.105    Kenmore Business Registration Program


Chapter 5.05 GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS

Sections: 

Article I. General Provisions

5.05.010    Definitions.

5.05.020    Applicability of chapter.

5.05.030    Additional rules and regulations.

5.05.040    Authority to suspend or revoke licenses, registration, permits or certificates.

Article II. Licensing Provisions

5.05.050    Application procedure – Fees refunds.

5.05.060    Form of license, registration, permit or certificate.

5.05.070    Posting of license, registration, permit or certificate.

5.05.080    Change of address.

5.05.090    License, registration, or permit not an endorsement.

5.05.100    Enforcement agreements with other municipalities.

Article III. Enforcement, Procedure and Penalty Provisions

5.05.110    Inspections – Right of entry.

5.05.120    Duties of the city manager.

5.05.130    Notice and order.

5.05.140    Civil penalty.

5.05.150    Appeals.

5.05.160    Violations – Misdemeanor.

5.05.170    Personal obligation.

5.05.180    Enforcement power.

Article I. General Provisions 


5.05.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of all chapters of this title except Chapter 5.105 KMC, the words and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the context otherwise indicates:

A. “Certificate” means any certificate or renewal of certificate issued pursuant to this title;

B. “City manager” means the City of Kenmore city manager or his or her designee(s);

C. “Department” means the City department or outside agency assigned by the city manager to administer a portion of the City code;

D. “License” means any license or renewal of license issued pursuant to this title;

E. “Licensee” means any person to whom a license or renewal of license has been issued pursuant to this title;

F. “Permit” means any permit or renewal of permit issued pursuant to this title;

G. “Person” means any individual, partnership, firm, joint stock company, corporation, association, trust, estate or other legal entity;

H. “Registrant” means any person to whom a registration or renewal of registration has been issued pursuant to this title;

I. “Registration” means any registration or renewal of registration issued pursuant to this title. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.01.010).]


5.05.020 Applicability of chapter.

This chapter shall apply to all chapters in this title except Chapter 5.105 KMC, the “Kenmore business registration program.” [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.01.020).]


5.05.030 Additional rules and regulations.

The city manager is authorized to make and enforce rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of any business license ordinance, and it is unlawful to violate or fail to comply with any of the rules and regulations. All of such rules and regulations as promulgated by the city manager shall be reduced to writing and mailed to each licensee or permit holder for his information and for distribution to his registrants or employees. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.01.030).]


5.05.040 Authority to suspend or revoke licenses, registration, permits or certificates.

The city manager shall have the right to suspend or revoke any business license, registration, permit or certificate based on one or more of the following grounds:

A. The license, registration, permit or certificate was procured by fraud or false representation of fact;

B. The licensee, registrant, permit holder or certificate holder has failed to comply with any provisions of this title;

C. The licensee, registrant, permit holder or certificate holder has failed to comply with any provisions of this code or City ordinance;

D. The business violates any building, fire, health or safety regulations on the premises in which the business is located after receiving warning from the City to refrain from such violations;

E. The licensee, registrant, permit holder or certificate holder is in default of any license fee or tax under this title; or

F. The licensee, registrant, permit holder or certificate holder or employee thereof has been convicted of a crime involving the business.

Provided, however, that such suspension or revocation shall not relieve the licensee, registrant, permit holder or certificate holder of the other penalties applicable to the business or its activities. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.01.040).]

Article II. Licensing Provisions 


5.05.050 Application procedure – Fees refunds.

A. The person who intends to conduct, operate or engage in the business for which the license is to be issued shall sign and submit an application for the license, registration or permit. Unless provided otherwise in this title, the application shall state the nature and address or addresses of the business or businesses, or proposed business or businesses, of the applicant, and such other information as may be required by the city manager. A nonrefundable fee as provided for in subsection B of this section shall accompany the application.

B. The fees and penalties associated with the licenses, registrations or permits provided for in this title shall be as set forth in a fee resolution adopted by the city council.

C. All licenses, registrations and permits shall be renewable on December 31st of each year. Fees becoming due for less than one year shall be prorated on a quarterly basis, unless otherwise provided in the fee resolution adopted by the city council.

D. The city manager shall approve or deny the license, pursuant to the terms and conditions of this title. If specific terms and conditions of the license, registration or permit are not set forth in this title, the city manager shall grant the license, registration or permit if the proposed business meets all current zoning and City building code requirements. If the city manager denies the application, the city manager shall state the reasons for the denial. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.01.050).]


5.05.060 Form of license, registration, permit or certificate.

All licenses, registrations, permits or certificates shall be in a form prescribed by the city manager. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.01.060).]


5.05.070 Posting of license, registration, permit or certificate.

Any license, registration, permit or certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business of the licensee, registrant, permit or certificate holder. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.01.070).]


5.05.080 Change of address.

Any licensee, registrant or permit holder shall notify the city manager of any change in address, business name, or officers, directors, or partners within 14 days of any such change. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.01.080).]


5.05.090 License, registration, or permit not an endorsement.

No license, registration, or permit shall be an endorsement of such business licensed, registered or permitted. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.01.090).]


5.05.100 Enforcement agreements with other municipalities.

The city manager is authorized to enter into agreements with any or all other municipal corporations for the licensing and enforcement of local ordinances relating to businesses or entertainments licensed, registered or permitted by the City; provided, that any municipal corporation entering into such an agreement shall enact an ordinance substantially similar to this title. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.01.100).]

Article III. Enforcement, Procedure and Penalty Provisions 


5.05.110 Inspections – Right of entry.

A. The city manager is authorized to make such inspections and take such action as may be required to enforce the provisions of this title.

B. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this title, or whenever the city manager has reasonable cause to believe that a licensee, registrant or permit holder is operating in violation of this title or any city manager rules or regulations, the city manager may enter such licensee’s, registrant’s or permit holder’s place of business or entertainment, which is licensed, registered or permitted pursuant to this title, at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed on the city manager by this title; provided, that:

1. If the place of business or entertainment is occupied, the city manager shall first present proper credentials and demand entry; and

2. If the place of business or entertainment is unoccupied, the city manager shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the licensee, registrant or permit holder or other person(s) having charge or control of the place of business or entertainment and demand entry.

C. No person shall fail or neglect, after proper demand, to admit the city manager, while acting within the scope of the city manager’s employment, to any place of business or entertainment licensed, registered or permitted pursuant to this title, or to interfere with the city manager while in the performance of the city manager’s duty. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.01.110).]


5.05.120 Duties of the city manager.

The city manager is authorized and directed to enforce the terms and provisions of this title. If the city manager determines, by means of investigation or inspection, that any person has violated or failed to comply with any provision of this title, then the city manager shall issue a notice and order recording such findings, specifying therein the particulars of any such violation or failure to comply. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.01.120).]


5.05.130 Notice and order.

A. The city manager shall issue a notice and order, pursuant to KMC 5.05.120, directed to the person whom the city manager has determined to be in violation of any of the terms and provisions of this title. The notice and order shall contain:

1. The street address and when available a legal description, sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the violation occurred;

2. A statement that the city manager has found the conduct of the person to be in violation of this title, with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to render such person in violation of this title;

3. A statement of any action required to be taken, as determined by the city manager. If the city manager has determined to assess a civil penalty, the order shall require that the penalty shall be paid within a time certain from the date of the order as determined by the city manager to be reasonable;

4. A statement of any action taken by the city clerk, if any;

5. Statements advising:

a. That the person may appeal from the notice and order of any action of the city manager to the Kenmore hearings examiner, provided the appeal is made in writing as provided in this chapter and filed with the city manager within seven days from the date of service of such notice and order; and

b. The failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all right to an administrative hearing and determination of the matter.

B. The notice and order, and any amended or supplemental notice and order, shall be served upon the person either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice and order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested to such person at the person’s address as it appears on the license, registration or permit. Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of mailing.

C. Proof of service of the notice and order shall be made at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting service, declaring the time, date, and manner in which service was made. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.01.130).]


5.05.140 Civil penalty.

In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided herein or by law, any person who violates any provision of this title shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $250.00 per violation to be directly assessed by the city manager. The city manager, in a reasonable manner, may vary the amount of the penalty assessed to consider the appropriateness of the penalty to the size of the business of the violator, the license, registration or permit fee required of the violator, the gravity of the violation, the number of past and present violations committed and the good faith of the violator in attempting to achieve compliance after notification of the violation. All civil penalties assessed will be enforced and collected in accordance with the procedure specified in this chapter. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.01.140).]


5.05.150 Appeals.

A. The city hearings examiner is designated to hear appeals by parties aggrieved by actions of the city manager pursuant to this title. The hearings examiner may adopt reasonable rules or regulations for conducting its business. Copies of all rules and regulations adopted by the hearings examiner shall be delivered to the city manager who shall make them freely accessible to the public. All decisions and findings of the hearings examiner shall be rendered to the appellant in writing with a copy to the city manager.

B. Any person entitled to service pursuant to KMC 5.05.130 may appeal from any notice and order or any action of the city manager by filing at the office of the city manager, within seven days from the date of service of such order, a written appeal containing:

1. A heading in the words: “Before the Kenmore hearings examiner”;

2. A caption reading: “Appeal of...,” giving the names of all appellants participating in the appeal;

3. A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants in the business or entertainment involved in the notice and order;

4. A brief statement in concise language of the specific order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant;

5. A brief statement in concise language of the relief sought, and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action should be reversed, modified, or otherwise set aside;

6. The signatures of all parties named as appellants, and their official mailing addresses;

7. The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of at least one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.

C. As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the hearings examiner shall fix a date, time, and place for the hearing of the appeal by the hearings examiner. Such date shall be not less than 10 days nor more than 60 days from the date the appeal was filed with the city manager. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by the hearings examiner either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at his address shown on the appeal.

D. At the hearing the appellant shall be entitled to appear in person and be represented by counsel and offer such evidence pertinent and material to the action of the city manager.

E. Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant in the written notice of appeal shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.

F. Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this section shall constitute a waiver of the person’s right to an administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and order, or any portion thereof.

G. Enforcement of any notice and order of the city manager shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.01.150).]


5.05.160 Violations – Misdemeanor.

Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this title shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine in any sum not to exceed $250.00 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.01.160).]


5.05.170 Personal obligation.

The civil penalty is a personal obligation of the licensee, registrant or permit holder. The city attorney, on behalf of the City of Kenmore, may collect the civil penalty by use of all appropriate legal remedies. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.01.170).]


5.05.180 Enforcement power.

The city manager is authorized to take such lawful action, including the writing and issuance of misdemeanor citations, as may be required to enforce the provisions of any business license ordinance codified in this title. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.01.180).]


Chapter 5.10 HEAVY MANUFACTURING BUSINESSES

Sections: 

5.10.010    License required.

5.10.020    Definitions.

5.10.030    Compliance with law.


5.10.010 License required.

It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of heavy manufacturing without first obtaining a business license from the City. If more than one business is conducted on a single premises, a separate license shall be required for each separate business conducted, operated, engaged in or practiced. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A).]


5.10.020 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

A. “Business” means any commercial enterprise or activity conducted by any person or persons on any premises in the City.

B. “Heavy manufacturing” means an establishment engaged in the mechanical, physical, or chemical transformation of materials, substances, or components into new products that is likely to generate levels of truck traffic, noise, pollution, vibration, dust, fumes, odors, radiation, poisons, pesticides, or other hazardous materials, fire or explosion hazards, or other undesirable conditions that would be injurious to health or offensive to the senses, or would be an obstruction to the free use of surrounding property and essentially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property. Heavy raw materials may require significant outdoor storage. Examples include concrete manufacture, asphalt batch plants, mass production of commercial or recreational vehicles or large machinery, production of industrial organic and inorganic chemicals, animal slaughtering, and refining, extruding, rolling, or drawing of ferrous or nonferrous metals.

C. “Person” means any individual, receiver, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust, estate, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, club, company, joint stock company, business trust, corporation, association, canvasser, peddler, solicitor, society, or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or otherwise, and includes the United States or any instrumentality thereof.

D. “Premises” means all lands, structures and places, and also any personal property which is either affixed to or is otherwise used in connection with any such business conducted on such premises. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A).]


5.10.030 Compliance with law.

The heavy manufacturing business shall comply with all applicable provisions of this code and City ordinances, which shall be enforced pursuant to the enforcement and penalty provisions of this title. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A).]


Chapter 5.15 AMUSEMENT PLACES

Sections: 

5.15.010    Definitions.

5.15.020    License required.

5.15.030    License investigation.

5.15.040    Repealed.

5.15.050    Due date for license fees.

5.15.060    License applications – Public amusement/entertainment license.

5.15.070    License display.

5.15.080    Business hours.

5.15.090    Outdoor sports exempt from code.

5.15.100    Repealed.

5.15.110    Standards for public amusement/entertainment license suspension or revocation.

5.15.120    Repealed.

5.15.130    Penalty for violation.

5.15.140    Civil penalty.

5.15.150    Additional enforcement.

5.15.160    Limitation of liability.


5.15.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, “public place of amusement,” “public amusement/entertainment,” and “public entertainment” mean an amusement, diversion, entertainment, show, performance, exhibition, display or like activities for the use or benefit of a member or members of the public, or advertised for the use or benefit of a member of the public, held, conducted, operated or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect, but not including adult entertainment businesses. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.08.010).]


5.15.020 License required.

A public place of amusement shall not be operated or maintained in the City unless the owner or lessee thereof has obtained a license from the city manager, for the following types of entertainment:

A. Live entertainment;

B. Music (other than mechanical);

C. Boxing or wrestling;

D. Pool halls; and

E. Bowling alleys. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.08.020).]


5.15.030 License investigation.

The city manager shall refer an application for a license to the department for a report on compliance with all applicable fire, building and zoning codes of the City. The department shall respond to the city manager within 20 days. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.08.021).]


5.15.040 Standards for denial of license.

Repealed by Ord. 15-0402. [Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.08.022).]


5.15.050 Due date for license fees.

All license fees are due and payable to the City at least 20 days before the opening of entertainment. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.08.030).]


5.15.060 License applications – Public amusement/entertainment license.

An application for a public amusement/entertainment license must be submitted in the name of the person or entity proposing to provide such public amusement/entertainment on the business premises and shall be signed by such person or agent and notarized or certified as true under penalty of perjury. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the city manager, which shall require the following information:

A. The name, current residential and mailing addresses, and date and place of birth of the applicant if the applicant is an individual, the partners if the applicant is a partnership and the officers and directors if the applicant is a corporation;

B. The business name, address and telephone number of the establishment;

C. If the applicant is a corporation, limited liability company or partnership, the legal name of the entity, the date and place of incorporation or formation, and the name and address of any registered agent for service of process;

D. Whether the applicant proposes to serve any alcoholic beverages on the premises and the status of the business’s liquor license or application for a liquor license issued by the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board; and

E. The nature of the business conducted on the premises and the proposed public amusement/entertainment. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.08.042).]


5.15.070 License display.

The public entertainment/amusement license issued under this chapter shall be prominently displayed on the licensed premises. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.08.043).]


5.15.080 Business hours.

No public entertainment shall be conducted between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, that public dancing and those activities related to public dancing licensed by the City, such as live musical entertainment, shall be permitted until 4:00 a.m. in establishments which have a Class “H” liquor license. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.08.070).]


5.15.090 Outdoor sports exempt from code.

No license shall be required for any recognized outdoor sports. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.08.080).]


5.15.100 Race tracks and dragstrips.

Repealed by Ord. 15-0402. [Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.08.090).]


5.15.110 Standards for public amusement/entertainment license suspension or revocation.

The city manager shall revoke or suspend, for not more than one year, any public amusement/entertainment license if he or she determines that the licensee or applicant has:

A. Obtained or renewed the license through a false, misleading or fraudulent omission or representation of material fact on the application; or

B. Violated or permitted or authorized any violation of any provisions of this chapter by any person. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.08.100).]


5.15.120 Severability.

Repealed by Ord. 15-0402. [Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.08.110).]


5.15.130 Penalty for violation.

Any person violating any of the terms of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in the sum of not less than $10.00 nor more than $300.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.08.120).]


5.15.140 Civil penalty.

In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided herein or by law, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $250.00 per violation, to be directly assessed by the city manager. The city manager, in a reasonable manner, may vary the amount of the penalty assessed to consider the appropriateness of the penalty to the size of the business of the violator, the gravity of the violation, the number of past and present violations committed, and the good faith of the violator in attempting to achieve compliance after notification of the violation. All civil penalties assessed will be enforced and collected in accordance with the procedure specified under this title. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.08.130).]


5.15.150 Additional enforcement.

Notwithstanding the existence or use of any other remedy, the city manager may seek legal or equitable relief to enjoin any acts or practices which constitute or will constitute a violation of any business license ordinance or other regulations herein adopted. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.08.140).]


5.15.160 Limitation of liability.

This chapter is not intended to create a cause of action or provide the basis for a claim against the City, its officials or its employees for the performance or the failure to perform a duty or obligation running to a specific individual or specific individuals. A duty or obligation created under this chapter is intended to be a general duty or obligation running in favor of the general public. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.08.150).]


Chapter 5.20 POOL AND BILLIARD TABLES

(Repealed by Ord. 03-0165)


Chapter 5.25 CLOSING OUT SALES

(Repealed by Ord. 15-0402) 


Chapter 5.30 DANCES

(Repealed by Ord. 15-0402) 


Chapter 5.35 GO KART TRACKS

(Repealed by Ord. 15-0402) 


Chapter 5.40 JUNK DEALERS

Sections: 

5.40.010    License required.

5.40.020    Definitions.

5.40.030    Repealed.

5.40.040    Application for license.

5.40.050    Repealed.

5.40.060    Personal property tax return.

5.40.070    Vehicle markings.

5.40.080    Records required.

5.40.090    Compliance required.

5.40.100    Records and articles to be available for inspection.

5.40.110    Seller to give true name.

5.40.120    Certain transactions prohibited.

5.40.130    No sale within 10 days.

5.40.140    Police officers to be admitted.

5.40.150    Violation a misdemeanor.

5.40.160    Civil penalty.

5.40.170    Additional enforcement.


5.40.010 License required.

A. It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to operate or maintain a junk shop without first obtaining a junk shop license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

B. It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to operate or maintain a junk wagon without first obtaining and displaying a valid junk wagon license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.36.010).]


5.40.020 Definitions.

A. “Junk,” as used in this chapter, shall be deemed to include and mean old rope, old iron, brass, copper, tin, lead, rags, empty bottles, paper, bagging, scrap metals of all kinds, and other worn out or discarded material.

B. “Junk shop,” as used in this chapter, means any storeroom, building, yard, enclosure, or other place where junk is sold, bought, received or stored; provided, however, that such definition shall not apply where junk is:

1. Purchased from a source other than a junk wagon and is in prepared form by baling, pressing, or otherwise, or in carload lots, or cut to specifications; or

2. Purchased from a licensed junk shop; or

3. Purchased directly from the industrial producer of scrap metals, by the consumer there; or

4. Purchased by automobile wreckers where automobiles are purchased and a certificate of title furnished.

C. “Junk wagon,” as used in this chapter, means any vehicle used for the purpose of going from house to house, place to place, buying or offering to buy, picking up or collecting junk and transporting such junk, wholly or in part, within the City, regardless of where the junk has been bought or collected, other than a vehicle used by a regularly licensed junk shop in disposition of its own junk. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.36.020).]


5.40.030 License fee.

Repealed by Ord. 15-0402. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.36.030).]


5.40.040 Application for license.

All applications for issuance or renewal of a junk shop license or a junk wagon license shall be made to and be filed with the city manager on forms furnished for such purpose. This application shall state the true name of the applicant, who shall not be less than 18 years of age, the names of all persons having a financial, proprietary, or other interest in such junk shop together with such other information as the city manager deems appropriate. The application shall then be referred to the city police department for investigation, report and recommendation. If, from the reports and other information available, the city manager deems the applicant to be a fit and proper person, the city manager shall issue or renew the license. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.36.040).]


5.40.050 Renewal of license, registration or permit – Late penalty.

Repealed by Ord. 15-0402. [Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.36.050).]


5.40.060 Personal property tax return.

No renewal license shall issue to any junk shop owner or to any junk wagon owner until the applicant shall show that he has made a return to the King County assessor of the property in his possession or ownership and the value thereof for tax assessment purposes and has paid the tax due. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.36.060).]


5.40.070 Vehicle markings.

Every licensee operating a junk wagon shall obtain from the city manager two junk wagon vehicle licenses for each vehicle to be so used. On each license there shall be stamped or painted the word “junk” and the license number of the licensee. Each license shall be securely fastened to each outer side of the vehicle. In addition, such vehicle shall also be prominently and plainly marked with the name of the licensee and the street address of his place of business. The vehicle marking license shall remain the property of the City, and it is unlawful for any person other than the licensee to whom the plates were issued to possess or use any such plate. Plates possessed or used in violation of the provisions of this section, or used after the junk wagon license has expired or been suspended, or if by a dealer after his junk shop license has expired or been suspended, shall be taken up by any police officer or the city manager. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.36.070).]


5.40.080 Records required.

Every person who maintains or operates a junk shop and/or a junk wagon shall provide and keep a book in which shall be plainly written in ink, in the English language, at the time of every purchase, a description of the article purchased, the printed name, signature, age, street and house number, the general description of the dress, complexion, color and appearance of the person from whom such purchase is made, and the day and hour of such purchase. All such records shall be present at the junk shop or junk wagon, and shall be at all times available for inspection by officers of the city police department. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.36.080).]


5.40.090 Compliance required.

It is unlawful for any junk shop or junk wagon owner, or any clerk, agent, or employee of such junk shop or junk wagon, to fail, neglect, or refuse to make any material entry in the records required herein, or to make any false entry therein, or to obliterate, destroy, or remove from his place of business such record within five years from the date of transaction. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.36.090).]


5.40.100 Records and articles to be available for inspection.

All books and other records of any junk shop operator or any junk wagon operator relating to the purchase or receipt of any goods, wares, merchandise, junk, or other articles or things of value shall be at all times open for inspection by the city police department; and all junk wagon operators shall at any time allow inspection of their license and junk or other articles contained in the junk wagon. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.36.100).]


5.40.110 Seller to give true name.

Anyone who sells or otherwise gives any property to a junk shop operator or junk wagon operator shall sign the records required to be kept by such operator with his true name and shall include his correct residence address. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.36.110).]


5.40.120 Certain transactions prohibited.

A. It is unlawful for any person to purchase any junk from any person under the age of 18 years without receiving from such person a written authority from the person owning such junk authorizing him to sell the same. Such written authority shall be placed on file by the person receiving such junk. It is unlawful for any junk shop operator or junk wagon operator to receive any article or thing known by him to be stolen, any article or thing from any person who is under 18 years of age, intoxicated, an habitual drunkard, addicted to the use of drugs, or from any person who is known to be a thief or a receiver of stolen property, or from any person who he has reason to suspect or believe to be such.

B. It is unlawful for any keeper of a junk shop, or person operating a junk wagon, to purchase any junk between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.36.120).]


5.40.130 No sale within 10 days.

No junk shop operator or junk wagon operator shall sell or otherwise dispose of any article received or purchased by him, or remove or permit the same to be removed from his place of business, within 10 days after receipt of the articles have been reported to the city police department as herein provided, except when the articles have been inspected by a regular member of the police department, and he has been authorized to dispose of such goods within a lesser period of time. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.36.130).]


5.40.140 Police officers to be admitted.

It is unlawful for any keeper of a junk shop or a junk wagon to refuse to allow any police officer to inspect his place of business or junk wagon, and all articles of junk kept therein, or to conceal or hide away any article or thing bought or received by him. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.36.140).]


5.40.150 Violation a misdemeanor.

Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.36.150).]


5.40.160 Civil penalty.

In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided herein or by law, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $250.00 per violation to be directly assessed by the city manager. The city manager, in a reasonable manner, may vary the amount of the penalty assessed to consider the appropriateness of the penalty to the size of the business of the violator, the gravity of the violation, the number of past and present violations committed and the good faith of the violator in attempting to achieve compliance after notification of the violation. All civil penalties assessed will be enforced and collected in accordance with the procedure specified under this title. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.36.160).]


5.40.170 Additional enforcement.

Notwithstanding the existence or use of any other remedy, the city manager may seek legal or equitable relief to enjoin any acts or practices which constitute or will constitute a violation of any business license ordinance or other regulations herein adopted. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.36.170).]


Chapter 5.43 MARIJUANA BUSINESSES

Sections: 

5.43.010    Definitions.

5.43.020    License required.

5.43.030    Liquor and Cannabis Board license – Condition precedent.

5.43.040    Marijuana business license.

5.43.050    Repealed.

5.43.060    Effect of license denial.

5.43.070    Appeal.

5.43.080    License term, assignment and renewals.

5.43.090    License suspension and revocation.

5.43.100    Standards of conduct for marijuana businesses.

5.43.110    Hours of operation for marijuana retailers.

5.43.120    Insurance.


5.43.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

A. “Applicant” means any person or business entity who is considered by the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board as a true party of interest in a marijuana license, as set forth in WAC 314-55-035.

B. “Marijuana” means marijuana as defined in RCW 69.50.101.

C. “Marijuana producer” means a marijuana producer as defined in RCW 69.50.101.

D. “Marijuana processor” means a marijuana processor as defined in RCW 69.50.101.

E. “Marijuana retailer” means a marijuana retailer as defined in RCW 69.50.101.

F. “Marijuana researcher” means a marijuana researcher as defined in RCW 69.50.101.

G. “Marijuana business” means a marijuana producer, marijuana processor, marijuana researcher, or marijuana retailer. Marijuana business does not include a marijuana cooperative as described in Chapter 69.51A RCW.

H. “Marijuana license” means a license issued by the Liquor and Cannabis Board for a marijuana producer, marijuana processor, marijuana researcher, or marijuana retailer.

I. “Marijuana business license” means a business license issued by the City pursuant to this chapter.

J. “Person” has the same meaning as the definition of “person,” firm,” or “corporation” in KMC 5.105.020.

K. “Liquor and Cannabis Board” means the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board. [Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0384 § 8.]


5.43.020 License required.

A. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, manage or operate a marijuana business unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the City to do so, obtained in the manner provided in this chapter.

B. It shall be unlawful for any employee or manager to knowingly work in or about, or to knowingly perform any service directly related to the operation of, an unlicensed marijuana business. [Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0384 § 8.]


5.43.030 Liquor and Cannabis Board license – Condition precedent.

The City shall process an application for a marijuana business license in accordance with this chapter after the applicant receives a marijuana business license from the Liquor and Cannabis Board. No license shall be issued to any person who does not hold a valid marijuana license from the Liquor and Cannabis Board. [Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0384 § 8.]


5.43.040 Marijuana business license.

A. After receiving a license from the Liquor and Cannabis Board, an applicant may file a written application with the city manager, on a form provided by the city manager for that purpose, in the name of the person or entity that was issued the license. A failure to provide all information required on the form will constitute an incomplete application and the application will not be processed. The application form shall require the following information of the applicant:

1. The name of the applicant; business, mailing, and residential addresses; and business telephone number.

2. The type of applicant, as described in WAC 314-55-035.

3. Whether the applicant, or any partner, corporate officer, or director of the applicant, holds any other licenses under this chapter from the City or another city, county or state, and if so, the names and addresses of each other licensed business.

4. A summary of the business history of the applicant in owning or operating marijuana businesses, providing names, addresses and dates of operation for such businesses, and whether any Liquor and Cannabis Board license or other business license has been revoked or suspended, and the reason therefor.

5. A copy of the completed personal/criminal history form and fingerprints submitted to the Liquor and Cannabis Board for the Liquor and Cannabis Board license application, together with the results of the Liquor and Cannabis Board’s criminal history check on the applicant.

6. A copy of the operating plan submitted to the Liquor and Cannabis Board in connection with the license application, and any amendments thereto, and the license issued by the Liquor and Cannabis Board.

7. Authorization for the City, its officers, employees and agents to seek information to confirm any information and documents in the application.

8. The location and “doing-business-as” name of the marijuana business, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number, together with the name and address of each owner and lessee of the property, if not the applicant.

9. Two two-inch by two-inch color photographs of the applicant and applicant control persons, taken within six months of the date of application showing only the full face.

B. An application shall be deemed complete upon the applicant’s submittal of all information and documents described above, including identification of “none” where that is the correct response, and the applicant’s verification that the application is complete. The city manager may request other information or clarification in addition to that provided in a complete application where necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.

C. A nonrefundable application fee (see KMC 5.05.050) must be paid at the time of filing an application.

D. All applications shall be signed by the applicant and notarized or certified as true under penalty of perjury.

E. If any person or entity acquires, subsequent to the issuance of a marijuana business license, a significant interest based on responsibility for management or operation of the licensed premises or the licensed business, notice of such acquisition shall be provided in writing to the city manager, no later than 21 days following such acquisition. The notice required shall include the information required for the original marijuana business license application.

F. The marijuana business license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or entity, or persons or entities, to whom it is issued, the expiration date, the “doing-business-as” name, and the address of the licensed marijuana business. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the marijuana business so that it can be easily read at any time the business is open.

G. No person granted a marijuana business license pursuant to this chapter shall operate the marijuana business under a name not specified on the license, nor shall any person operate a marijuana business under any designation or at any location not specified on the license.

H. Upon receipt of the complete application and fee, the city manager shall provide copies to the appropriate city departments for their investigation and review to determine compliance of the proposed marijuana business with the laws and regulations which each department administers. Each department shall, within 20 days of the date of such application, inspect the application and premises and shall make a written report to the city manager regarding compliance of such application and premises with the laws administered by each department. A department shall recommend denial of a license under this subsection if it finds that the proposed marijuana business is not in conformance with the requirements of this chapter or other law in effect in the City. A recommendation for denial shall cite the specific reason therefor, including reference to applicable laws. The city manager shall not issue a marijuana business license unless and until each department reports that the application and premises comply with the relevant laws, unless the 20-day period has lapsed. If the premises is not yet constructed, the departments shall base their recommendation as to premises compliance on their review of the drawings submitted in the application. Any marijuana business license approved prior to premises construction shall contain a condition that the premises may not open for business until the premises have been inspected and determined to be in substantial conformance with the drawings submitted with the application.

I. A marijuana business license shall be issued by the city manager within 30 days of the filing of a complete license application and the application fee, unless the city manager determines that the applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements of this chapter, that the applicant has failed to provide any information required under this section, or that the applicant has made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact on the application. The city manager shall grant an extension of time in which to provide all information required for a complete license application upon the request of the applicant. If the city manager finds that the applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements for issuance of a marijuana business license, the city manager shall deny the application in writing and shall cite the specific reasons therefor, including applicable law. If the city manager fails to issue or deny the license within 30 days of the date of filing of a complete application and the application fee, the applicant shall be permitted, subject to all other applicable law, to operate the business for which the license was sought until notification by the city manager that the license has been denied, but in no event may the city manager extend the application review time for more than an additional 20 days. [Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0384 § 8.]


5.43.050 Marijuana business license fee.

Repealed by Ord. 15-0402. [Ord. 14-0384 § 8.]


5.43.060 Effect of license denial.

If the City denies a marijuana business license, the City shall not issue a marijuana business license to that applicant, or the applicant’s successor on the marijuana licenses, for a period of one year from the date of such denial. [Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0384 § 8.]


5.43.070 Appeal.

A. Any person aggrieved by the action of the city manager in refusing to issue or renew any license issued under this chapter shall have the right to appeal such action to the hearing examiner by filing a notice of appeal with the city manager within 21 days of notice of the refusal to issue or renew. The decision of the city manager shall be stayed pending the final outcome of any such timely appeal. The appeal shall be processed under KMC 5.05.150 and Chapter 19.30 KMC.

B. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the hearing examiner may appeal to the superior court for a writ of certiorari, prohibition or mandamus. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be stayed pending the final outcome of any such timely appeal. [Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0384 § 8.]


5.43.080 License term, assignment and renewals.

A. The marijuana business license is valid for one year and shall be renewed annually. The city manager shall have the authority to adjust the expiration date and to prorate the license fee of the license in order to coincide with marijuana license expiration dates. Marijuana business licenses issued under this chapter shall not be assignable.

B. Application for renewal of marijuana business licenses issued hereunder shall be made to the city manager no later than 30 days prior to the expiration of marijuana business licenses. The renewal license shall be issued in the same manner and on payment of the same fees as for an original application under this chapter. There shall be assessed and collected by the city manager an additional charge, computed as a percentage of the marijuana business license fee, on applications not made on or before said date, as follows:

	Days Past Due	Percent of License Fee

	7 – 30	25%

	31 – 60	50%

	61 and over	75%

C. The city manager shall renew a license upon application if it complies with all provisions of this chapter, as now enacted or as the same may hereafter be amended; provided, that the city manager may deny a renewal where the city manager is aware of facts that would disqualify the applicant from being issued a marijuana business license. [Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0384 § 8.]


5.43.090 License suspension and revocation.

A. The city manager may, upon the recommendation of the chief of police or designee, and as provided in subsection B of this section, suspend or revoke any marijuana business license issued under the provisions of this chapter:

1. Where the license was procured by fraud or false representation of fact;

2. For violation of, or failure to comply with, this chapter, this code, or similar local or State law by the licensee, or by any of the licensee’s servants, agents or employees, when the licensee knew or should have known of the violations committed by such servants, agents or employees;

3. For conviction of the licensee of any crime or offense involving transactions involving controlled substances (as that term is defined in Chapter 69.50 RCW) committed on the premises, or the conviction of any of licensee’s servants, agents or employees of any crime or offense involving transactions involving controlled substances (as that term is defined in Chapter 69.50 RCW) committed on the premises in which the marijuana business is conducted when the licensee knew or should have known of the violations committed by such servants, agents or employees.

B. A license procured by fraud or misrepresentation shall be revoked permanently for the licensee and licensee’s successors on the marijuana license. Where other violations of this chapter or other applicable ordinances, statutes or regulations are found, the license shall be suspended for a period of 30 days upon the first such violation, 90 days upon the second violation within a 24-month period, and revoked for third and subsequent violations within a 24-month period, not including periods of suspension.

C. The city manager shall provide at least 10 days’ prior written notice to the licensee of the decision to suspend or revoke the license. Such notice shall inform the licensee of the right to appeal the decision to the hearing examiner or other designated hearing body and shall state the effective date of such revocation or suspension and the grounds for revocation or suspension. Such appeals shall be processed under KMC 5.05.150 and Chapter 19.30 KMC. The decision of the city manager shall be stayed during the pendency of any appeal except as provided in subsection D of this section.

D. Where the city building official or fire marshal, or their designees, or the King County health department finds that any condition exists upon the premises of a marijuana business which constitutes a threat of immediate serious injury or damage to persons or property, the official may immediately suspend any license issued under this chapter pending a hearing in accordance with subsection C of this section. The official shall issue a notice setting forth the basis for the action and the facts that constitute a threat of immediate serious injury or damage to persons or property, and informing the licensee of the right to appeal the suspension to the hearing examiner or other designated hearing body under the same appeal provisions set forth in subsection C of this section; provided, that a suspension based on threat of immediate serious injury or damage shall not be stayed during the pendency of the appeal. [Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0384 § 8.]


5.43.100 Standards of conduct for marijuana businesses.

Marijuana businesses shall conform to the rules of Chapter 314-55 WAC, applicable State laws relating to marijuana businesses, and KMC Title 18. [Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0384 § 8.]


5.43.110 Hours of operation for marijuana retailers.

A marijuana retailer may be open for business only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. [Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0384 § 8.]


5.43.120 Insurance.

The licensee shall maintain the insurance coverage of WAC 314-55-082 during the term of the marijuana business license, and shall name the City as an additional insured on the insurance policies. The policies shall be primary to any City insurance policies and the licensee’s insurance policies shall state this requirement. [Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0384 § 8.]


Chapter 5.45 MASSAGE BUSINESSES, MASSAGE PRACTITIONERS AND PUBLIC BATHHOUSES

Sections:

5.45.010    Definitions.

5.45.020    General provisions.

5.45.030    License required.

5.45.040    License application and issuance.

5.45.050    Standards for denial of license.

5.45.060    Operating requirements – Massage business or public bathhouse.

5.45.070    Location of establishment – Transfer of licenses and change of location.

5.45.080    Operating requirements for safety and sanitation.

5.45.090    Standards of conduct.

5.45.100    Suspension or revocation of license.


5.45.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

A. “Corporation” means a partnership, firm, joint stock company, corporation, association, trust, estate or other legal entity.

B. “Corporation members” means partners, directors, officials, officers, shareholders, employees, members or managers of the corporation; independent contractors who perform services for the corporation; and any person who has an ownership, management or other interest in the corporation.

C. “Genitals” includes genitals, pubic area, anus, or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.

D. “Massage” means the treatment of a human body by another by the external manipulation or pressure of soft tissue. Massage includes reflexology, rubbing, kneading, touching, stroking, compressing, gliding, shaking, stretching, or tapping by manual means as they relate to massage with or without the aids of superficial heat, cold, water, lubricants, or salts.

E. “Massage business” means the operation of a business where massages are given.

F. “Massage practitioner” means any person engaged in the practice of massage.

G. “Public bathhouse” means any place where baths or facilities for baths of any kind whatsoever are given or furnished, and the term shall include but not be limited to: Finnish baths; Russian baths; sauna baths; Swedish baths; Turkish baths; hot tubs; and baths by hot air, steam, vapor, water or electric cabinet; provided, that such term shall not include ordinary tub or shower baths where an attendant is not required.

H. “Reflexology” means a health care service that is limited to applying alternating pressure with thumb and finger techniques to reflexive areas of the lower one-third of the extremities, feet, hands, and outer ears based on reflex maps. Reflexology does not include the diagnosis of or treatment for specific diseases, or joint manipulations. [Ord. 16-0425 § 1 (Exh. A).]


5.45.020 General provisions.

Unless otherwise specified, the general licensing provisions of Chapter 5.05 KMC shall apply to this chapter. [Ord. 16-0425 § 1 (Exh. A).]


5.45.030 License required.

A. Massage Business or Public Bathhouse. It is unlawful for any person or corporation to conduct, operate or maintain a massage business or public bathhouse without a current and valid license issued in accordance with Chapter 5.05 KMC and this chapter. A renewal of a license shall be handled and processed as a new application for a license.

B. Massage Practitioner. It is unlawful for any person to give a massage without a current and valid license issued in accordance with Chapter 5.05 KMC and this chapter. A renewal of a license shall be handled and processed as a new application for a license.

C. Exemptions. This chapter shall not apply to:

1. An individual giving massage in the individual’s home to members of the individual’s immediate family.

2. Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, acupuncturists, or physical therapists who are duly licensed or certified to practice their respective professions in the State of Washington.

3. Persons practicing massage under the direct supervision of physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, or physical therapists duly licensed by the State of Washington. “Direct supervision” means that the massage is given on the premises of or in the presence of such physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, or physical therapists.

4. Nurses, nurse practitioners and practical nurses who are duly licensed or registered to practice their respective services in the State of Washington.

5. Cosmetologists, hair designers, barbers, manicurists and estheticians who are duly licensed to practice their respective services; provided, that such services as are practiced are within their authorized and licensed scope of practice.

6. Massage practiced at the athletic department of any institution maintained by the public funds of the State, or any of its political subdivisions.

7. Massage practiced at the athletic department of any school or college accredited by the Northwest Association of Secondary and Higher Schools. [Ord. 16-0425 § 1 (Exh. A).]


5.45.040 License application and issuance.

A. Massage Business or Public Bathhouse. In addition to the application requirements of Chapter 5.05 KMC, all applications for a massage business or public bathhouse license, or renewal thereof, shall:

1. Be certified as true under penalty of perjury;

2. For corporations, state the names, addresses, telephone numbers, and Social Security numbers of all corporation members, specifying the status of each;

3. For a massage business, submit copies of current and valid licenses issued by the State of Washington for all massage practitioners who are corporation members or who provide or will provide massages; and

4. Submit copies of loan documents and leases relating to the business, if requested by the city manager.

The city manager shall refer applications to the city police department and may refer applications to the King County Department of Health, the Northshore Fire Department, and any other City departments deemed appropriate by the city manager, with a request to inspect the proposed business premises or business premises, as applicable, with regard to its sanitary and safety conditions and to submit a written report thereon; provided, that an application for a massage business conducted in the applicant’s home shall not be referred to the Northshore Fire Department.

B. Massage Practitioner. In addition to the application requirements of Chapter 5.05 KMC, all applications for a massage practitioner’s license, or renewal thereof, shall:

1. Be certified as true under penalty of perjury;

2. Contain a letter from the owner of the massage business indicating an intent to employ the applicant; and

3. Contain a copy of a current and valid massage practitioner license issued by the State of Washington.

C. The city police department or designee may perform a background check on the applicant and any corporation members, in accordance with the procedures of the city police department. [Ord. 16-0425 § 1 (Exh. A).]


5.45.050 Standards for denial of license.

A. Massage Business or Public Bathhouse License.

1. In addition to the reasons for approval or denial of a license stated in Chapter 5.05 KMC, the city manager may deny any new application for or renewal of a massage business or public bathhouse license if the city manager determines that the applicant has:

a. Made any material misstatement in the application;

b. Proposed a place of business or an establishment to be licensed which would not comply with all applicable requirements of this code; or

c. Within three years prior to the date of the application, the applicant or any corporation member:

(1) Failed to comply with the standards of conduct or operating requirements of this chapter in connection with a massage business or public bathhouse in the City;

(2) Had any convictions or bail forfeitures which have a direct connection with operating a massage business or public bathhouse, including but not limited to theft, controlled substances, prostitution, promoting or permitting prostitution, sexual offenses, consumer fraud, or obscenity;

(3) Had a massage business or public bathhouse license suspended or revoked by the City pursuant to KMC 5.45.100, or its predecessor code section, or by any other jurisdiction; or

(4) Received penalties pursuant to RCW 18.108.035.

B. Massage Practitioner License.

1. In addition to the reasons for approval or denial of a license stated in Chapter 5.05 KMC, the city manager may deny any new application for or renewal of a massage practitioner license if the city manager determines that the applicant has:

a. Made any material misstatement in the application; or

b. Within three years prior to the date of application, the applicant/licensee:

(1) Failed to comply with the standards of conduct or operating requirements of this chapter;

(2) Had any convictions or bail forfeitures which have a direct connection with the licensed activity including, but not limited to, theft, controlled substances, prostitution, sexual offenses, consumer fraud or obscenity;

(3) Had a massage practitioner license suspended or revoked by the City pursuant to KMC 5.45.100, or its predecessor code section, or by any other jurisdiction; or

(4) Received penalties pursuant to RCW 18.108.035.

C. Effect of License Denial. If the denial is based on conviction of a felony, then the applicant may reapply after two years from the date of denial of the license. If the denial is based on conviction of a misdemeanor or prior suspension or revocation of a license, then the applicant may reapply after one year from the date of denial of the license. If the denial is based on anything other than a felony conviction, misdemeanor conviction, or prior suspension or revocation of a license, then the applicant may reapply after six months or another time period determined by the city manager. [Ord. 16-0425 § 1 (Exh. A).]


5.45.060 Operating requirements – Massage business or public bathhouse.

All massage business and public bathhouse licensees shall:

A. Comply with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations, including but not limited to safety, sanitation and conduct requirements of KMC 5.45.080 and 5.45.090;

B. Keep business receipts showing the dates of services given, the type of services rendered and the name and license number of the employees rendering the services. These business receipts shall be retained for a period of three years after the dates of the services, and shall be open to inspection by the city police department;

C. Allow any police officer, the city manager, or a representative from the Seattle-King County Health Department or the Northshore Fire Department to enter the premises in accordance with KMC 5.05.110;

D. Equip all doors in the premises (excluding doors in office and storage rooms), unless such doors provide access to service areas, so that they may not be fastened shut in order to prevent reasonable access by such authorities who announce their authority to enter prior to inspection of the premises;

E. Upon request of the city manager, submit a current and valid Washington State massage business license;

F. Post in a prominent place in the premises a list of all services offered, with a brief description of the services and the cost for the services. All business transactions with customers must be conducted in accordance with this posted list;

G. Not distribute or allow consumption of liquor and/or controlled substances in the premises; and

H. Not operate the business between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. [Ord. 16-0425 § 1 (Exh. A).]


5.45.070 Location of establishment – Transfer of licenses and change of location.

A. No massage business or public bathhouse license issued under this chapter shall be transferable from one person or entity to another. Upon the sale or transfer of any substantial interest in a massage business or public bathhouse, the license therefor shall be null and void. A new application shall be made by any person or entity desiring to operate or maintain the establishment and shall include a release of interest statement from the previous licensee and/or a signed lease or rental agreement for the establishment.

B. A massage practitioner license, when issued, shall be valid only for the massage establishment listed on the license; provided, that if the practitioner provides massage solely in the customer’s home, the license will so note and will be valid for such purpose. Before commencing work as a massage practitioner for a new employer, a massage practitioner shall submit a letter from the new employer indicating an intent to employ the practitioner and the practitioner must apply for and receive from the city manager an amendment to his or her license, after paying a transfer fee of $5.00. [Ord. 16-0425 § 1 (Exh. A).]


5.45.080 Operating requirements for safety and sanitation.

Health and sanitary requirements for a massage business or public bathhouse shall include the following, in addition to any requirements of State and other local agencies:

A. Each room or enclosure where massage services are performed on customers shall be provided with adequate lighting in accordance with the City building code, and in addition, at least one artificial light of not less than 60 watts shall be provided in each room or enclosure where services are performed on customers and shall be in operation when such services are performed.

B. The premises shall have equipment for disinfecting and cleaning nondisposable instruments and materials used in administering massage services. Such materials and instruments shall be properly cleaned after each use.

C. Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times.

D. Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of all equipment, supplies and clean linens. All used disposable materials and soiled linens and towels shall be kept in covered containers or cabinets, which containers or cabinets shall be kept separate from clean storage cabinets.

E. Clean linens and towels shall be provided for each massage customer. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted.

F. All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, sauna baths, steam or bath areas and all floors shall have surfaces which can be readily cleaned.

G. Oils, creams, lotions or other preparations used in administering massages shall be kept in clean containers or cabinets.

H. Shower and/or bathtub, dressing, locker and toilet facilities shall be provided upon request for all customers served at any given time. Upon the request of a customer, the licensee shall provide the customer with facilities to lock or secure personal property. Male and female customers shall not simultaneously use common shower and/or bathtub, dressing, toilet and massage room facilities.

I. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all other physical facilities shall be in good repair and shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly and properly cleaned after each use.

J. Each massage practitioner shall wash his or her hands in hot running water using soap or disinfectant before and after administering a massage on a customer.

K. No person shall consume food or beverages in massage work areas.

L. Animals, except for trained dog guides or service animals, shall not be permitted in the premises.

M. A person suffering from an infectious or contagious disease shall not be served or treated. A massage practitioner who is suffering from an infectious or contagious disease shall not administer massage services.

N. The massage business or public bathhouse shall continuously comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations, including but not limited to building, fire or health laws, ordinances and regulations. [Ord. 16-0425 § 1 (Exh. A).]


5.45.090 Standards of conduct.

A. The following standards of conduct/operation must be adhered to by the licensee or corporation member of any massage business or public bathhouse:

1. Any person who provides a massage in the premises must be at least 18 years of age and have a current and valid massage practitioner license issued by the State of Washington and the City;

2. Massage businesses must have at least one massage practitioner who has a current and valid massage practitioner license issued by the State of Washington and the City on the premises at all times during business hours and/or during the presence of customers. Public bathhouses must have a manager or supervisor on the premises at all times during business hours and/or during the presence of customers;

3. Any person who provides a massage in the premises must present documentation that he or she has attained the age of 18 years when an inspection pursuant to this chapter is conducted. Any of the following shall be accepted as documentation of age:

a. A motor vehicle operator’s license issued by any state bearing the massage practitioner’s photograph and date of birth;

b. An identification card issued by the State of Washington which bears the massage practitioner’s photograph and date of birth; or

c. A passport.

4. The corporation member must prohibit any person providing massages from conducting the unlawful acts described in subsection B of this section.

Any violation of this section shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the massage business or public bathhouse license, as provided for in KMC 5.45.100.

B. It shall be unlawful for any licensee or corporation member to:

1. Intentionally touch or manipulate the genitals of a massage customer;

2. Masturbate or fondle the genital area of a massage customer;

3. Administer a massage to a massage customer, unless in the case of a massage practitioner, the massage practitioner’s sexual and genital body parts are completely covered by opaque clothing; or

4. Administer a massage to multiple customers in the same room or enclosure at the same time.

Any violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the massage practitioner license and/or the massage business or public bathhouse license of the massage business or public bathhouse where such actions occurred. [Ord. 16-0425 § 1 (Exh. A).]


5.45.100 Suspension or revocation of license.

A. Massage Business or Public Bathhouse License.

1. In addition to the grounds for suspending or revoking a massage business or public bathhouse license in KMC 5.05.040, the city manager may suspend or revoke such a license on one or more of the following grounds:

a. The licensee, corporation member, or massage practitioner has:

(1) Failed to comply with applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations;

(2) Employed, contracted with, or allowed persons who, within a period of one year, have been convicted of prostitution, consumer fraud, or related crimes stemming from activities conducted on the licensed premises;

(3) Had any convictions or bail forfeitures which have a direct connection with the licensed activity, including, but not limited to, consumer fraud, theft, controlled substances, prostitution, permitting or promoting prostitution, sexual offenses, or obscenity;

(4) Had any violations subject to RCW 18.108.035; or

(5) Failed to comply with or done anything which constitutes a reasonable basis for suspending or revoking the license.

B. Massage Practitioner License.

1. In addition to the grounds for suspending or revoking a massage practitioner license in KMC 5.05.040, the city manager may suspend or revoke such a license on one or more of the following grounds:

a. The licensee has had any convictions or bail forfeitures which have a direct connection with the licensed activity including, but not limited to, theft, controlled substances, prostitution, consumer fraud, obscenity, or sexual offenses;

b. The licensee has had violations subject to RCW 18.108.035; or

c. The licensee has failed to comply with or done anything which constitutes a reasonable basis for suspending or revoking the license.

C. Effect of License Suspension or Revocation. For a suspension or revocation of a license issued under this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

1. “Suspension” of a license means a suspension of a current and valid massage business or public bathhouse license or a massage practitioner license for a period of up to one year. The applicant’s license shall be automatically reinstituted upon expiration of the suspension period; provided, that during the suspension period, if the license expires, the applicant must reapply after the conclusion of the suspension period.

2. “Revocation” of a license means a revocation of current and valid massage business or public bathhouse license or massage practitioner license for a period of at least one year. The applicant must reapply for a license upon expiration of the revocation period. [Ord. 16-0425 § 1 (Exh. A).]


Chapter 5.50 OUTDOOR MUSICAL ENTERTAINMENTS

(Repealed by Ord. 15-0402)


Chapter 5.55 PAWNBROKERS

Sections: 

5.55.010    License required.

5.55.020    Pawnbroker and pawnshop defined.

5.55.030    Repealed.

5.55.040    Application for license.

5.55.050    Personal property tax return.

5.55.060    Limitation on licensing.

5.55.070    Repealed.

5.55.075    Fixed place of business required.

5.55.080    Records required.

5.55.090    Compliance required.

5.55.100    Report to police.

5.55.105    Notification of lost or stolen property.

5.55.110    Records and articles to be available for inspection.

5.55.120    Seller or consignee to give true name and address.

5.55.130    Authorized rate of interest – Penalty for violation.

5.55.140    Prima facie evidence of violation.

5.55.150    Period of redemption.

5.55.160    Certain transactions prohibited.

5.55.170    Pawnshop to be closed during certain hours.

5.55.180    Violation – Misdemeanor.

5.55.190    Civil penalty.

5.55.200    Additional enforcement.


5.55.010 License required.

It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to engage in the business of pawnbroker or to conduct a pawnshop without first obtaining a “pawnbroker’s license” pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.56.010).]


5.55.020 Pawnbroker and pawnshop defined.

A. The term “pawnbroker,” as used in this chapter, means and includes every person who takes or receives by way of pledge, pawn, or exchange, goods, wares, merchandise, or any kind of personal property as security for the repayment of any money loaned thereon, or who loans money on deposit of personal property, or who makes a public display of any sign indicating that he has money to loan on personal property on deposit or pledge.

B. The term “pawnshop” means and includes every place at which the business of pawnbroker is being carried on. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0242 § 1; Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.56.020).]


5.55.030 License fee.

Repealed by Ord. 15-0402. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.56.030).]


5.55.040 Application for license.

All applications for issuance or renewal of a pawnbroker’s license shall be made to and be filed with the city manager on forms furnished for such purpose. This application shall state the true name of the applicant, who shall not be less than 18 years of age, the names of all persons having a financial, proprietary, or other interest in such pawnshop, together with such other information as the city manager deems appropriate. The application shall then be referred to the city police department for investigation, report and recommendation. If, from the reports and other information available, the city manager deems the applicant and all persons having an interest in such pawnshop to be fit and proper, the city manager shall issue or renew the license. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0242 § 2; Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.56.040).]


5.55.050 Personal property tax return.

No renewal license shall issue to any pawnbroker until the applicant shall show that he has made a return to the King County assessor of the property in his possession or ownership and the value thereof for tax assessment purposes and has paid the tax due. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.56.050).]


5.55.060 Limitation on licensing.

No pawnbroker’s license shall be issued which would increase the number of holders of such licenses to more than one for every 15,000 of population, according to the last preceding federal census; provided, that this population limitation shall not operate to prohibit the licensing of any pawnbroker duly licensed prior to the enactment of this chapter, if such pawnbroker is otherwise duly qualified. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.56.060).]


5.55.070 Renewal of license, registration or permit – Late penalty.

Repealed by Ord. 15-0402. [Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.56.070).]


5.55.075 Fixed place of business required.

No person shall operate as a pawnbroker unless the person maintains a fixed place of business within the City. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0242 § 3.]


5.55.080 Records required.

Every pawnbroker shall maintain at the place of business a record in which shall be legibly written in the English language at the time of each transaction the following information:

A. The date of the transaction;

B. The name of the person conducting the transaction and making the entries required herein;

C. The printed name, signature, date of birth, sex, height, weight, race, street and house number, telephone number, general description of the dress, and color of hair of the person with whom the transaction was made;

D. The name and street and house number of the owner of the property bought or received in pledge;

E. The street and house number of the place from which the property bought or received in pledge was last removed;

F. A complete description of the property bought or received in pledge, including the brand name, serial number, model number or name, any initials or engraving, size, pattern, and color or stone or stones, and in the case of firearms, the caliber, barrel length, type of action, and whether it is a pistol, rifle, or shotgun;

G. The price paid or the amount loaned;

H. The number of any pawn tickets issued therefor;

I. The type and identifying number of identification used by the person with whom the transaction was made, which shall consist of a valid driver’s license or identification card issued by any state or two pieces of identification issued by a governmental agency, one of which shall be descriptive of the person identified; provided, that at all times, one piece of current government-issued picture identification is required; and

J. The nature of the transaction, a number identifying the transaction, the store identification as designated by the city police department, or the name and address of the business and the name of the person or employee conducting the transaction. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0242 § 4; Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.56.080).]


5.55.090 Compliance required.

It is unlawful for any pawnbroker or any clerk, agent, or employee of such pawnbroker to fail, neglect, or refuse to make any material entry in this record, as required by this chapter, or to make any false entry therein, or to obliterate, destroy, or remove from his place of business such record within five years from date of transaction. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.56.090).]


5.55.100 Report to police.

A. Upon request, every pawnbroker shall furnish or mail within 24 hours to the city police department a full, true and correct transcript of the record of all transactions conducted on the preceding day. At the close of every business week, every pawnbroker shall furnish or mail to the city police department a full, true and correct transcript of the record of all transactions conducted during the preceding week. These transactions shall be recorded on such forms as may be provided and in such format as may be required by the chief of police. This information may be transmitted electronically, by facsimile transmission, or by modem or similar device, or by delivery of computer disk subject to the requirements of, and approval by, the chief of police.

B. It is also the duty of any pawnbroker having good cause to believe any property in his possession has been previously lost or stolen to report such fact to the city police department immediately, together with the name of the owner, if known, and the date when and name of the person from whom the same was received by such pawnbroker. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0242 § 5; Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.56.100).]


5.55.105 Notification of lost or stolen property.

Following notification from a law enforcement agency that an item of property has been reported as lost or stolen, the pawnbroker shall hold that property intact and safe from alteration, damage or commingling. The pawnbroker shall place an identifying tag or other suitable identification on property so held. Property held shall not be released for 120 days from the date of police notification unless released by written consent of the applicable law enforcement agency or by court order; provided, that in cases where the applicable law enforcement agency has placed a verbal hold on an item, that agency must then give written notice within 10 business days. If such written notice is not received within that period of time, then the hold order will cease. The pawnbroker shall give a 20-day written notice before the expiration of the 120-day holding period to the applicable law enforcement agency about the lost or stolen property. If notice is not given within the required 20-day period, then the hold on the property shall continue for an additional 120 days. The applicable law enforcement agency may renew the holding period for additional 120-day periods as necessary. After the receipt of notification from a pawnbroker, if an additional holding period is required, the applicable law enforcement agency shall give the pawnbroker written notice prior to the expiration of the existing hold order. A law enforcement agency shall not place on hold any item of personal property unless that agency reasonably suspects that the item of personal property is a lost or stolen item. Any hold that is placed on an item will be removed as soon as practicable after the item on hold is determined not to be lost or stolen. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0242 § 6.]


5.55.110 Records and articles to be available for inspection.

All books and other records of any pawnbroker relating to purchase, pledge, exchange, order or receipt of any goods, wares, merchandise, or other articles or things of value shall at all times be open for inspection by the Kenmore police department, and all articles or things received, purchased or left in pledge with the pawnbroker shall at all times be open to a like inspection. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.56.110).]


5.55.120 Seller or consignee to give true name and address.

Anyone who pledges, sells, or consigns any property to or with a pawnbroker shall sign the records required to be kept by such pawnbroker with his true name and shall include his correct residence address. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.56.120).]


5.55.130 Authorized rate of interest – Penalty for violation.

All pawnbrokers are authorized to charge and receive interest and other fees in accordance with RCW 19.60.060 or any successor statute. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0242 § 7; Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.56.130).]


5.55.140 Prima facie evidence of violation.

The fact of loaning money upon or purchasing goods from any of the classes enumerated in KMC 5.55.160 shall be prima facie evidence of an intent on the part of such pawnbroker, his agent or employee to violate this chapter. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.56.140).]


5.55.150 Period of redemption.

No pawnbroker shall sell any property held by him as security for a loan until both the term of the loan and a grace period of a minimum of 60 days have expired. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0242 § 8; Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.56.150).]


5.55.160 Certain transactions prohibited.

A. It is unlawful for any pawnbroker or the clerk or employee of a pawnbroker to receive in pledge, or purchase, any article or thing known to him to be stolen, any article or thing from any person who is under 18 years of age, intoxicated, addicted to the use of drugs, or from any person who is known to be a thief, or a receiver of stolen property, or from any person who he has reason to suspect or believe to be such.

B. It is unlawful for any pawnbroker or the clerk or employee of a pawnbroker to refuse to return property which has been identified as stolen or pawned without authorization to any person the pawnbroker or the clerk or employee of a pawnbroker knows to be the rightful owner, or to charge a fee for the return of such property to the rightful owner.

1. “Identified as stolen or pawned without authorization” shall mean any property which has been reported by the rightful owner to legitimate authority as lost or stolen and has been released by written consent of the applicable law enforcement agency or by court order.

2. “The rightful owner,” unless otherwise proven, shall be considered to be the person having possession of the property prior to the theft or removal without authorization. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0242 § 9; Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.56.160).]


5.55.170 Pawnshop to be closed during certain hours.

It is unlawful for any pawnbroker to conduct or carry on the business of the pawnbroker, in whole or in part, directly or indirectly, or to open or keep open his pawnshop for the transaction of any business whatsoever therein, between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except from December 1st to December 24th of each year, when pawnbrokers may remain open until 10:00 p.m. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.56.170).]


5.55.180 Violation – Misdemeanor.

Any violation of the provisions of this chapter constitutes a misdemeanor. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.56.180).]


5.55.190 Civil penalty.

In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided herein or by law, any person who violates any provision of any business license ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $250.00 per violation to be directly assessed by the city manager. The city manager, in a reasonable manner, may vary the amount of the penalty assessed to consider the appropriateness of the penalty to the size of the business of the violator, the gravity of the violation, the number of past and present violations committed, and the good faith of the violator in attempting to achieve compliance after notification of the violation. All civil penalties assessed will be enforced and collected in accordance with the procedure specified under this title. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.56.190).]


5.55.200 Additional enforcement.

Notwithstanding the existence or use of any other remedy, the city manager may seek legal or equitable relief to enjoin any acts or practices which constitute or will constitute a violation of any business license ordinance or other regulations herein adopted. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.56.200).]


Chapter 5.60 SECONDHAND DEALERS

Sections: 

5.60.010    License required.

5.60.020    Secondhand dealer and secondhand goods defined.

5.60.030    Repealed.

5.60.040    Application for a license.

5.60.050    Repealed.

5.60.060    Repealed.

5.60.070    More than one shop – Change of location.

5.60.080    Records required.

5.60.090    Compliance required.

5.60.100    Transcript to be furnished.

5.60.110    Records and articles to be available for inspection.

5.60.120    Seller to give true name and address.

5.60.130    No sale within 10 days.

5.60.140    Certain transactions prohibited.

5.60.150    Violation a misdemeanor.

5.60.160    Civil penalty.

5.60.170    Additional enforcement.


5.60.010 License required.

It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the business of buying, selling, or trading in secondhand goods in the City without first obtaining a “secondhand dealer’s license” pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.60.010).]


5.60.020 Secondhand dealer and secondhand goods defined.

A. The term “secondhand dealer,” as used in this chapter, means and includes every person who as a business engages in the purchase, sale, trade, barter, auction, sale on consignment, or otherwise exchanges secondhand goods, or who keeps a store, shop, room or other place where secondhand goods of any kind or description are bought, sold, traded, bartered, pledged, pawned, auctioned, sold on consignment, or otherwise exchanged, including dealers in used or remanufactured automobile tires or parts; provided, however, that this term shall not apply to those persons engaged in the business of selling used or secondhand motor vehicles or boats.

B. The term “secondhand goods” when used in this chapter means and includes any and all used, remanufactured, or secondhand goods purchased or kept for sale by a dealer in secondhand goods; provided, however, such term shall not be construed to include junk or used or secondhand motor vehicles or boats. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.60.020).]


5.60.030 License fee.

Repealed by Ord. 15-0402. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.60.030).]


5.60.040 Application for a license.

All applications for issuance or renewal of secondhand dealer’s license shall be made to and be filed with the city manager on forms furnished for such purpose. This application shall state the true name of the applicant, who shall not be less than 18 years of age, the names of all persons having a financial, proprietary, or other interest in such secondhand dealer’s shop, together with such other information as the city manager deems appropriate. The application shall then be referred to the city police department for investigation, report, and recommendation. If, from the reports and other information available, the department deems the applicant to be a fit and proper person, the city manager shall issue or renew the license. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.60.040).]


5.60.050 Renewal of license, registration or permit – Late penalty.

Repealed by Ord. 15-0402. [Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.60.050).]


5.60.060 Personal property tax return.

Repealed by Ord. 15-0402. [Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.60.060).]


5.60.070 More than one shop – Change of location.

Any person having more than one place of business where secondhand goods are bought, sold, traded, bartered, or exchanged shall be required to procure a separate license for each and every such place of business. A secondhand dealer’s license shall not be transferable from one person to another, but the licensee may have his license transferred to a new location by the city manager, and the change of address shall be noted on the license, together with the date on which the change was made. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.60.070).]


5.60.080 Records required.

Every secondhand dealer shall maintain at his place of business a book in which he shall at the time of purchase of any secondhand goods enter, in the English language, written in ink, the following information:

A. The date of the transaction;

B. The name of the person conducting the transaction and making the entries required herein;

C. The printed name, signature, age, and address of the person with whom the transaction is had;

D. The address of the place from which the property was last removed;

E. An accurate description of the property bought, which shall include the name of the maker of such property or manufacturer thereof and the serial number, if the article has such marks on it, or any other inscriptive or identifying marks; provided, that when the article received is furniture or the contents of any house or room, actually inspected on the premises where the sale is made, the general description of the property shall be sufficient; and

F. An itemized statement of the price or amount paid for the property purchased. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.60.080).]


5.60.090 Compliance required.

It is unlawful for any secondhand dealer, or any clerk, agent, or employee of such secondhand dealer, to fail, neglect, or refuse to make any material entry in this record, as required by this chapter, or to make any false entry therein, or to obliterate, destroy, or remove from his place of business such record within five years from the date of the transaction. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.60.090).]


5.60.100 Transcript to be furnished.

A. Every secondhand dealer shall deliver to the city police department at the close of every business week a full, true, and correct transcript of the record of all transactions occurring during the preceding week. Secondhand goods taken on consignment or trade-in will be recorded in the same manner as goods purchased outright.

B. Any secondhand dealer having good cause to believe any property in the dealer’s possession has been previously lost or stolen shall report such act to the city police department immediately, together with the name of the owner, if known, and the date and name of the person from whom the same was received by such secondhand dealer. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.60.100).]


5.60.110 Records and articles to be available for inspection.

All books and other records of any secondhand dealer relating to purchase or receipt of any goods, wares, merchandise, or other things of value shall at all times be open for inspection by the city police department, and all articles or things received or purchased shall at all times be open to a like inspection. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.60.110).]


5.60.120 Seller to give true name and address.

Anyone who sells or otherwise leaves any property with a secondhand dealer shall sign the records required to be kept by such dealer with his true name and shall include his correct residence address. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.60.120).]


5.60.130 No sale within 10 days.

No dealer in secondhand goods shall sell or dispose of any article received or purchased by him or permit the same to be removed from his place of business within 10 days after the receipt of such goods has been reported to the city police department as provided herein, except when the goods have been inspected by regular members of the city police department, and they have authorized the secondhand dealer to dispose of such goods within a lesser period of time; provided, that consigned property sold at auction need only be held for three days prior to sale. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.60.130).]


5.60.140 Certain transactions prohibited.

A. It is unlawful for any secondhand dealer, his clerk or employee to purchase or receive any article or thing known by him to be stolen, any article or thing from a person who is under 18 years of age, intoxicated, addicted to the use of drugs, or from any person who is known to be a thief, or a receiver of stolen property, or from any person who he has reason to suspect or believe to be such.

B. It is unlawful for any secondhand dealer, his clerk or employee to refuse to return property which has been identified as stolen or sold without authorization to any person the secondhand dealer, his clerk or employee knows to be the rightful owner, or to charge a fee for the return of such property to the rightful owner.

1. “Identified as stolen or sold without authorization” shall mean any property which has been reported by the rightful owner to legitimate authority as missing or stolen.

2. “The rightful owner,” unless otherwise proven, shall be considered to be the person having possession of the property prior to the theft or removal without authorization. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.60.140).]


5.60.150 Violation a misdemeanor.

Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.60.150).]


5.60.160 Civil penalty.

In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided herein or by law, any person who violates any provision of any business license ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $250.00 per violation to be directly assessed by the city manager. The city manager, in a reasonable manner, may vary the amount of the penalty assessed to consider the appropriateness of the penalty to the size of the business of the violator, the gravity of the violation, the number of past and present violations committed and the good faith of the violator in attempting to achieve compliance after notification of the violation. All civil penalties assessed will be enforced and collected in accordance with the procedure specified under this title. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.60.160).]


5.60.170 Additional enforcement.

Notwithstanding the existence or use of any other remedy, the city manager may seek legal or equitable relief to enjoin any acts or practices which constitute or will constitute a violation of any business license ordinance or other regulations herein adopted. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.60.170).]


Chapter 5.65 THEATERS

Sections: 

5.65.010    License required.

5.65.020    Repealed.

5.65.030    Transferring of license.

5.65.040    Repealed.

5.65.050    Application for license.

5.65.060    Penalty – Misdemeanor.

5.65.070    Civil penalty.

5.65.080    Additional enforcement.


5.65.010 License required.

It is unlawful for any person to open, operate, conduct, manage, maintain or control any theater which is open to the public and which is located in the City of Kenmore without a valid and subsisting license to be known as a “theater license.” [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.68.010).]


5.65.020 License fee – Term.

Repealed by Ord. 15-0402. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.68.020).]


5.65.030 Transferring of license.

No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable or assignable, unless specifically authorized by the city manager. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.68.030).]


5.65.040 Renewal of license, registration or permit – Late penalty.

Repealed by Ord. 15-0402. [Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.68.040).]


5.65.050 Application for license.

All applications for licenses under this chapter shall be made to the city manager. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.68.050).]


5.65.060 Penalty – Misdemeanor.

Any violation or failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as such. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.68.060).]


5.65.070 Civil penalty.

In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided herein or by law, any person who violates any provision of any business license ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $250.00 per violation to be directly assessed by the city manager. The city manager, in a reasonable manner, may vary the amount of the penalty assessed to consider the appropriateness of the penalty to the size of the business of the violator, the gravity of the violation, the number of past and present violations committed and the good faith of the violator in attempting to achieve compliance after notification of the violation. All civil penalties assessed will be enforced and collected in accordance with the procedure specified under this title. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.68.070).]


5.65.080 Additional enforcement.

Notwithstanding the existence or use of any other remedy, the city manager may seek legal or equitable relief to enjoin any acts or practices which constitute or will constitute a violation of any business license ordinance or other regulations herein adopted. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.68.080).]


Chapter 5.70 CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS

Sections: 

5.70.010    Definitions.

5.70.020    Soliciting for private needs prohibited.

5.70.030    Permit – Required – Exemptions.

5.70.040    Permit – Application – Contents.

5.70.050    Permit – Application – Investigation.

5.70.060    Permit – Application – State registration in lieu of.

5.70.070    Permit – Issuance.

5.70.080    Repealed.

5.70.090    Permit – Term.

5.70.100    Credentials.

5.70.110    Permit – Expiration – Return.

5.70.120    Written receipts required.

5.70.130    Repealed.

5.70.140    Permit – Suspension or revocation – Notice to Kenmore police department.

5.70.150    Books and records of permit holders.

5.70.160    Financial report.

5.70.170    Religious solicitations – Certificate of registration – Required.

5.70.180    Religious solicitations – Certificate of registration – Regulations.

5.70.190    Fraudulent misrepresentation and misstatements prohibited.

5.70.200    Violation – Penalty.

5.70.210    Civil penalty.

5.70.220    Additional enforcement.

5.70.230    Repealed.


5.70.010 Definitions.

The following words and terms of this chapter, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context, shall mean as follows:

A. “Charitable” means and includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic or fraternal, either actual or purported; provided, such term shall not include “religious” and “religion,” which terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions;

B. “Contributions” means and includes alms, food, clothing, money, credit, subscription, property, financial assistance or other thing of value and including any donations under the guise of a loan of money or property;

C. “Direct gift” means and includes an outright contribution of food, clothing, money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value to be used for a charitable or religious purpose and for which the donor receives no consideration or thing of value in return;

D. “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association or joint stock association, church, religious sect, religious denomination, society, organization or league, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent or other similar representative thereof;

E. “Promoter” means any person who promotes, manages, supervises, organizes or attempts to promote, manage, supervise or organize a campaign of solicitation, but shall not include either a bona fide full-time salaried officer or employee of a charitable organization whose salary or other compensation is not computed on funds raised or to be raised, or a temporary employee who is employed to contact volunteer workers by telephone but who may not himself solicit contributors directly;

F. “Sale and benefit affair” means and includes, but is not limited to, athletic or sports event, bazaar, benefit, campaign, circus, dance, drive, entertainment, exhibition, exposition, party, performance, picnic, sale, social gathering, theater or variety show, which the public is requested to patronize or attend or to which the public is requested to make a contribution for any charitable or religious purpose connected therewith;

G. “Solicit” and “solicitation” mean the request within the City directly or indirectly of money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value on the plea or representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value will be used for a charitable or religious purpose, and include:

1. Any oral or written request;

2. The distribution, circulation, mailing, posting or publishing of any handbill, written advertisement or publication;

3. The making of any announcement to the press, by radio or television, by telephone or telegraph, concerning an appeal, assemblage, athletic or sports event, bazaar, benefit, campaign, circus, contest, dance, drive, entertainment, exhibition, exposition, party, performance, picnic, sale, social gathering, theater or variety show, which the public is requested to patronize or to which the public is requested to make a contribution for any charitable or religious purpose connected therewith;

4. The sale of, offer or attempt to sell any advertisement, advertising space, book, card, chance, coupon, device, magazine, membership, subscription, ticket, admission, article or other thing in connection with which any appeal is made for any charitable or religious purpose, or where the name of any charitable or religious organization, association or person is used or referred to in any such appeal or where in connection with any such sale, any statement is made that the whole or any part of the proceeds from any such sale will go or be donated to any charitable or religious purpose.

A “solicitation” shall be deemed completed when made, whether or not the person making the same received any contribution or makes any sale referred to in this section. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.76.010).]


5.70.020 Soliciting for private needs prohibited.

No person shall solicit contributions for himself in or upon any public street or public place in the City. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.76.020).]


5.70.030 Permit – Required – Exemptions.

It is unlawful for any person to solicit contributions for any charitable purpose within the City without a “charitable solicitation permit” issued by the city manager authorizing such solicitation; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to:

A. Solicitations by any organization operated exclusively for religious or charitable purposes and not operated for the pecuniary profit of any person, if the solicitations by such organization are conducted among the members thereof by other members or officers thereof, voluntarily and without remuneration for making such solicitations, or if the solicitations are in the form of collections or contributions at the regular assemblies, meetings or services of any such organization;

B. Any charitable organization which does not solicit and collect contributions in this City in excess of $2,500 in any one-year period all of such fundraising functions are carried on by persons who are unpaid for their services. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.76.030).]


5.70.040 Permit – Application – Contents.

An application for a charitable solicitation permit shall be made to the city manager upon forms provided by the city manager. Such application shall be executed under oath by the applicant, and if a promoter is involved in the solicitation, the promoter shall likewise execute under oath such application. The application shall be submitted to the city manager at least 30 days prior to the time at which the permit applied for shall become effective; provided, however, that the city manager may for good cause shown allow the application to be submitted less than 30 days prior to the effective date of the permit applied for. The application herein required shall contain the following information or, in lieu thereof, a detailed statement of the reason or reasons why such information cannot be furnished:

A. The name and address or headquarters of the person applying for the permit;

B. If applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the applicant’s principal officers and managers, and a copy of the resolution, if any, authorizing such solicitation, certified to as a true and correct copy of the original by the officer having charge of applicant’s records;

C. If some organization other than the applicant is to be the beneficiary of the funds solicited hereunder and if that beneficiary organization’s name will be used in the campaign of solicitation, there must be filed with the city manager a statement signed by the board of directors or other governing body of that beneficiary organization, authorizing the use of that organization’s name in the solicitation campaign;

D. The purpose for which such solicitation is to be made, the total amount of funds proposed to be raised thereby, and the use or disposition to be made of any receipts therefrom;

E. The name and address of the person or persons by whom the receipts of such solicitation shall be disbursed;

F. The names, addresses and dates of birth of the person or persons who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitation and the names and dates of birth of all promoters connected or to be connected with the proposed solicitation;

G. An outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the solicitation and location of any telephone solicitation headquarters;

H. The time when such solicitations shall be made, giving the dates for the beginning and ending of such solicitations;

I. The amount of any wages, fees, commissions, salaries, expenses or emoluments to be expended or paid to any person in connection with such solicitations, and the names and addresses of all such persons;

J. A financial statement for the last preceding fiscal year of any funds collected for charitable purposes by the applicant, the statement giving the amount of money so raised, together with the cost of solicitation, and final distribution of the balance. This financial statement shall be submitted on a uniform reporting form provided by the city manager;

K. A detailed statement of the charitable work being done by the applicant within the City;

L. An itemization of the estimated cost of the solicitation;

M. A statement that the cost of the solicitation will not exceed 20 percent of the total gross amount to be raised by direct gifts, 55 percent of the total gross amount to be raised by sale and benefit affairs, and that in either case all wages, fees, commissions, salaries and emoluments paid or to be paid to all salesmen, solicitors, collectors, conductors and managers will not exceed 20 percent of the total gross amount collected;

N. A statement to the effect that if a permit is granted, it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the City or by any department or officer thereof of solicitations made thereunder;

O. A statement that applicant, and if applicant is not an individual, its principal officers, and any promoter, has read and understands the provisions of this chapter;

P. Such other information as may be reasonably required by the city manager in order for him to determine the character of the applicant and/or promoters and agents and the kind and character of the proposed solicitation.

If, while any application is pending or during the term of any permit granted thereon, there is any change in fact, policy or method that would alter the information given in the application, the applicant shall notify the city manager in writing thereof within 24 hours after such change. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.76.040).]


5.70.050 Permit – Application – Investigation.

The city manager shall examine all applications filed and shall make, or cause to be made, such further investigation of the application and the applicant as the city manager deems necessary. Upon request by the city manager, the applicant shall make available for inspection by the city manager, or any person designated as his representative for such purpose, all of the applicant’s books, records and papers at any reasonable time before the permit is granted, during the time a permit is in effect, or after a permit has expired. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.76.050).]


5.70.060 Permit – Application – State registration in lieu of.

KMC 5.70.040 and 5.70.050 shall not apply to any person who has fully complied with the laws of the State of Washington relating to charitable solicitation and has received a valid registration provided:

A. Such person furnishes a sworn statement that State law relating to charitable solicitation has been fully complied with and that the State registration is current and has not been revoked; and

B. Such person files with the city manager duplicate copies of all applications for registration, correspondence, instruments, documents and papers filed with the appropriate State officer or agency; and

C. Such person pays to the city manager the appropriate fees; and

D. Such person does not use a method of solicitation or a promotional plan in violation of this chapter.

The city manager shall issue a charitable solicitation permit to any person who complies with this section and KMC 5.70.070. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.76.060).]


5.70.070 Permit – Issuance.

A. The city manager shall issue the permit provided he finds the following facts to exist:

1. All of the statements made in the application are true;

2. The applicant and the officers of the organization on whose behalf charitable solicitations are to be made and all persons supervising the solicitations and any promoters connected therewith shall not, to the knowledge of the applicant and/or promoter, have had a record of arrest and conviction with any federal or State law enforcement agency involving misstatement, misrepresentation, deception or fraud;

3. The control and supervision of the solicitation will be under responsible and reliable persons;

4. The applicant (and if not an individual, the officers, agents or promoters) has not engaged in any fraudulent transactions or enterprises;

5. The proposed solicitation will be conducted to finance the charitable cause described in the application, and not for purposes of private gain;

6. The cost of raising the funds will not exceed 20 percent of the total gross amount to be raised by direct gifts, or 55 percent of the total gross amount to be raised by sale and benefit affairs, and that in either case all wages, fees, commissions, salaries or emoluments paid or to be paid to all salesmen, solicitors, collectors, conductors and managers will not exceed 20 percent of the total gross amount collected;

7. The method or methods for solicitation outlined in the application do not include any of the following methods of solicitation:

a. Charitable solicitations by children under 14 years of age where the children will be paid for such solicitation or retain a portion of the solicited funds. This prohibition shall not apply where both of the following exist:

(1) The children are members of the organization for whose benefit the solicitation is made; and

(2) All funds so solicited, less permissible costs, shall be expended locally and solely for the direct benefit of children in such organization;

b. Delivery by mail or otherwise of any unordered merchandise;

c. Solicitation by means of coin or currency boxes or receptacles except when:

(1) Each such box or receptacle shall be the responsibility of a bona fide member, agent or solicitor of the soliciting organization; 

(2) Such responsible person shall be required to pick up each such box or receptacle at the end of the solicitation period; and

(3) The use of such boxes and receptacles in the solicitation is expressly authorized by the city manager;

8. The person or organization has tax-exempt status from the government of the United States.

B. The city manager may request the city police department to investigate the truth of the statements in the application and all other matters which tend to aid the city manager in determining whether to grant the permit. The city police department shall report to the city manager any reasons he may have for objecting to the granting of a permit.

C. The city manager is authorized to make and enforce rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, and it is unlawful to violate or not to comply with any of the rules and regulations. All of such rules and regulations as promulgated by the city manager from time to time shall be reduced to writing and shall be made available to applicants under this chapter. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.76.070).]


5.70.080 Permit – Fees.

Repealed by Ord. 15-0402. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.76.080).]


5.70.090 Permit – Term.

A. All charitable solicitation permits issued under this chapter shall be dated and shall bear the name and address of the person to whom issued and of the organization on whose behalf solicitation may be done and shall be valid for one year from date of issue.

B. If an annual permit is applied for and denied, the applicant shall be entitled to a public hearing.

C. Such permits shall not be transferable and shall state that the same is not an endorsement by the City for the purpose of the solicitation or of the person making the same. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.76.090).]


5.70.100 Credentials.

All persons to whom charitable solicitation permits have been issued shall furnish to each of their agents and solicitors credentials approved as to form by the city manager. Such credentials shall include the permit number, the name and telephone number of the permit holder, the purpose of the solicitation, the signature of the applicant, and the name, address and signature of the solicitor to whom such credentials are issued, and the period of time during which the solicitor is authorized to solicit on behalf of the permit holder. The city manager may authorize the use of the identification approved by the Director of the Department of Motor Vehicles for the State of Washington for any person or organization validly registered under the charitable solicitation law, provided the above information appears thereon. It is unlawful for any person to solicit under any such charitable solicitation permit without having in his possession the credentials required by this section. The credentials must be shown, upon request, to all persons solicited or to any police officer of the City or agent of the city manager. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.76.100).]


5.70.110 Permit – Expiration – Return.

Any charitable solicitation permit shall be returned to the city manager within seven days of its date of expiration. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.76.110).]


5.70.120 Written receipts required.

Any person receiving money or anything having a value of $1.00 or more from any contributor under a solicitation made pursuant to a charitable solicitation permit shall, upon request, give to the contributor a written receipt signed by the solicitor showing plainly the name and permit number of the person under whose permit the solicitation is conducted, the date and the amount received; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any contributions collected by means of a closed box or receptacle used in solicitation with the express approval of the city manager. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.76.120).]


5.70.130 Renewal of license, registration or permit – Late penalty.

Repealed by Ord. 15-0402. [Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.76.130).]


5.70.140 Permit – Suspension or revocation – Notice to Kenmore police department.

The city police department shall be notified by the city manager of the suspension or revocation of any charitable solicitation permit. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.76.140).]


5.70.150 Books and records of permit holders.

Every person to whom a charitable solicitation permit has been issued under this chapter shall maintain a system of accounting whereby all contributions and all disbursements are entered upon the books or records of such person’s treasurer or other financial officer. For each solicitation a separate folder containing all vouchers supporting the accounting and containing a record of all contributions and disbursements will be maintained and available for inspection by the city manager for a period of one year from the end of the period of solicitation. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.76.150).]


5.70.160 Financial report.

Within 30 days after completing solicitation, the holder of a charitable solicitation permit shall furnish the city manager with a detailed financial report and statements showing the amount raised by solicitation under the permit, the amount expended in soliciting, including a detailed account of all wages, fees, commissions and expenses allowed or paid anyone in connection with such solicitation, and a statement of the disposition of the balance, and proof of such disposition shall be furnished the finance director on request. All monies or things of value collected under such permit shall be reported. The financial report required by this section shall be submitted on a uniform form provided by the city manager. The city manager shall keep the report available for inspection by the public; provided, however, the city manager may extend the time for filing of the report required by this section for an additional period of 30 days or longer upon proof that the filing of the report within the time specified will work unnecessary hardship on the permit holder. Any charitable organization having a one-year permit shall file with the city manager a copy of the independent certified audit of its financial books and records within 10 days after the same has been obtained. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.76.160).]


5.70.170 Religious solicitations – Certificate of registration – Required.

A. No person shall solicit contributions for any religious purpose within the City without a certificate of registration issued by the city manager; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to solicitations by any religious organization conducted among the members thereof by other officers or members voluntarily and without remuneration for making such solicitations, or to solicitations for or collections of contributions at the regular assemblies, meetings or services of such organizations. Application for a certificate shall be made to the city manager upon forms provided by him. Such application shall be sworn to or affirmed, and shall contain the following information, or in lieu thereof, a statement of the reason or reasons why such information cannot be furnished:

1. The name and local address or headquarters of the person applying for the certificate;

2. If applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the applicant’s principal officers and managers and a copy of the resolution, if any, authorizing such solicitation, certified to as a true and correct copy of the original by the officer having charge of applicant’s records;

3. The purpose for which such solicitation is to be made, the total amount of funds proposed to be raised thereby, and the use or disposition to be made of any receipts therefrom;

4. The name and address of the person or persons by whom the receipts of such solicitation shall be disbursed;

5. The name and address of the person or persons who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitation and the names of all promoters connected or to be connected with the proposed solicitation;

6. An outline of the method to be used in conducting the solicitation;

7. The time when such solicitation shall be made, giving the dates for the beginning and ending of such solicitations;

8. The estimated cost of the solicitation;

9. The amount of any wages, fees, commissions, expenses or emoluments to be expended or paid to any person in connection with such solicitations, and the names and addresses of all such persons;

10. A financial statement for the last preceding fiscal year of any funds solicited by the applicant for religious purposes from the public pursuant to a certificate of registration hereunder, said statements giving the amount of money so raised, together with the cost of raising it, and final distribution thereof;

11. A detailed statement of the religious work being done by the applicant within the City;

12. A statement to the effect that the certificate will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the City or by any department or officer thereof.

B. If, while any application is pending or during the term of any certificate granted thereon, there is any change in fact, policy or method that would alter the information given in the application, the applicant shall notify the city manager in writing thereof within 24 hours after such change. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.76.170).]


5.70.180 Religious solicitations – Certificate of registration – Regulations.

Upon receipt of such application, the city manager shall issue the applicant a certificate of registration. The certificate shall remain in force and effect for a period of six months after the issuance thereof, and shall be renewed upon the expiration of this period upon the filing of a new application. Certificates of registration shall bear the name and address of the person by whom the solicitation is to be made, the number of the certificate, the date issued and a statement that the certificate does not constitute an endorsement by the City or by any of its departments or officers of the purpose or the person conducting the solicitation. All persons to whom certificates of registration have been issued shall furnish credentials to their agents and solicitors in the same manner and subject to the same conditions relating to credentials to solicit for charitable purposes. No person shall solicit under any such certificate of registration without such credentials in his possession, and such person shall, upon demand, present these credentials to any person solicited or to the city manager or his agent or to any police officer of the City. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.76.180).]


5.70.190 Fraudulent misrepresentation and misstatements prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to directly or indirectly solicit contributions for any purpose by misrepresentation of his name, occupation, financial condition, social condition or residence, and no person shall make or perpetrate any other misstatement, misrepresentation, deception or fraud in connection with any solicitation of any contribution for any purpose in the City or in any application or report filed in connection therewith. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.76.190).]


5.70.200 Violation – Penalty.

Any person who willfully violates any of the provisions of this chapter is, upon conviction thereof, punishable by a fine of not more than $250.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not more than 90 days, or by both fine and imprisonment. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.76.200).]


5.70.210 Civil penalty.

In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided herein or by law, any person who violates any provision of any business license ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $250.00 per violation to be directly assessed by the city manager. The city manager, in a reasonable manner, may vary the amount of the penalty assessed to consider the appropriateness of the penalty to the size of the business of the violator, the gravity of the violation, the number of past and present violations committed and the good faith of the violator in attempting to achieve compliance after notification of the violation. All civil penalties assessed will be enforced and collected in accordance with the procedure specified under this title. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.76.210).]


5.70.220 Additional enforcement.

Notwithstanding the existence or use of any other remedy, the city manager may seek legal or equitable relief to enjoin any acts or practices which constitute or will constitute a violation of any business license ordinance or other regulations herein adopted. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.76.220).]


5.70.230 Severability.

Repealed by Ord. 15-0402. [Ord. 98-0017 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 6.76.230).]


Chapter 5.75 VIOLATION – PENALTIES

Sections: 

5.75.010    General.

5.75.020    Civil penalties.


5.75.010 General.

Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of Chapters 5.05 through 5.100 KMC shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as set forth in KMC 1.15.010 and 1.15.020. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 § 3.]


5.75.020 Civil penalties.

In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided herein, any person violating any provision of Chapters 5.05 through 5.100 KMC shall be subject to a civil penalty as provided in KMC 1.15.010 and 1.15.020. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 98-0017 § 4.]


Chapter 5.80 PANORAM PREMISES

Sections: 

5.80.010    Findings of fact.

5.80.020    Definitions.

5.80.030    Panoram premises license required.

5.80.040    Panoram device license required.

5.80.050    Panoram operator’s license required.

5.80.060    Panoram manager’s license required.

5.80.070    Repealed.

5.80.080    License application – Report by city departments.

5.80.090    Issuance of licenses.

5.80.100    Suspension or revocation of licenses – Notices – Summary suspension.

5.80.110    Appeal and hearing.

5.80.120    Premises regulations.

5.80.130    Unlawful acts.

5.80.140    Violations and penalties.

5.80.150    Compliance.


5.80.010 Findings of fact.

The City takes notice and specifically relies upon the experiences of and studies utilized by other cities and counties in combating the specific adverse impacts of sexually oriented businesses, including panoram or “peep show” establishments. This includes but is not limited to the studies relied upon, findings of fact entered by, and litigation involving the cities of Tukwila, SeaTac, Shoreline, and Federal Way in their respective panoram ordinance provisions.

Additionally, the city council enters the following findings of fact related to panoram establishments within the City:

A. The police have documented the existence of illegal sexual activity occurring within the panoram booths at panoram establishments within the City.

B. The floor in the panoram booths is stained with fluid.

C. Adoption of this chapter will minimize these and other illegal and unhealthful activities, and will preserve the public health, safety, and welfare. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 99-0069 § 1.]


5.80.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

A. “Applicant” means the individual or entity seeking any form of panoram license in the City of Kenmore.

B. “Applicant control persons” means all partners, corporate officers and directors and any other individuals in the applicant’s business organization who hold a significant interest in the panoram business, based on responsibility for management or control of the panoram business, regardless of whether such person’s name appears on corporate filings, license applications, or other official documents of the applicant.

C. “Panoram,” “preview,” “picture arcade” or “peep show” means any device which, for payment of a fee, membership fee or other charge, is used to view, exhibit or display a film or videotape. All such devices are denominated in this chapter by the terms “panoram” or “panoram device.” The terms “panoram” and “panoram device” as used in this chapter do not include games which employ pictures, or gambling devices regulated by the State.

D. “Panoram manager” means any person to whom the applicant or any applicant control person has delegated day-to-day administrative or management duties on the panoram premises.

E. “Panoram premises” means any premises or portion of any premises on which any panoram device is located and to which members of the public are admitted. The term “panoram premises” as used in this chapter does not include motion picture theater auditoriums.

F. “Panoram station” means a portion of any panoram premises on which a panoram device is located and where a patron or customer would ordinarily be positioned while watching the panoram device. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 99-0069 § 2.]


5.80.030 Panoram premises license required.

A. It is unlawful to display, exhibit, expose or maintain any panoram device upon any premises to which members of the public are admitted unless there is a valid and current panoram premises license for such premises.

B. A separate panoram premises license is required for each panoram premises and the same shall at all times be conspicuously posted and maintained therein.

C. The city manager shall prescribe the form of such license, number the same, and shall indicate thereon the number of panoram devices which may be operated thereunder, and the location of the licensed panoram premises. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 99-0069 § 3.]


5.80.040 Panoram device license required.

A. It is unlawful to exhibit or display for public use any panoram device upon any panoram premises without first having obtained a panoram device license for each such panoram device.

B. Panoram device licenses shall be issued for specific panoram premises only and shall not be transferable.

C. The current panoram device license for each panoram device shall be securely attached to each panoram device in a conspicuous place.

D. The city manager shall prescribe the form of such license and number the same. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 99-0069 § 4.]


5.80.050 Panoram operator’s license required.

It is unlawful to own and exhibit or display for public use, or to place with another, by lease or otherwise, for public use, exhibit or display, any panoram device without a valid and current panoram operator’s license. The city manager shall prescribe the form of such license and shall number the same. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 99-0069 § 5.]


5.80.060 Panoram manager’s license required.

No person shall work as a manager at a panoram premises in the City without a valid and current panoram manager’s license under this chapter. The city manager shall prescribe the form of such license and shall number the same. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 99-0069 § 6.]


5.80.070 License fee – Terms – Assignment – Renewals.

Repealed by Ord. 15-0402. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0069 § 7.]


5.80.080 License application – Report by city departments.

A. Any person seeking a panoram premises license, panoram operator’s license or panoram device license shall file a written application with the city manager on a form provided by the city manager for that purpose.

The city manager, upon presentation of a complete application and appropriate fee, shall refer such application to the police department, and other appropriate city departments or contractors, for a full investigation as to the truth of the statements contained therein, and as to any or all other matters which would aid the city manager in determining compliance with this chapter and other applicable law.

Upon receipt of any complete application and appropriate fee for a license, the city manager shall further issue a temporary license, pending disposition of the application or the completion of the term of any license suspension issued pursuant to this chapter. The temporary license shall expire upon issuance of a license or renewal thereof or notice of nonissuance. The holder of a temporary license is subject to all requirements, standards, and penalty provisions of this chapter.

B. Applicants for any license or renewal thereof under this chapter shall provide information as follows:

1. With each application for a panoram premises license or renewal thereof, applicants shall provide:

a. The name, address and telephone number of each person applying for the license;

b. The name, address and telephone number of each person holding an ownership or leasehold interest in the panoram premises;

c. The name, address and telephone number of the manager or other person responsible for the operation of the premises;

d. The address of the premises;

e. The number of panoram devices to be located on the premises; and

f. A sketch or drawing sufficient to show the layout of the premises, including all information necessary to determine whether the premises complies with the provisions of this chapter.

2. With each application for a panoram device license or renewal thereof, applicants shall provide:

a. The name, address and telephone number of each person applying for the license;

b. The name, address and telephone number of each person holding an ownership or leasehold interest in the panoram device;

c. The name, address and telephone number of each person responsible for the operation of the panoram device;

d. The address at which the panoram device is to be located; and

e. A description of the panoram device, including make, model and serial number.

3. With each application for a panoram operator’s and panoram manager’s license, or any renewal thereof, applicants shall provide:

a. For the applicant, each applicant control person, and each manager: names; any aliases or previous names; driver’s license number, if any; Social Security number, if any; business, mailing, and residential address; and business and residential telephone number;

b. If a partnership, whether general or limited, provide for all general partners the same information required under subsection (B)(3)(a) of this section;

c. If a corporation, date and place of incorporation, evidence that it is in good standing under the laws of the State of Washington, and name and address of any registered agent for service of process;

d. Whether the applicant or any partner, corporate officer, or director of the applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter or any license for similar adult entertainment or sexually oriented business, including motion picture theaters and panorams, from the City or another city, county or state, and if so, the names and addresses of each other licensed business;

e. A summary of the business history of the applicant, applicant control persons, and each manager in owning or operating the adult entertainment or other sexually oriented businesses, providing names, addresses and dates of operation for such businesses, and whether any business license or adult entertainment license has been revoked or suspended, and the reason therefor;

f. For the applicant, all applicant control persons, and each manager, any and all criminal convictions or bail forfeitures within five years immediately preceding the date of the application, other than parking offenses or minor traffic infractions, including the dates of conviction, nature of the crime, name and location of court and disposition;

g. For the applicant and all applicant control persons, a description of their business, occupation or employment history for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application;

h. The location and doing-business-as name of the proposed panoram facility, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number, together with the name and address of each owner and lessee of the property;

i. Two two-inch by two-inch color photographs of the applicant and applicant control persons, taken within six months of the date of application showing only the full face; and

j. A complete set of fingerprints for the applicant, each applicant control person, and each manager taken by the city police department or its designee. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 99-0069 § 8.]


5.80.090 Issuance of licenses.

A. Upon receipt of any application, the city manager shall issue a temporary license or renewal thereof, pursuant to KMC 5.80.080, or notice of nonissuance and the reasons therefor.

B. The city manager shall issue the permanent license or licenses applied for if, after investigation, the city manager finds that:

1. The business for which a license is required herein will be conducted in a building, structure and location which complies with the requirements and standards of this chapter; and

2. The applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a license, or in any report or record required to be filed with the city manager. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 99-0069 § 9.]


5.80.100 Suspension or revocation of licenses – Notices – Summary suspension.

The city manager may, upon 10 days’ written notice delivered to the license holder, temporarily suspend or permanently revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter where one or more of the following conditions exist:

A. The license application, or any report or record required to be filed with the city manager, includes one or more false, misleading, or fraudulent statements of material fact; or

B. The building, structure, equipment or location of the business for which the license was issued does not comply with the requirements or the standards of this chapter, the City building code or other applicable law; or

C. The licensee, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer or manager has knowingly allowed or permitted in or upon the panoram premises any violations of this chapter or acts made unlawful under this chapter. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 99-0069 § 10.]


5.80.110 Appeal and hearing.

A. Any person aggrieved by the action of the city manager in refusing to issue or renew any license under this chapter or in temporarily suspending or permanently revoking any license under this chapter shall have the right to appeal such action to the city hearing examiner, or to such other hearing body as may hereafter be established by the city council for the hearing of such appeals, by filing a notice of appeal with the city manager within 10 days of receiving notice of the action from which appeal is taken. The filing of such appeal shall stay the action of the city manager.

B. The hearing body, upon receipt of a timely notice of appeal, shall set a date for a hearing of such appeal within 30 days from the date of such receipt, unless extended by mutual agreement or for good cause shown. The hearing shall be de novo. The hearing body shall hear testimony, take evidence and may hear oral argument and receive written briefs.

C. The decision of the hearing body on an appeal from a decision of the city manager shall be based upon a preponderance of the evidence. The burden of proof shall be on the City.

D. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the hearing examiner or other designated hearing body shall have the right to appeal the decision to the superior court by writ of certiorari filed and served upon the City within 14 calendar days after the date of the hearing examiner’s or other hearing body’s decision. The filing of such appeal shall stay the decision of the hearing examiner or other designated hearing body. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 99-0069 § 11.]


5.80.120 Premises regulations.

A. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a panoram operator, manager, or anyone owning or controlling a panoram premises to cause, maintain, or permit to exist any condition in violation of this section, and the city manager shall not license any panoram premises which do not conform to the requirements of this section, and shall revoke or suspend the license of any panoram premises, and the license of any operator and any manager thereof, which do not maintain conformity with these requirements.

B. All panoram stations must be open to an adjacent public room so that the entire area inside each station is visible by direct line of sight to persons in the adjacent public room, including the manager. The entire interior of every panoram station shall be visible and may not be obscured by any curtain, door, enclosure, or other form of screening device. Any chair or other seating surface within a panoram station shall not provide a seating surface of greater than 18 inches in either length or width. Only one such chair or other seating surface shall be placed in any panoram station.

C. The panoram stations on any panoram premises shall be separated by partitions constructed of wood or other solid and opaque material. No openings in such partitions for ventilation or other purposes shall extend higher than 12 inches from the floor or lower than 84 inches from the floor. Any such opening shall be covered with a permanently affixed wire mesh or other cover not capable of penetration by solid matter.

D. The licensee shall not permit any doors to other areas on the premises which are available for use by persons other than the licensee or employees of the licensee to be locked during business hours.

E. All panoram stations and other public areas of the panoram premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which employees, patrons, invitees or customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less than 10 foot candles as measured at the floor level at all times while patrons, invitees or customers are permitted within the panoram premises.

F. The entire floor area of a panoram booth or stall must be level with the continuous main aisle. No steps, ramps or risers are allowed in any such booth or stall.

G. The licensee shall permanently post and maintain on the interior and exterior of each booth or stall on the panoram premises a sign with two-inch lettering on a contrasting background stating:

Occupancy of this booth is at all times limited to only one person. Violations are subject to criminal prosecution.

H. The licensee shall not operate or maintain any warning system or device, of any nature or kind, for the purpose of warning customers or patrons or any other persons occupying panoram booths or stalls located on the licensee’s premises that police officers or city health, fire, licensing or building inspectors are approaching or have entered the licensee’s premises.

I. A licensed panoram manager shall be on the premises at all times that the panoram premises is open to the public for business.

J. No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted to enter any panoram premises.

K. All panoram stations shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. All floors, walls and ceilings shall consist only of hard, cleanable surfaces. All panoram stations shall be thoroughly cleaned with a diluted bleach solution whenever necessary for the removal of any potentially infectious materials (including, without limitation, semen, blood and vaginal secretions), but at least once daily. A record of such cleaning, listing the date and time, shall be posted in each panoram station. Any such potentially infectious materials, together with any cleaning rags, cloths or other implements, and any condoms, needles, or other items that may contain such potentially infectious materials, shall be placed in a properly labeled “medical waste” bag and disposed of pursuant to applicable laws or regulations.

L. It shall be unlawful for any panoram premises to be operated or otherwise open to the public between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 04-0199 §§ 3, 4, 5; Ord. 99-0069 § 12.]


5.80.130 Unlawful acts.

A. A panoram station subject to the requirements of this chapter may only be occupied by one person at any one time. It is unlawful for any person to occupy such a booth or stall at the same time it is occupied by any other person.

B. It is unlawful to stand or kneel on any chair or seating surface in a panoram booth or stall.

C. It is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, employee or other person in charge of premises for which a panoram location license is required to warn, or to aid and abet the warning, of customers or patrons or any other persons occupying panoram booths or stalls located on the licensee’s premises that police officers or health, fire, licensing or building inspectors are approaching or have entered the licensee’s premises.

D. It is unlawful within any panoram premises for any person to masturbate, or expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, penis, vulva or genitals. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 99-0069 § 13.]


5.80.140 Violations and penalties.

It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter, including the premises regulations enumerated in KMC 5.80.120, shall upon conviction thereof be guilty of a gross misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $5,000, or by imprisonment of a period of not more than one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or part of day, during which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted. In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated as such, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. All costs expended by the City in any such nuisance abatement or other action, including police investigation costs and attorney fees, shall be recoverable as part of any judgment in the City’s favor. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 99-0069 § 14.]


5.80.150 Compliance.

All persons and premises regulated pursuant to this chapter shall comply with this chapter within 30 days of its effective date. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 99-0069 § 15.]


Chapter 5.85 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS

Sections: 

5.85.010    Definitions.

5.85.020    Registration required.

5.85.030    Identification.

5.85.040    Hours of operation.

5.85.050    No soliciting signs compliance.

5.85.060    Use of streets, parks or rights-of-way.

5.85.070    Exemptions.

5.85.080    Enforcement and penalties.


5.85.010 Definitions.

A. “Peddler” means any person with no fixed place of business who goes from house to house, from place to place or from state to state, carrying or transporting goods, wares or merchandise and offering or exposing the same for sale, or making sales and deliveries to purchasers.

B. “Registered solicitor” means and includes any person or business which has obtained a valid certificate or registration as provided in this chapter.

C. “Solicitor” means any person who goes from house to house, from place to place, or from state to state, soliciting, taking or attempting to take orders for any goods, wares or merchandise, including books, periodicals, magazines or personal property of any nature whatsoever, including any services for future delivery.

D. “Transient merchant” means any person, firm or corporation who engages temporarily in the business of selling and delivering goods, wares or merchandise within the City, and who, in furtherance of such purposes, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure or vacant lot, motor vehicle, or trailer. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 04-0198 § 1.]


5.85.020 Registration required.

It is unlawful and a nuisance for any person to engage in commercial or business solicitation and/or canvassing or calling at residences without the previous consent of the occupant for purposes of soliciting orders, sales, subscriptions or business commercial information without first having registered in the office of the city manager. The applicant shall provide a written signed application stating:

A. The name, address, telephone number and contact person for the principal applicant;

B. The nature of the products or services involved, the names of the manufacturers, if any;

C. The proposed method of operation in the City;

D. A list of persons who will solicit or canvass in the City, including each person’s name, address and telephone number, a general description of each person; and

E. Any other information required by the city manager. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 04-0198 § 2.]


5.85.030 Identification.

Every peddler, solicitor, registered solicitor or transient merchant shall not conduct business within the City limits without possessing a valid copy of their solicitor/peddler certificate at all times. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 04-0198 § 3.]


5.85.040 Hours of operation.

Peddlers, solicitors, registered solicitors or transient merchants shall not operate within the City between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. without a prearranged appointment. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 04-0198 § 4.]


5.85.050 No soliciting signs compliance.

No peddler, solicitor, registered solicitor, or transient merchant shall contact any residence that is posted by signage that such contacts are not desired by the residents. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 04-0198 § 5.]


5.85.060 Use of streets, parks or rights-of-way.

No peddler, solicitor, registered solicitor or transient merchant shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets, parks or public rights-of-way, nor be permitted a stationary location, nor be permitted to operate in any congested area where operations might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this section the judgment of a law enforcement officer, exercised in good faith, shall be conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 04-0198 § 6.]


5.85.070 Exemptions.

Except where noted the following shall be exempt from all provisions of this chapter:

Officers or employees of the City, county, State or federal government, or any subdivision thereof when on official business.

Charitable, religious, nonprofit organizations, any political campaign on behalf of (or in opposition to) any candidate for public office or other similar civic, charitable, or nonprofit organizations shall be exempt from all provisions except the section pertaining to compliance with “No soliciting” signage.

Mobile food trucks with food or drink, prepared on site or prepackaged, selling and serving to the general public and licensed by King County public health department. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 04-0198 § 7.]


5.85.080 Enforcement and penalties.

A. Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor and any person, business, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions herein shall upon conviction be punished by a fine of up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 04-0198 § 8.]


Chapter 5.90 ADULT CABARETS

Sections: 

5.90.010    Definitions.

5.90.020    License required.

5.90.030    License prohibited to certain classes.

5.90.040    Adult cabaret license.

5.90.050    Adult cabaret manager and entertainer licenses.

5.90.060    Repealed.

5.90.070    Appeal.

5.90.080    Standards of conduct and operation for adult cabarets.

5.90.090    Adult cabaret premises specifications.

5.90.100    Recordkeeping and inspection requirements for adult cabarets.

5.90.110    Hours of operation for adult cabarets.

5.90.120    Dramatic works excepted.

5.90.130    Repealed.

5.90.140    License suspension and revocation.

5.90.150    Liquor regulations.

5.90.160    Violation a misdemeanor.

5.90.170    Nuisance declared.

5.90.180    Additional enforcement.

5.90.190    Repealed.


5.90.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

A. “Adult cabaret” means any commercial premises to which any member of the public is invited or admitted and where an entertainer provides live adult entertainment to any member of the public.

B. “Adult entertainment” means:

1. Any exhibition, performance or dance of any type conducted in a premises where such exhibition, performance, or dance involves a person who is unclothed or in such costume, attire, or clothing as to expose any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, or wearing any device or covering exposed to view which simulates the appearance of any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or

2. Any exhibition, performance or dance of any type conducted in a premises where such exhibition, performance or dance is distinguished or characterized by a predominant emphasis on the depiction, description, simulation or relation to the following specified sexual activities:

a. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;

b. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or

c. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or

3. Any exhibition, performance or dance which is intended to sexually stimulate any member of the public and which is conducted on a regular basis or as a substantial part of the premises activity. This includes, but is not limited to, any such exhibition, performance or dance performed for, arranged with or engaged in with fewer than all members of the public on the premises at that time, with separate consideration paid, either directly or indirectly, for such performance, exhibition or dance and which is commonly referred to as table dancing, couch dancing, taxi dancing, lap dancing, private dancing or straddle dancing.

C. “Applicant” means the individual or entity seeking an adult cabaret license in the City of Kenmore.

D. “Applicant control persons” means all partners, corporate officers and directors and any other individuals in the applicant’s business organization who hold a significant interest in the adult cabaret business, based on responsibility for management of the adult cabaret business.

E. “Employee” means any and all persons, including managers, entertainers and independent contractors, who work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of any adult cabaret.

F. “Entertainer” means any person who provides adult entertainment within an adult cabaret as defined in this section, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment.

G. “Liquor” means all beverages defined in RCW 66.04.200.

H. “Manager” means any person who manages, directs, administers or is in charge of the affairs and/or conduct of any portion of any activity involving adult entertainment occurring at any adult cabaret, and includes assistant managers working with or under the direction of a manager to carry out such purposes.

I. “Operator” means any person operating, conducting or maintaining an adult cabaret.

J. “Person” means any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated or unincorporated association, marital community, joint venture, governmental entity, or other entity or group of persons however organized.

K. “Member of the public” means any customer, patron, club member, or person, other than an employee as defined in this section, who is invited or admitted to an adult cabaret.

L. “Sexual conduct” means acts of:

1. Sexual intercourse within its ordinary meaning, occurring upon any penetration, however slight; or

2. Any penetration of the vagina or anus, however slight, by an object; or

3. Any contact between persons involving the sex organs of one person and the mouth or anus of another; or

4. Masturbation, manual or instrumental, of oneself or of one person by another; or

5. Touching of the sex organs or anus, whether clothed or unclothed, of oneself or of one person by another. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 2(A).]


5.90.020 License required.

A. It is unlawful for any person to conduct, manage or operate an adult cabaret unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the City to do so, obtained in the manner provided in this chapter.

B. It is unlawful for any entertainer, employee or manager to knowingly work in or about, or to knowingly perform any service or entertainment directly related to the operation of, an unlicensed adult cabaret.

C. It is unlawful for any entertainer to perform in an adult cabaret unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the City to do so.

D. It is unlawful for any manager to work in an adult cabaret unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the City to do so. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 2(B).]


5.90.030 License prohibited to certain classes.

No license shall be issued to:

A. A natural person who has not attained the age of 21 years, except that licenses may be issued to persons who have attained the age of 18 years with respect to adult cabarets where no intoxicating liquors are served or provided.

B. A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent, unless such manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee, or in the case of a manager of an adult cabaret, the manager has obtained a manager’s license.

C. A copartnership, unless all the members thereof are qualified to obtain a license as provided in this chapter. Such license shall be issued to the manager or agent thereof.

D. A corporation, unless all the officers and directors thereof are qualified to obtain a license as provided herein. Such license shall be issued to the manager or agent thereof. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 2(C).]


5.90.040 Adult cabaret license.

A. Any person desiring an adult cabaret license required under the provisions of this chapter shall file written application with the city manager, on forms provided by the city manager for that purpose, in the name of the person or entity proposing to conduct an adult cabaret on the business premises. A failure to provide all information required on the form will constitute an incomplete application and will not be processed. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the City, which shall require the following information:

1. For the applicant and for each applicant control person, provide: names, any aliases or previous names, driver’s license number (if any), Social Security number (if any), and business, mailing, and residential address, and business telephone number.

2. If a partnership, whether general or limited; and if a corporation, date and place of incorporation, evidence that it is in good standing under the laws of Washington, and name and address of any registered agent for service of process.

3. Whether the applicant or any partner, corporate officer, or director of the applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter or any license for similar adult entertainment or sexually oriented business, including adult cabarets, adult panorams or adult retail businesses, from the City or another city, county or state, and if so, the names and addresses of each other licensed business.

4. A summary of the business history of the applicant and applicant control persons in owning or operating the adult entertainment or other sexually oriented businesses, providing names, addresses and dates of operation for such businesses, and whether any business license or adult entertainment license has been revoked or suspended, and the reason therefor.

5. For the applicant and all applicant control persons, any and all criminal convictions or forfeitures within five years immediately preceding the date of the application, other than parking offenses or minor traffic infractions, including the dates of conviction, nature of the crime, name and location of court and disposition.

6. For the applicant and all applicant control persons, a description of business, occupation or employment history for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application.

7. Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek information to confirm any statements set forth in the application.

8. The location and doing-business-as name of the proposed adult cabaret, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number, together with the name and address of each owner and lessee of the property.

9. Two two-inch by two-inch color photographs of the applicant and applicant control persons, taken within six months of the date of application showing only the full face.

10. A complete set of fingerprints for the applicant or each applicant control person, by city police department employees.

11. A scale drawing or diagram showing the configuration of the premises for the proposed adult cabaret, including a statement of the total floor space occupied by the business, and marked dimensions of the interior of the premises. Performance areas, seating areas, manager’s office and stations, restrooms and service areas shall be clearly marked on the drawing. An application for a license for an adult cabaret shall include building plans which demonstrate conformance with this chapter.

B. An application shall be deemed complete upon the applicant’s provision of all information requested above, including identification of “none” where that is the correct response, and the applicant’s verification that the application is complete. The city manager may request other information or clarification in addition to that provided in a complete application where necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.

C. A nonrefundable application fee must be paid at the time of filing an application in order to defray the costs of processing the application.

D. All applications shall be signed by the applicant and notarized or certified as true under penalty of perjury.

E. If any person or entity acquires, subsequent to the issuance of an adult cabaret license, a significant interest based on responsibility for management or operation of the licensed premises or the licensed business, notice of such acquisition shall be provided in writing to the city manager, no later than 21 days following such acquisition. The notice required shall include the information required for the original adult cabaret license application.

F. The adult cabaret license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is issued, the expiration date, the doing-business-as name and the address of the licensed adult cabaret. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult cabaret so that it can be easily read at any time the business is open.

G. No person granted an adult cabaret license pursuant to this chapter shall operate the adult cabaret business under a name not specified on the license, nor shall any person operate an adult cabaret under any designation or at any location not specified on the license.

H. Upon receipt of the complete application and fee, the city manager shall provide copies to the appropriate city departments for their investigation and review to determine compliance of the proposed adult cabaret with the laws and regulations which each department administers. Each department shall, within 20 days of the date of such application, inspect the application and premises and shall make a written report to the city manager whether such application and premises comply with the laws administered by each department. No license may be issued unless each department reports that the application and premises comply with the relevant laws, unless the 20-day period has lapsed. In the event the premises is not yet constructed, the departments shall base their recommendation as to premises compliance on their review of the drawings submitted in the application. Any adult cabaret license approved prior to premises construction shall contain a condition that the premises may not open for business until the premises have been inspected and determined to be in substantial conformance with the drawings submitted with the application. A department shall recommend denial of a license under this subsection if it finds that the proposed adult cabaret is not in conformance with the requirements of this chapter or other law in effect in the City. A recommendation for denial shall cite the specific reason therefor, including applicable laws.

I. An adult cabaret license shall be issued by the city manager within 30 days of the date of filing a complete license application and fee, unless the city manager determines that the applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements of this chapter or provide any information required under this subsection or that the applicant has made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact on the application for a license. The city manager shall grant an extension of time in which to provide all information required for a complete license application upon the request of the applicant. If the city manager finds that the applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements for issuance of an adult cabaret license, the city manager shall deny the application in writing and shall cite the specific reasons therefor, including applicable law. If the city manager fails to issue or deny the license within 30 days of the date of filing of a complete application and fee, the applicant shall be permitted, subject to all other applicable laws, to operate the business for which the license was sought until notification by the city manager that the license has been denied, but in no event may the city manager extend the application review time for more than an additional 20 days. [Amended during 9/15 supplement; Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 2(D).]


5.90.050 Adult cabaret manager and entertainer licenses.

A. No person shall work as a manager, assistant manager or entertainer at an adult cabaret without an entertainer’s or manager’s license from the City. Each applicant for a manager’s or entertainer’s license shall complete an application on forms provided by the city manager containing the information identified below. A copy of the application shall be provided to the city police department for its review, investigation and recommendation. All applications for a manager’s or entertainer’s license shall be signed by the applicant and certified to be true under penalty of perjury. The manager’s or entertainer’s license application shall require the following information:

1. The applicant’s name, home address, home telephone number, date and place of birth, fingerprints taken by city police department employees, Social Security number (if any), and any stage names or nicknames used in entertaining.

2. The name and address of each business at which the applicant intends to work.

3. Documentation that the applicant has attained the age of 18 years. Any two of the following shall be accepted as documentation of age:

a. A motor vehicle operator’s license issued by any state bearing the applicant’s photograph and date of birth;

b. A State-issued identification card bearing the applicant’s photograph and date of birth;

c. An official passport issued by the United States of America;

d. An immigration card issued by the United States of America; or

e. Any other identification that the City determines to be acceptable.

4. A complete statement of all convictions of the applicant for any misdemeanor or felony violations in this or any other city, county, or state within five years immediately preceding the date of the application, except parking violations or minor traffic infractions.

5. A description of the applicant’s principal activities or services to be rendered.

6. Two two-inch by two-inch photographs of applicant, taken within six months of the date of application, showing only the full face.

7. Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to investigate and confirm any statements set forth in the application.

8. Every adult entertainer shall provide his or her license to the adult cabaret manager on duty on the premises prior to the entertainer’s performance. The manager shall retain the licenses of the adult entertainers readily available for inspection by the City at any time during business hours of the adult cabaret.

B. The city manager may request additional information or clarification when necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.

C. An adult cabaret manager’s or an adult entertainer’s license shall be issued by the city manager within 14 days from the date the complete application and fee are received unless the city manager determines that the applicant has failed to provide any information required to be supplied according to this chapter; has made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application; or has failed to meet any of the requirements for issuance of a license under this chapter. If the city manager determines that the applicant has failed to qualify for the license applied for, the city manager shall deny the application in writing and shall cite the specific reasons therefor, including applicable laws. If the city manager has failed to approve or deny an application for an adult cabaret manager’s license within 14 days of filing of a complete application, the applicant may, subject to all other applicable laws, commence work as an adult cabaret manager in a duly licensed adult cabaret until notified by the city manager that the license has been denied, but in no event may the city manager extend the application review time for more than an additional 20 days.

D. An applicant for an adult cabaret manager’s license or an adult entertainer’s license shall be issued a temporary license upon receipt of a complete license application and fee. Said temporary license will automatically expire on the fourteenth day following the filing of the complete application and fee, unless the city manager has failed to approve or deny the license application, in which case the temporary license shall be valid until the city manager approves or denies the application, or until the final determination of any appeal from a denial of the application. In no event may the city manager extend the application review time for more than an additional 20 days. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 2(E).]


5.90.060 Adult cabaret license fees.

Repealed by Ord. 15-0402. [Ord. 06-0240 § 2(F).]


5.90.070 Appeal.

A. Any person aggrieved by the action of the city manager in refusing to issue or renew any license issued under this chapter shall have the right to appeal such action to the hearing examiner by filing a notice of appeal with the city manager within 21 days of notice of the refusal to issue or renew. The decision of the city manager shall be stayed pending the final outcome of any such timely appeal. The appeal shall be processed under KMC 5.05.150 and Chapter 19.30 KMC.

B. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the hearing examiner may appeal to the superior court for a writ of certiorari, prohibition or mandamus. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be stayed pending the final outcome of any such timely appeal. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 2(G).]


5.90.080 Standards of conduct and operation for adult cabarets.

A. The following standards of conduct must be adhered to by employees of any adult cabaret while in any area in which members of the public are allowed to be present:

1. No employee or entertainer shall be unclothed or in such less than opaque and complete attire, costume or clothing so as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, except upon a stage at least 18 inches above the immediate floor level and removed at least eight feet from the nearest member of the public.

2. No employee or entertainer mingling with members of the public shall be unclothed or in less than opaque and complete attire, costume or clothing as described in subsection (A)(1) of this section, nor shall any male employee or entertainer at any time appear with his genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered, or wear or use any device or covering which simulates the same.

3. No employee or entertainer mingling with members of the public shall wear or use any device or covering exposed to view which simulates the breast below the top of the areola, vulva, genitals, anus, any portion of the pubic region, or buttocks.

4. No employee or entertainer shall caress, fondle or erotically touch any member of the public. No employee or entertainer shall encourage or permit any member of the public to caress, fondle or erotically touch any employee or entertainer.

5. No employee or entertainer shall perform actual or simulated acts of sexual conduct as defined in this chapter, or any act which constitutes a violation of Chapter 7.48A RCW, the Washington Moral Nuisances Statute.

6. No employee or entertainer mingling with members of the public shall conduct any dance, performance or exhibition in or about the nonstage area of the adult cabaret unless that dance, performance or exhibition is performed at a distance of no less than four feet, measured from torso to torso, from any member of the public.

7. No tip or gratuity offered to or accepted by an adult entertainer may be offered or accepted prior to any performance, dance or exhibition provided by the entertainer. No entertainer performing upon any stage area shall be permitted to accept any form of gratuity offered directly to the entertainer by any member of the public. Any gratuity offered to any entertainer performing upon any stage area must be placed into a receptacle provided for receipt of gratuities by the adult cabaret or provided through a manager on duty on the premises. Any gratuity or tip offered to any adult entertainer conducting any performance, dance or exhibition in or about the nonstage area of the adult cabaret shall be placed into the hand of the adult entertainer or into a receptacle provided by the adult entertainer, and not upon the person or into the clothing of the adult entertainer.

B. At any adult cabaret, the following are required:

1. Admission must be restricted to persons of the age of 18 years or more. It is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager or other person in charge of an adult cabaret to knowingly permit or allow any person under the minimum age specified to be in or upon such premises.

2. Neither the performance nor any photograph, drawing, sketch or other pictorial or graphic representation thereof displaying any portion of the breasts below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic hair, buttocks, genitals, and/or anus may be visible outside of the adult cabaret.

3. No member of the public shall be permitted at any time to enter into any of the nonpublic portions of the adult cabaret, which shall include but are not limited to: the dressing rooms of the entertainers or other rooms provided for the benefit of employees, and the kitchen and storage areas; except that persons delivering goods and materials, food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs to the premises or equipment on the premises may be permitted into nonpublic areas to the extent required to perform their job duties.

C. The responsibilities of the manager of an adult cabaret shall include but are not limited to:

1. A licensed manager shall be on duty at an adult cabaret at all times adult entertainment is being provided or members of the public are present on the premises. The name and license of the manager shall be prominently posted during business hours. The manager shall be responsible for verifying that any person who provides adult entertainment within the premises possesses a current and valid entertainer’s license.

2. The licensed manager on duty shall not be an entertainer.

3. The manager or an assistant manager licensed under this chapter shall maintain visual observation of each member of the public at all times any entertainer is present in the public or performance areas of the adult cabaret. Where there is more than one performance area, or the performance area is of such size or configuration that one manager or assistant manager is unable to visually observe, at all times, each adult entertainer, each employee, and each member of the public, a manager or assistant manager licensed under this chapter shall be provided for each public or performance area or portion of a public or performance area visually separated from other portions of the adult cabaret.

4. The manager shall be responsible for and shall assure that the actions of members of the public, the adult entertainers and all other employees shall comply with all requirements of this chapter. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 2(H).]


5.90.090 Adult cabaret premises specifications.

A. The performance area of the adult cabaret where adult entertainment is provided shall be a stage or platform at least 18 inches in elevation above the level of the patron seating areas, and shall be separated by a distance of at least eight feet from all areas of the premises to which members of the public have access. A continuous railing at least three feet in height and located at least eight feet from all points of the performance area shall separate the performance area and the patron seating areas. The stage and the entire interior portion of cubicles, rooms or stalls wherein adult entertainment is provided must be visible from the common areas of the premises and at least one manager’s station. Visibility shall not be blocked or obstructed by doors, curtains, drapes or any other obstruction whatsoever.

B. Sufficient lighting shall be provided and equally distributed throughout the public areas of the premises so that all objects are plainly visible at all times. A minimum lighting level of 30 lux horizontal, measured at 30 inches from the floor and on 10-foot centers is hereby established for all areas of the adult cabaret where members of the public are admitted.

C. A sign at least two feet by two feet, with letters at least one inch high, shall be conspicuously displayed in the public area(s) of the premises stating the following:

THIS ADULT CABARET IS REGULATED BY THE CITY OF KENMORE. ENTERTAINERS ARE:

A. NOT PERMITTED TO ENGAGE IN ANY TYPE OF SEXUAL CONDUCT

B. NOT PERMITTED TO APPEAR SEMI-NUDE OR NUDE, EXCEPT ON STAGE

C. NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT TIPS OR GRATUITIES IN ADVANCE OF THEIR PERFORMANCE

D. NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT TIPS DIRECTLY FROM PATRONS WHILE PERFORMING UPON ANY STAGE AREA 

[Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 2(I).]


5.90.100 Recordkeeping and inspection requirements for adult cabarets.

A. All papers, records, and things required to be kept pursuant to this chapter shall be open to inspection by the city manager during the hours when the licensed premises are open for business, upon two days’ written notice. The purpose of such inspections shall be to determine whether the papers, records, and things meet the requirements of this chapter.

B. Each adult entertainment business shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the name, address, and age of each person employed or otherwise retained or allowed to perform on the premises as an adult entertainer, including independent contractors and their employees, as an entertainer. This information shall be open to inspection by the city manager during hours of operation of the business upon 24 hours’ notice to the licensee.

C. In order to ensure compliance with this chapter all areas of licensed adult cabarets which are open to members of the public shall be open to inspection by city agents and employees during the hours when the premises are open for business. The purpose of such inspections shall be to determine if the licensed premises are operated in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. It is hereby expressly declared that unannounced inspections are necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 2(J).]


5.90.110 Hours of operation for adult cabarets.

It is unlawful for any adult cabaret to be operated or otherwise open to the public between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 2(K).]


5.90.120 Dramatic works excepted.

A. This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit:

1. Plays, operas, musicals, or other dramatic works that are not obscene;

2. Classes, seminars and lectures which are held for serious scientific or educational purposes and which are not obscene; or

3. Exhibitions, performances, expressions or dances that are not obscene.

B. These exemptions shall not apply to the sexual conduct described in RCW 7.48A.010(2)(b)(ii) and (iii).

C. Whether or not activity is obscene shall be judged by consideration of the following factors:

1. Whether the average person, applying contemporary community standards, would find that the activity taken as a whole appeals to a prurient interest in sex; and

2. Whether the activity depicts or describes in a patently offensive way, as measured against community standards, sexual conduct as described in RCW 7.48A.010(2)(b); and

3. Whether the activity taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 2(L).]


5.90.130 License term, assignment and renewals.

Repealed by Ord. 15-0402. [Ord. 06-0240 § 2(M).]


5.90.140 License suspension and revocation.

A. The city manager may, upon the recommendation of the chief of police or his designee and as provided in subsection B of this section, suspend or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this chapter at any time where the same was procured by fraud or false representation of fact; or for the violation of, or failure to comply with, the provisions of this chapter or any of the provisions of this code or any other similar local or State law by the licensee or by any of his servants, agents or employees when the licensee knew or should have known of the violations committed by his servants, agents or employees; or for the conviction of the licensee of any crime or offense involving prostitution, promoting prostitution, or transactions involving controlled substances (as that term is defined in Chapter 69.50 RCW) committed on the premises, or the conviction of any of his servants, agents or employees of any crime or offense involving prostitution, promoting prostitution, or transactions involving controlled substances (as that term is defined in Chapter 69.50 RCW) committed on the premises in which his cabaret is conducted when the licensee knew or should have known of the violations committed by his servants, agents or employees.

B. A license procured by fraud or misrepresentation shall be revoked. Where other violations of this chapter or other applicable ordinances, statutes or regulations are found, the license shall be suspended for a period of 30 days upon the first such violation, 90 days upon the second violation within a 24-month period, and revoked for third and subsequent violations within a 24-month period, not including periods of suspension.

C. The city manager shall provide at least 10 days’ prior written notice to the licensee of the decision to suspend or revoke the license. Such notice shall inform the licensee of the right to appeal the decision to the hearing examiner or other designated hearing body and shall state the effective date of such revocation or suspension and the grounds for revocation or suspension. Such appeals shall be processed under KMC 5.05.150 and Chapter 19.30 KMC. The decision of the city manager shall be stayed during the pendency of any appeal except as provided in subsection D of this section.

D. Where the city building official or fire marshal or their designees or the King County health department find that any condition exists upon the premises of a cabaret or adult cabaret which constitutes a threat of immediate serious injury or damage to persons or property, said official may immediately suspend any license issued under this chapter pending a hearing in accordance with subsection C of this section. The official shall issue notice setting forth the basis for the action and the facts that constitute a threat of immediate serious injury or damage to persons or property, and informing the licensee of the right to appeal the suspension to the hearing examiner or other designated hearing body under the same appeal provisions set forth in subsection C of this section; provided, however, that a suspension based on threat of immediate serious injury or damage shall not be stayed during the pendency of the appeal. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 2(N).]


5.90.150 Liquor regulations.

Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to any rules or regulations of the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the applicable rules and regulations of the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board, the rules and regulations of the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board shall control. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 2(O).]


5.90.160 Violation a misdemeanor.

It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter shall upon conviction thereof be guilty of a gross misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $5,000, or by imprisonment of a period of not more than one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or part of day, during which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 2(P).]


5.90.170 Nuisance declared.

A. Any adult cabaret operated, conducted, or maintained in violation of this chapter or any law of the City or the State of Washington shall be, and the same is declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance. The city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of any other remedies set forth in this chapter, commence an action to enjoin, remove or abate such nuisance in the manner provided by law and shall take such other steps and apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such public nuisance, and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult cabaret contrary to the provisions of this chapter. All costs expended by the City in any such nuisance abatement or other action, including police investigation costs and attorney fees, shall be recoverable as part of any judgment in the City’s favor.

B. Any adult cabaret operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of Chapter 7.48A RCW, Moral Nuisance, shall be, and the same is declared to be, unlawful and a public and moral nuisance and the city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of any other remedies set forth herein, commence an action or actions to abate, remove and enjoin such public and moral nuisance, or impose a civil penalty, in the manner provided by Chapter 7.48A RCW. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 2(Q).]


5.90.180 Additional enforcement.

The remedies found in this chapter are not exclusive, and the City may seek any other legal or equitable relief, including but not limited to enjoining any acts or practices which constitute or will constitute a violation of this title or other regulations herein adopted. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 2(R).]


5.90.190 Severability.

Repealed by Ord. 15-0402. [Ord. 06-0240 § 2(S).]


Chapter 5.95 ADULT RETAIL BUSINESSES

Sections: 

5.95.010    Definitions.

5.95.020    License required.

5.95.030    License prohibited to certain classes.

5.95.040    Adult retail business license.

5.95.050    Repealed.

5.95.060    Appeal.

5.95.070    Repealed.

5.95.080    License suspension and revocation.

5.95.090    Standards of conduct for adult retail businesses.

5.95.100    Levels of lighting.

5.95.110    Hours of operation for adult retail businesses.

5.95.120    Violation a misdemeanor.

5.95.130    Nuisance declared.

5.95.140    Additional enforcement.

5.95.150    Repealed.


5.95.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

A. “Adult retail business” means an enclosed building, or any portion thereof, which, for money or any other form of consideration, devotes a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade to the sale, exchange, rental, loan, trade, transfer, or viewing of adult-oriented merchandise.

B. “Adult-oriented merchandise” means any goods, products, commodities, or other wares, including, but not limited to, videos, CD-ROMS, DVDs, computer disks or other storage devices, magazines, books, pamphlets, posters, cards, periodicals or nonclothing novelties which depict, describe or simulate specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.

C. “Applicant” means the individual or entity seeking an adult retail business license in the City.

D. “Applicant control persons” means all partners, corporate officers and directors and any other individuals in the applicant’s business organization who hold a significant interest in the adult retail business, based on responsibility for management of the adult retail business.

E. “Employee” means any and all persons, including managers, entertainers and independent contractors, who work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of any adult retail business.

F. “Person” means any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated or unincorporated association, marital community, joint venture, governmental entity, or other entity or group of persons however organized.

G. “Specified anatomical areas” means the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, or wearing any device or covering exposed to view which simulates the appearance of any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

H. “Specified sexual activities” means:

1. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; or

2. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or

a. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or

b. Any act which is set forth in RCW 7.48A.010(2)(b), the Washington Moral Nuisances Act. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 3(A).]


5.95.020 License required.

A. It is unlawful for any person to conduct, manage or operate an adult retail business unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the City to do so, obtained in the manner provided in this chapter.

B. It is unlawful for any employee or manager to knowingly work in or about, or to knowingly perform any service or entertainment directly related to the operation of, an unlicensed adult retail business. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 3(B).]


5.95.030 License prohibited to certain classes.

No license shall be issued to:

A. A natural person who has not attained the age of 21 years, except that licenses may be issued to persons who have attained the age of 18 years with respect to adult retail businesses where no intoxicating liquors are served or provided.

B. A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent, unless such manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee.

C. A copartnership, unless all the members thereof are qualified to obtain a license as provided in this chapter. Such license shall be issued to the manager or agent thereof.

D. A corporation, unless all the officers and directors thereof are qualified to obtain a license as provided herein. Such license shall be issued to the manager or agent thereof. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 3(C).]


5.95.040 Adult retail business license.

A. Any person desiring an adult retail business license required under the provisions of this chapter shall file written application with the city manager, on forms provided by the city manager for that purpose, in the name of the person or entity proposing to conduct an adult retail business on the business premises. A failure to provide all information required on the form will constitute an incomplete application and will not be processed. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the City, which shall require the following information:

1. For the applicant and for each applicant control person, provide: names, any aliases or previous names, driver’s license number (if any), Social Security number (if any), and business, mailing, and residential address, and business telephone number.

2. If a partnership, whether general or limited; and if a corporation, date and place of incorporation, evidence that it is in good standing under the laws of Washington, and name and address of any registered agent for service of process.

3. Whether the applicant or any partner, corporate officer, or director of the applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter or any license for similar adult entertainment or sexually oriented business, including adult cabarets, adult panorams or adult retail businesses, from the City or another city, county or state, and if so, the names and addresses of each other licensed business.

4. A summary of the business history of the applicant and applicant control persons in owning or operating the adult entertainment or other sexually oriented businesses, providing names, addresses and dates of operation for such businesses, and whether any business license or adult entertainment license has been revoked or suspended, and the reason therefor.

5. For the applicant and all applicant control persons, any and all criminal convictions or forfeitures within five years immediately preceding the date of the application, other than parking offenses or minor traffic infractions, including the dates of conviction, nature of the crime, name and location of court and disposition.

6. For the applicant and all applicant control persons, a description of business, occupation or employment history for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application.

7. Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek information to confirm any statements set forth in the application.

8. The location and doing-business-as name of the proposed adult retail business, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number, together with the name and address of each owner and lessee of the property.

9. Two two-inch by two-inch color photographs of the applicant and applicant control persons, taken within six months of the date of application showing only the full face.

10. A complete set of fingerprints for the applicant or each applicant control person, by city police department employees.

11. A scale drawing or diagram showing the configuration of the premises for the proposed adult retail business, including a statement of the total floor space occupied by the business, and marked dimensions of the interior of the premises. Public sales areas, seating areas, manager’s office and stations, restrooms and service areas shall be clearly marked on the drawing. An application for a license for an adult retail business shall include building plans which demonstrate conformance with this chapter.

B. An application shall be deemed complete upon the applicant’s provision of all information requested above, including identification of “none” where that is the correct response, and the applicant’s verification that the application is complete. The city manager may request other information or clarification in addition to that provided in a complete application where necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.

C. A nonrefundable application fee must be paid at the time of filing an application in order to defray the costs of processing the application.

D. All applications shall be signed by the applicant and notarized or certified as true under penalty of perjury.

E. If any person or entity acquires, subsequent to the issuance of an adult retail business license, a significant interest based on responsibility for management or operation of the licensed premises or the licensed business, notice of such acquisition shall be provided in writing to the city manager, no later than 21 days following such acquisition. The notice required shall include the information required for the original adult retail business license application.

F. The adult retail business license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is issued, the expiration date, the doing-business-as name and the address of the licensed adult retail business. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult retail business so that it can be easily read at any time the business is open.

G. No person granted an adult retail business license pursuant to this chapter shall operate the adult retail business under a name not specified on the license, nor shall any person operate an adult retail business under any designation or at any location not specified on the license.

H. Upon receipt of the complete application and fee, the city manager shall provide copies to the appropriate city departments for their investigation and review to determine compliance of the proposed adult retail business with the laws and regulations which each department administers. Each department shall, within 20 days of the date of such application, inspect the application and premises and shall make a written report to the city manager whether such application and premises comply with the laws administered by each department. No license may be issued unless each department reports that the application and premises comply with the relevant laws, unless the 20-day period has lapsed. In the event the premises is not yet constructed, the departments shall base their recommendation as to premises compliance on their review of the drawings submitted in the application. Any adult retail business license approved prior to premises construction shall contain a condition that the premises may not open for business until the premises have been inspected and determined to be in substantial conformance with the drawings submitted with the application. A department shall recommend denial of a license under this subsection if it finds that the proposed adult retail business is not in conformance with the requirements of this chapter or other law in effect in the City. A recommendation for denial shall cite the specific reason therefor, including applicable laws.

I. An adult retail business license shall be issued by the city manager within 30 days of the date of filing a complete license application and fee, unless the city manager determines that the applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements of this chapter or provide any information required under this subsection or that the applicant has made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact on the application for a license. The city manager shall grant an extension of time in which to provide all information required for a complete license application upon the request of the applicant. If the city manager finds that the applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements for issuance of an adult retail business license, the city manager shall deny the application in writing and shall cite the specific reasons therefor, including applicable law. If the city manager fails to issue or deny the license within 30 days of the date of filing of a complete application and fee, the applicant shall be permitted, subject to all other applicable law, to operate the business for which the license was sought until notification by the city manager that the license has been denied, but in no event may the city manager extend the application review time for more than an additional 20 days. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 3(D).]


5.95.050 Adult retail business license fees.

Repealed by Ord. 15-0402. [Ord. 06-0240 § 3(F).]


5.95.060 Appeal.

A. Any person aggrieved by the action of the city manager in refusing to issue or renew any license issued under this chapter shall have the right to appeal such action to the hearing examiner, by filing a notice of appeal with the city manager within 21 days of notice of the refusal to issue or renew. The decision of the city manager shall be stayed pending the final outcome of any such timely appeal. The appeal shall be processed under KMC 5.05.150 and Chapter 19.30 KMC.

B. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the hearing examiner may appeal to the superior court for a writ of certiorari, prohibition or mandamus. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be stayed pending the final outcome of any such timely appeal. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 3(G).]


5.95.070 License term, assignment and renewals.

Repealed by Ord. 15-0402. [Ord. 06-0240 § 3(H).]


5.95.080 License suspension and revocation.

A. The city manager may, upon the recommendation of the city chief of police or his designee and as provided in subsection B of this section, suspend or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this chapter at any time where the same was procured by fraud or false representation of fact; or for the violation of, or failure to comply with, the provisions of this chapter or any of the provisions of this code or any other similar local or State law by the licensee or by any of his servants, agents or employees when the licensee knew or should have known of the violations committed by his servants, agents or employees; or for the conviction of the licensee of any crime or offense involving prostitution, promoting prostitution, or transactions involving controlled substances (as that term is defined in Chapter 69.50 RCW) committed on the premises, or the conviction of any of his servants, agents or employees of any crime or offense involving prostitution, promoting prostitution, or transactions involving controlled substances (as that term is defined in Chapter 69.50 RCW) committed on the premises in which the licensee’s adult retail business is conducted when the licensee knew or should have known of the violations committed by his servants, agents or employees.

B. A license procured by fraud or misrepresentation shall be revoked. Where other violations of this chapter or other applicable ordinances, statutes or regulations are found, the license shall be suspended for a period of 30 days upon the first such violation, 90 days upon the second violation within a 24-month period, and revoked for third and subsequent violations within a 24-month period, not including periods of suspension.

C. The city manager shall provide at least 10 days’ prior written notice to the licensee of the decision to suspend or revoke the license. Such notice shall inform the licensee of the right to appeal the decision to the hearing examiner or other designated hearing body and shall state the effective date of such revocation or suspension and the grounds for revocation or suspension. Such appeals shall be processed under KMC 5.05.150 and Chapter 19.30 KMC. The decision of the city manager shall be stayed during the pendency of any appeal except as provided in subsection D of this section.

D. Where the city building official or fire marshal or their designees or the King County health department find that any condition exists upon the premises of an adult retail business which constitutes a threat of immediate serious injury or damage to persons or property, said official may immediately suspend any license issued under this chapter pending a hearing in accordance with subsection C of this section. The official shall issue notice setting forth the basis for the action and the facts that constitute a threat of immediate serious injury or damage to persons or property, and informing the licensee of the right to appeal the suspension to the hearing examiner or other designated hearing body under the same appeal provisions set forth in subsection C of this section; provided, however, that a suspension based on threat of immediate serious injury or damage shall not be stayed during the pendency of the appeal. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 3(I).]


5.95.090 Standards of conduct for adult retail businesses.

At any adult retail business, the following are required:

A. Admission must be restricted to persons of the age of 18 years or more. It is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, employee or other person in charge of an adult retail business to knowingly permit or allow any person under the minimum age specified to be in or upon such premises.

B. No photograph, drawing, sketch or other pictorial or graphic representation thereof displaying any portion of the breasts below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic hair, buttocks, genitals, and/or anus may be visible outside of the adult retail business.

C. No member of the public shall be permitted at any time to enter into any of the nonpublic portions of the adult retail business, which shall include but are not limited to: dressing rooms, booths, or other rooms provided for the benefit of employees, and the kitchen and storage areas; except that persons delivering goods and materials, food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs to the premises or equipment on the premises may be permitted into nonpublic areas to the extent required to perform their job duties. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 3(J).]


5.95.100 Levels of lighting.

Sufficient lighting shall be provided and equally distributed throughout the public areas of the premises so that all objects are plainly visible at all times. A minimum lighting level of 30 lux horizontal, measured at 30 inches from the floor and on 10-foot centers, is hereby established for all areas of the adult retail business where members of the public are admitted. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 3(K).]


5.95.110 Hours of operation for adult retail businesses.

It is unlawful for any adult retail business to be operated or otherwise open to the public between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 3(L).]


5.95.120 Violation a misdemeanor.

It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter shall upon conviction thereof be guilty of a gross misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $5,000, or by imprisonment of a period of not more than one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or part of day, during which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 3(M).]


5.95.130 Nuisance declared.

A. Any adult retail business operated, conducted, or maintained in violation of this chapter or any law of the City or the State of Washington shall be, and the same is declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance. The city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of any other remedies set forth in this chapter, commence an action to enjoin, remove or abate such nuisance in the manner provided by law and shall take such other steps and apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such public nuisance, and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult retail business contrary to the provisions of this chapter. All costs expended by the City in any such nuisance abatement or other action, including police investigation costs and attorney fees, shall be recoverable as part of any judgment in the City’s favor.

B. Any adult retail business operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of Chapter 7.48A RCW, Moral Nuisance, shall be, and the same is declared to be, unlawful and a public and moral nuisance and the city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of any other remedies set forth herein, commence an action or actions to abate, remove and enjoin such public and moral nuisance, or impose a civil penalty, in the manner provided by Chapter 7.48A RCW. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 3(N).]


5.95.140 Additional enforcement.

The remedies found in this chapter are not exclusive, and the City may seek any other legal or equitable relief, including but not limited to enjoining any acts or practices which constitute or will constitute a violation of this title or other regulations herein adopted. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 06-0240 § 3(O).]


5.95.150 Severability.

Repealed by Ord. 15-0402. [Ord. 06-0240 § 3(P).]


Chapter 5.100 SOCIAL CARD GAMES

Sections: 

5.100.010    Social card game prohibited.


5.100.010 Social card game prohibited.

Pursuant to RCW 9.46.295, “social card games,” as that term is defined in RCW 9.46.0282 as now in effect or may subsequently be amended, are prohibited within the City. Social card games shall not be permitted, maintained or operated as a commercial stimulant for the operation of any business primarily engaged in the selling of food or drink for consumption on the premises, nor for any other reason or under any other circumstances. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to otherwise change the scope of any current license issued by the State Gambling Commission. [Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 05-0237 § 1.]


Chapter 5.105 KENMORE BUSINESS REGISTRATION PROGRAM

Sections: 

5.105.010    Chapter and purpose.

5.105.020    Definitions – General.

5.105.025    Engaging in business.

5.105.030    Business registration required – Posting.

5.105.040    Exceptions – Applicability of provisions.

5.105.050    Nonprofit businesses and organizations.

5.105.060    Program application and renewal.

5.105.070    Registration term or expiration.

5.105.080    Fee.

5.105.090    Late renewal.

5.105.100    Registration denial or revocation.

5.105.110    Violation – Civil infraction, enforcement.

5.105.120    Rules and rulings.


5.105.010 Chapter and purpose.

Maintenance of current information with respect to business, trade, service, commercial and professional activities carried on within the City allows the City to carry out the duties and authorities delegated to it by the Washington State Constitution and the laws of the State of Washington as a noncharter code city. Such information can best be accumulated and maintained on a current basis through the establishment of a program for the registration of such business activities. The business registration program (“program”) is hereby established to protect the public and promote economic development and not intended to benefit any individual or class. [Ord. 18-0468 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 13-0356 § 1 (Exh. 1).]


5.105.020 Definitions – General.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given in this section:

A. “Business,” “occupation” or “pursuit” means and includes all activities, occupations, trades, pursuits, professions, and matters located or engaged in within the City with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage to the applicant for business registration or other person, directly or indirectly, whether part-time or full-time, whether resident or nonresident.

B. “City” means the City of Kenmore, Washington.

C. “Engaging in business” is defined in KMC 5.105.025.

D. “Person,” “firm,” or “corporation,” used interchangeably in this chapter, means any individual, receiver, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust, estate, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, club, company, joint stock company, business trust, corporation, association, canvasser, peddler, solicitor, society, or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or otherwise, and includes the United States or any instrumentality thereof. [Ord. 18-0468 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 13-0356 § 1 (Exh. 1).]


5.105.025 Engaging in business.

A. For purposes of this chapter, the term “engaging in business” means commencing, conducting, or continuing in business, and also the exercise of corporate or franchise powers, as well as liquidating a business when the liquidators thereof hold themselves out to the public as conducting such business.

B. This section sets forth examples of activities that constitute engaging in business in the City, and establishes safe harbors for certain of those activities so that a person who meets the criteria may engage in de minimis business activities in the City without having to pay a business license fee. The activities listed in this section are illustrative only and are not intended to narrow the definition of “engaging in business” in subsection A of this section. If an activity is not listed, whether it constitutes engaging in business in the City shall be determined by considering all the facts and circumstances and applicable law.

C. Without being all-inclusive, any one of the following activities conducted within the City by a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker or another acting on its behalf, constitutes engaging in business and requires a person to register and obtain a business license:

1. Owning, renting, leasing, maintaining, or having the right to use, or using, tangible personal property, intangible personal property, or real property permanently or temporarily located in the City.

2. Owning, renting, leasing, using, or maintaining an office, place of business, or other establishment in the City.

3. Soliciting sales.

4. Making repairs or providing maintenance or service to real or tangible personal property, including warranty work and property maintenance.

5. Providing technical assistance or service, including quality control, product inspections, warranty work, or similar services on or in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf.

6. Installing, constructing, or supervising installation or construction of, real or tangible personal property.

7. Soliciting, negotiating, or approving franchise, license, or other similar agreements.

8. Collecting current or delinquent accounts.

9. Picking up and transporting tangible personal property, solid waste, construction debris, or excavated materials.

10. Providing disinfecting and pest control services, employment and labor pool services, home nursing care, janitorial services, appraising, landscape architectural services, security system services, surveying, and real estate services including the listing of homes and managing real property.

11. Rendering professional services such as those provided by accountants, architects, attorneys, auctioneers, consultants, engineers, professional athletes, barbers, baseball clubs and other sports organizations, chemists, psychologists, court reporters, dentists, doctors, detectives, laboratory operators, teachers, veterinarians.

12. Meeting with customers or potential customers, even when no sales or orders are solicited at the meetings.

13. Training or recruiting agents, representatives, independent contractors, brokers or others, domiciled or operating on a job in the City, acting on its behalf, or for customers or potential customers.

14. Investigating, resolving, or otherwise assisting in resolving customer complaints.

15. In-store stocking or manipulating products or goods, sold to and owned by a customer, regardless of where sale and delivery of the goods took place.

16. Delivering goods in vehicles owned, rented, leased, used, or maintained by the person or another acting on its behalf.

D. If a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker or another acting on the person’s behalf, engages in no other activities in or with the City but the following, it need not register and obtain a business license:

1. Meeting with suppliers of goods and services as a customer.

2. Meeting with government representatives in their official capacity, other than those performing contracting or purchasing functions.

3. Attending meetings, such as board meetings, retreats, seminars, and conferences, or other meetings wherein the person does not provide training in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf. This provision does not apply to any board of director member or attendee engaging in business such as a member of a board of directors who attends a board meeting.

4. Renting tangible or intangible property as a customer when the property is not used in the City.

5. Attending, but not participating in, a “trade show” or “multiple vendor events.” Persons participating at a trade show shall review the City’s trade show or multiple vendor event ordinances.

6. Conducting advertising through the mail.

7. Soliciting sales by phone from a location outside the City.

E. A seller located outside the City merely delivering goods into the City by means of common carrier is not required to register and obtain a business license; provided, that it engages in no other business activities in the City. Such activities do not include those in subsection D of this section.

F. The City expressly intends that engaging in business include any activity sufficient to establish nexus for purposes of applying the license fee under the law and the Constitutions of the United States and the State of Washington. Nexus is presumed to continue as long as the taxpayer benefits from the activity that constituted the original nexus-generating contact or subsequent contacts. [Ord. 18-0468 § 1 (Exh. A).]


5.105.030 Business registration required – Posting.

A. Any person engaging in business, occupation, or home occupation (see Chapter 18.73 KMC), or pursuit in the City shall register that business with the City’s program. To register under the program, a person must submit an application to the State Department of Revenue and pay the applicable registration fee.

B. A business located within the City must be registered with the program.

C. A business registration shall be posted in a conspicuous location at the place of the business. [Ord. 18-0468 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 13-0356 § 1 (Exh. 1).]


5.105.040 Exceptions – Applicability of provisions.

This chapter does not apply to:

A. The performance of governmental or proprietary functions by any instrumentality of the United States, the State of Washington, or any political subdivision thereof, including City sponsored civic events.

B. The delivery of goods by vehicle to a customer or client by a business where the sale occurred on a business premises outside of the City and the only event occurring within the City is a delivery.

C. Accredited public or private schools, colleges, or universities, as to their education endeavors only; churches and other religious bodies, as to their religious activities only; political groups and organizations as to their political activities only.

D. Minors, a person under the age of 18, engaged in business or operating a business concern where no other person is employed by the minor.

E. A business located within the City with an annual gross income of $12,000 or less.

F. To the extent set forth in this section, the following persons and businesses shall be exempt from the registration, license and/or license fee requirements as outlined in this chapter:

1. Any person or business whose annual value of products, gross proceeds of sales, or gross income of the business in the City is equal to or less than $12,000 and who does not maintain a place of business within the City shall be exempt from the general business license requirements in this chapter. The exemption does not apply to regulatory requirements or activities that require a specialized permit.

G. Notwithstanding subsection F of this section, a business that is not located within the City is exempt from this chapter regardless of the annual value of products, gross proceeds of sales, or gross income of the business in the City.

H. Farmers selling fruit, vegetables, berries, eggs, or any farm produce or edibles raised, gathered, produced or manufactured by such person; provided, that nothing herein authorizes any person to sell, deliver or peddle any dairy product, meat, poultry, eel, fish, mollusk or shellfish without a license as otherwise required by the State of Washington.

I. Where preempted by Federal or State constitutions or laws. [Ord. 18-0468 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 13-0356 § 1 (Exh. 1).]


5.105.050 Nonprofit businesses and organizations.

Organizations exempt from taxation under 26 USC 501(c)(3) and (4) must register under the business registration program, but shall be exempt from paying the registration fee. This shall not constitute an exemption from all other applicable taxes and fees. Such organization must be able to show satisfactory proof of such status to the City. [Ord. 18-0468 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 13-0356 § 1 (Exh. 1).]


5.105.060 Program application and renewal.

A. A person shall register a business with the program by submitting an application to the State Department of Revenue (with its Business Licensing Service), in coordination with the city manager, giving such information as is deemed reasonably necessary to enable the enforcement of this chapter. Businesses that are not required to be registered because they do not exceed the annual gross income threshold may be voluntarily registered with the program, in the same manner set forth in KMC 5.105.030.

B. Only one registration is necessary if a business is located at two or more separate locations within the City, if the same business name and type of business is operated at the separate locations in the City.

C. If more than one business is conducted or operated on premises, a separate business registration shall be required for each business that meets the requirements for business registration. Each business owner must separately register a business with the program.

D. A business registration is nontransferable. A person engaged in business within the City shall notify the city manager and State Department of Revenue of a change of business location within 30 days of the location change or by the next registration renewal date, whichever date occurs first.

E. A person who has registered a business under the City’s program shall renew the registration on an annual basis, in the same manner as the original application for registration including payment of fees.

F. A person engaged in business within the City must comply with all applicable City ordinances and code provisions, and State and Federal laws. [Ord. 18-0468 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 13-0356 § 1 (Exh. 1).]


5.105.070 Registration term or expiration.

Business registration shall be valid for a term of 12 months, and shall expire on the date determined by the Department of Revenue, in coordination with the City. [Ord. 18-0468 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 13-0356 § 1 (Exh. 1).]


5.105.080 Fee.

A. The fee to register with the City’s program, or renew such registration, shall be as set forth in a fee resolution adopted by the city council.

B. From July 1, 2013, to December 31, 2013, program registration fees may be prorated to coincide with the Washington State Department of Revenue’s (its Business Licensing Service) registration term of 12 months. The prorated fee shall be as set forth in a fee resolution adopted by the city council. Thereafter, all registration fees shall be the full amount identified in subsection A of this section. [Ord. 18-0468 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 13-0356 § 1 (Exh. 1).]


5.105.090 Late renewal.

Each business registration issued must be renewed annually on or before the expiration date, or expiration of any prorated period. Failure to renew a business registration by the expiration date may result in an increase in the amount of the renewal fee by 50 percent. [Ord. 18-0468 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 13-0356 § 1 (Exh. 1).]


5.105.100 Registration denial or revocation.

A. An application for registration required under this chapter may be denied or revoked by the City based on any of the grounds provided below:

1. If the person who obtains the registration or any of the business officers, directors, agents, owners or employees of the business fail to comply with the requirements of this chapter.

2. If a person procures registration by fraud or misrepresentation of fact, or the person who obtains the registration or any of the business officers, directors, agents, owners or employees of the business obtain registration so as to practice some illegal act or some act injurious to the public health, safety and welfare.

3. Whenever a person fails or refuses to pay the registration or renewal fee.

B. The City shall not deny or revoke a business registration without cause. [Ord. 18-0468 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 13-0356 § 1 (Exh. 1).]


5.105.110 Violation – Civil infraction, enforcement.

A. A violation of this chapter shall constitute a civil infraction. A person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a civil fine in an amount not to exceed $100.00.

B. The city manager and officers authorized to provide police services to the City shall enforce this chapter and are authorized to issue civil infractions for violations of this chapter. The disposition of a civil infraction issued under this chapter shall follow the procedures adopted under the following statutes:

1. A notice of civil infraction issued under this chapter shall comply with the procedures of RCW 46.63.060(1), (2)(a) through (g) and (3), hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in full. A response to the notice of civil infraction and/or request for hearing shall comply with RCW 46.63.070(1) through (4) and (6), hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in full.

2. RCW 46.63.090 and 46.63.100, which regulate hearings on contested infractions and hearings to explain mitigating circumstances, are hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in full.

3. The phrase “traffic infraction” referenced in the above-cited statutes shall mean a “civil infraction” issued under this chapter.

C. A civil infraction issued under this chapter shall be filed with the King County district court, which shall have the exclusive jurisdiction to hear and determine the same. Rules of procedures for the conduct of hearings filed under this chapter may be established by rule of the court. [Ord. 18-0468 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 13-0356 § 1 (Exh. 1).]


5.105.120 Rules and rulings.

The city manager may, from time to time, adopt, publish and enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or with State law. The purpose of such rules and regulations is to carry out the provisions of this chapter. The city manager may also issue letter rulings from time to time which are applicable only to specific businesses. Such administrative rulings shall be binding on the City and the applicable business. [Ord. 18-0468 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 15-0402 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 13-0356 § 1 (Exh. 1).]


Title 6 ANIMALS

Chapters:

6.05    Animal Care and Control

6.10    Dog Leash Law

6.15    Repealed

6.20    Repealed

6.25    Repealed

6.30    Repealed


Chapter 6.05 ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL

Sections:

6.05.010    Adoption by reference.

6.05.020    License fees and penalties.

6.05.030    Enforcement.


6.05.010 Adoption by reference.

Title 11 of the King County Code, entitled “Regional Animal Services Section,” is adopted by reference as if set forth in full herein, with the exception of the provisions of Chapter 11.08 of the King County Code, “Dog Leash Law,” which is expressly not adopted. Except as provided in KMC 6.05.020 (license fees and penalties), future amendments to Title 11 of the King County Code shall not automatically be adopted, but shall require city council approval by way of an ordinance to become effective within the City. [Ord. 10-0317 § 2.]


6.05.020 License fees and penalties.

The animal license and registration fees applicable to this title shall be the same as the animal license and registration fees in King County Code Section 11.04.035 as now in effect or as hereafter amended. The city clerk or designee shall include these fees in the City fee schedule maintained by the city clerk or designee. [Ord. 10-0317 § 2.]


6.05.030 Enforcement.

The city manager or designee, and the regional animal services section of King County, are authorized to enforce the provisions of this title, consistent with the enforcement provisions set forth in Title 11 of the King County Code. [Ord. 10-0317 § 2.]


Chapter 6.10 DOG LEASH LAW

Sections:

6.10.010    Purpose.

6.10.020    Definitions.

6.10.030    Dogs at large prohibited in City.

6.10.040    Violations – Misdemeanor penalty.

6.10.050    Violations – Civil penalty.

6.10.060    Severability.

6.10.070    Dog control zone – Urban areas of the City.


6.10.010 Purpose.

Under the authority of Chapter 16.10 RCW, it is the intention of the City of Kenmore to enforce a dog leash law in the City of Kenmore. It is the intention of the City of Kenmore to administer a dog leash law in conjunction with the rules and regulations of the animal control authority contained in this title, as amended. [Ord. 98-0009 § 45 (KCC 11.08.010).]


6.10.020 Definitions.

In construing the provisions of this chapter, except where otherwise plainly declared or clearly apparent from the context, words used in this chapter shall be given their common and ordinary meaning; in addition, the following definitions shall apply:

A. “At large” means to be off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the owner by leash; provided, that an animal within an automobile or other vehicle of its owner shall be deemed to be upon the owner’s premises.

B. “Lawful training” means to be engaged in training on the premises of the owner or on the land of another person by permission, or on public land that is set aside for training or is open for hunting or trapping; provided, that the dog is accompanied afield by the owner or trainer. A “no-shooting” area shall not be interpreted to mean a “no-training” area.

C. “Leash” includes a cord, thong or chain not more than 15 feet in length by which an animal is physically controlled by the person accompanying it.

D. Restraint. An animal is considered to be under restraint if it is maintained and remains within the property limits of its owner or keeper. [Ord. 98-0009 § 45 (KCC 11.08.020).]


6.10.030 Dogs at large prohibited in City.

It is unlawful for owners to allow their dogs to be at large or without restraint, except that this section shall not apply where the dogs are engaged in obedience training, lawful hunting activity, lawful competition sanctioned by a nationally recognized body or a local chapter thereof, or lawful training in preparation for such hunting or competition, are working dogs engaged in the herding of livestock, or are working dogs engaged in sanctioned search and rescue activities. [Ord. 98-0009 § 45 (KCC 11.08.030).]


6.10.040 Violations – Misdemeanor penalty.

Any owner of an animal in violation of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by fine of not more than $250.00 and/or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. [Ord. 98-0009 § 45 (KCC 11.08.050).]


6.10.050 Violations – Civil penalty.

In addition to, or as an alternate to, any other penalty provided in this title, as amended, or by general law, any person whose animal is maintained in violation of this chapter shall incur a civil penalty plus billable costs of the animal control authority. The penalty for violation shall be as provided in KMC 6.05.450. [Ord. 98-0009 § 45 (KCC 11.08.060).]


6.10.060 Severability.

Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. [Ord. 98-0009 § 45 (KCC 11.08.070).]


6.10.070 Dog control zone – Urban areas of the City.

A. Findings. The Kenmore city council finds that the establishment of a dog control zone in the entire City of Kenmore is necessary for the following reasons:

1. The protection of dogs and other domestic animals from dogs at large or without restraint;

2. The preservation of private property rights from unlawful trespass by dogs at large or without restraint;

3. The preservation, protection and maintenance of public property and public amenities such as parks, schools and playgrounds from the waste products generated by dogs at large or without restraint;

4. The prevention of unintentional loss of dogs at large or without restraint due to their becoming lost or being struck by vehicular traffic; and

5. The protection of pedestrians and bicyclists from dogs at large or without restraint.

B. Dog Control Zone – Established. There is created a dog control zone in the City of Kenmore. [Ord. 98-0009 § 45 (KCC 11.08.075).]


Chapter 6.15 RABIES CONTROL

(Repealed by Ord. 10-0317)


Chapter 6.20 DISPOSITION OF FOWL AND RABBITS

(Repealed by Ord. 10-0317)


Chapter 6.25 STOCK RESTRICTED AREA

(Repealed by Ord. 10-0317)


Chapter 6.30 EXOTIC ANIMALS

(Repealed by Ord. 10-0317)


Title 7 (Reserved)

 


Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY

Chapters:

8.05    Noise

8.10    Fireworks

8.15    Boating Regulations

8.20    Moorage and Anchorage Regulations

8.25    Junk Vehicles

8.30    Emergency Operations Plan

8.35    Public Nuisances

8.40    Special Events

8.44    Heavy Manufacturing

8.50    Plastic Bag Policy

8.55    Notice of Rent Increase


Chapter 8.05 NOISE

Sections:

8.05.010    Declaration of policy.

8.05.015    Maximum permissible environmental noise levels.

8.05.020    Exemptions.

8.05.025    Public nuisance and disturbance noises.

8.05.030    Posting notice of construction hours – When required.

8.05.035    Variances.

8.05.040    Penalty for violation.


8.05.010 Declaration of policy.

The city council finds that inadequately controlled noise adversely affects the health, safety and welfare of the people, the value of property, and the quality of the environment. It is the express intent of the City to control the level of noise in a manner which promotes commerce, the use, value and enjoyment of property, sleep and repose, and the quality of the environment. [Ord. 17-0442 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 98-0042 § 1.]


8.05.015 Maximum permissible environmental noise levels.

No person shall cause or permit noise to intrude into the property of another person which noise exceeds the maximum permissible noise level set forth in WAC 173-60-040, which section is hereby adopted by reference. [Ord. 17-0442 § 2 (Exh. A).]


8.05.020 Exemptions.

The exemptions to the maximum permissible environmental noise levels set forth in WAC 173-60-050 are hereby adopted by reference. [Ord. 17-0442 § 2 (Exh. A).]


8.05.025 Public nuisance and disturbance noises.

It is unlawful for any person to cause, or for any person in possession of property to allow to originate from said property, sound that is a public nuisance. The following sources of sound are defined to be public nuisances, except to the extent that they may be specifically exempted by other provisions of this chapter:

A. Frequent, repetitive or continuous noise made by any animal which unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort and repose of property owners or possessors, except that such sounds shall be exempt when originating from lawfully operated animal shelters, kennels, pet shops and veterinary clinics;

B. Frequent, repetitive or continuous sounding of any horn or siren attached to a motor vehicle, except as a warning of danger or as specifically permitted or required by law;

C. Frequent, repetitive or continuous noise in connection with the starting, operation, repair, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle, motorcycle, off-highway vehicle or internal combustion engine so as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort and repose of owners or possessors of real property; provided, however, this subsection shall not apply to airplanes and boats;

D. Yelling, shouting, whistling or singing on or near the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time and place so as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort and repose of owners or possessors of real property;

E. Any loud and raucous noise which unreasonably interferes with the use of any residential property, school, church, hospital or convalescent facility;

F. Any sound made by the construction, excavation, repair, demolition, destruction or alteration of any building or property, or upon any building site, anytime on Sundays and holidays and outside the hours of 7:00 a.m. through 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 9:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m. on Saturday, excepting:

1. Highway construction; and

2. Sounds originating from residential property relating to temporary projects for the maintenance or repair of homes, grounds and appurtenances as follows:

	November 1st – April 30th

	Monday – Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.

Saturday and Sunday, 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.

	May 1st – October 31st

	Monday – Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.

Saturday and Sunday, 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.

Nothing herein shall be construed to limit or prohibit different or more restrictive hours for any work authorized under a development permit issued by the City.

G. Frequent, repetitive or continuous sounds which emanate from any building, structure, apartment or condominium which unreasonably interferes with the peace, comfort and repose of owners or possessors of real property;

H. Sound from motor vehicle public address or audio systems, such as, but not limited to, tape players, radios and compact disc players, operated at a volume so as to be audible greater than 75 feet from the source;

I. Sound from audio equipment, such as, but not limited to, tape players, radios and compact disc players, operated at a volume so as to be audible greater than 75 feet from the source; and

J. The foregoing provisions shall not apply to regularly scheduled events at schools or stadiums, such as public address systems for baseball games or special events approved and permitted in accordance with Chapter 8.40 KMC. [Ord. 17-0442 § 4 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-0335 § 2; Ord. 00-0094 § 1; Ord. 98-0042 § 2. Formerly 8.05.020.]


8.05.030 Posting notice of construction hours – When required.

A sign providing notice of the limitation of construction hours contained in KMC 8.05.025(F) shall be posted on construction sites prior to commencement of any new development, including individual building permits. The city manager or his or her designee shall establish standards for size, color, layout, design, wording and placement of the signs. [Ord. 17-0442 § 3 (Exh. A).]


8.05.035 Variances.

A. Variances may be granted to any person from any requirement in KMC 8.05.025, if findings are made by the city manager or his or her designee that immediate compliance with such requirement cannot be achieved because of special circumstances rendering immediate compliance unreasonable in light of economic or physical factors, encroachment upon an existing noise source, or because of nonavailability of feasible technology or control methods, or where a variance to this code section is reasonably anticipated to reduce or limit other disturbances to the public, such as the total length of time the disturbance must occur.

B. Any such variance, or renewal thereof, shall be granted only for the minimum time period found to be necessary under the facts and circumstances.

C. Variances shall be heard and decided in the manner set forth in Chapter 19.25 KMC for administrative interpretations of development regulations by the city manager or his or her designee. The decision of the city manager or his or her designee shall be a Type 1 action under KMC 19.25.020 for decision-making procedure. [Ord. 17-0442 § 3 (Exh. A).]


8.05.040 Penalty for violation.

Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a civil fine not to exceed $250.00 for a first offense. For second and subsequent offenses within any 12-consecutive-month period, the person shall be subject to a civil fine not to exceed $1,000. [Ord. 17-0442 § 4 (Exh. A); Ord. 98-0042 § 3. Formerly 8.05.030.]


Chapter 8.10 FIREWORKS

Sections:

8.10.010    Definitions.

8.10.020    Sale, possession, use, and discharge of fireworks unlawful – Exceptions.

8.10.022    Permit required for public display of fireworks.

8.10.024    Applicability.

8.10.026    Chapter in connection with State law.

8.10.028    Enforcement.

8.10.030    Penalty for violations.


8.10.010 Definitions.

The definitions set forth in Chapter 70.77 RCW as now in effect or hereinafter amended shall govern the construction of this chapter, when applicable. RCW 70.77.120 through and including RCW 70.77.230 as now in effect or hereinafter amended are hereby adopted by this reference and a copy of the same shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk for public use and inspection. [Ord. 04-0204 § 1; Ord. 00-0082 § 1.]


8.10.020 Sale, possession, use, and discharge of fireworks unlawful – Exceptions.

No person shall possess, use or discharge any fireworks within the City, nor shall any person offer for retail sale or sell any fireworks within the City. Except as authorized by a State license and City special event permit granted pursuant to RCW 70.77.260(2) (Public display) or RCW 70.77.311(2) (Use by individual or group for religious or other specified purpose on approved date and at approved location) or Chapter 8.40 KMC, no person shall ignite, explode or discharge any fireworks within the City. [Ord. 12-0335 § 3; Ord. 04-0204 § 2; Ord. 00-0082 § 2.]


8.10.022 Permit required for public display of fireworks.

It is unlawful for any person to hold, conduct or engage in any public display of fireworks within the City without having obtained and being the holder of a valid permit. [Ord. 04-0204 § 3.]


8.10.024 Applicability.

The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to the sales, possession, use, and discharge of all fireworks except “toy caps.” [Ord. 04-0204 § 4.]


8.10.026 Chapter in connection with State law.

This chapter is intended to implement Chapter 70.77 RCW, and shall be construed in connection with that law and any and all rules or regulations issued pursuant thereto. [Ord. 04-0204 § 5.]


8.10.028 Enforcement.

The police chief, or designee, is authorized to enforce all provisions of this chapter, including the authority to revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter upon any failure or refusal of the permittee to comply with the provisions of this chapter and any related requirements of the police chief or his designee, or any other applicable ordinance or regulation of the City. [Ord. 04-0204 § 6.]


8.10.030 Penalty for violations.

Except as set forth in this section, any person violating or failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in the following manner:

A. The sale, possession, or use of unlawful fireworks by any person shall be punishable by a penalty of $500.00 for each violation.

B. The discharge of unlawful fireworks by any person shall be punishable by a penalty of $1,000 for each violation. [Ord. 04-0204 § 7; Ord. 00-0082 § 3.]


Chapter 8.15 BOATING REGULATIONS

Sections:

8.15.010    Authorization.

8.15.020    Definitions.

8.15.030    Interpretation and application of regulations.

8.15.040    Operation of personal watercraft.

8.15.050    Required distance from powercraft to swimmers and row boats.

8.15.060    Speed limit specified – Lakes – Exception.

8.15.070    Speed limit specified – Rivers – Exception.

8.15.080    Speed regulations within 100 yards of shore on Lake Washington.

8.15.090    Interference with navigation.

8.15.100    Sunken vessels.

8.15.110    Floating objects.

8.15.120    Accidents.

8.15.130    Accident reports.

8.15.140    Accident reports confidential, inadmissible as evidence.

8.15.150    Overloading.

8.15.160    Swimming.

8.15.170    Skin diving.

8.15.180    Water skiing.

8.15.190    Whistles and lights.

8.15.200    Equipment and numbering.

8.15.210    Life preservers and running lights.

8.15.220    Races and testing.

8.15.230    Aircraft on the water.

8.15.240    Rules of the road.

8.15.250    Propellers.

8.15.260    Unsafe piers.

8.15.270    Safety devices.

8.15.280    Pier barriers.

8.15.290    Drifting debris.

8.15.300    Oil.

8.15.310    Nuisances.

8.15.320    Public health.

8.15.330    Boat rental records.

8.15.340    Liability for damages.

8.15.350    Exemption to authorized emergency vessels and watercraft.

8.15.360    Aiding and abetting violation.

8.15.370    Directing traffic, emergency powers.

8.15.380    Boating advisory commission.

8.15.390    Appeal of denial for license, permit or authority.

8.15.400    Lake Washington restrictions.

8.15.410    Authority of officers to board boats.

8.15.420    Emergency rescues.

8.15.430    Penalty.


8.15.010 Authorization.

The City of Kenmore, in the exercise of its police power, assumes control and jurisdiction over all lakes, rivers and all other waters within its geographical boundaries. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.010).]


8.15.020 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed in this section:

A. “Anchorage” means a designated position where vessels or watercraft may anchor or moor.

B. “Aquatic event” means any organized water event of limited duration which is duly sanctioned at least seven days in advance by duly constituted authority and which is conducted according to a prearranged schedule and in which general public interest is manifested.

C. “Authorized emergency vessel” means any authorized vessel or watercraft of the City of Kenmore police department, the City of Kenmore fire department, the United States government, and State of Washington authorized patrol vessels or watercraft.

D. “Boat dealer” means any person engaged in the business of buying, selling, exchanging, offering, brokering, leasing with an option to purchase, auctioning, soliciting, or advertising the sale of new or used vessels. The term “boat dealer” shall not include:

1. Receivers, trustees, administrator, executors, guardians, or other persons appointed by or acting under a judgment or order of any court;

2. Employees of dealers who are engaged in the specific performance of their duties as such employees;

3. Any person engaged in an isolated sale of a vessel of which he is the owner.

E. “County” means the county of King.

F. “Diver’s flag” means a red flag five units of measurement on the hoist by six units of measurement on the fly with a white stripe of one unit crossing the red diagonally (the flag to have a stiffener to make it stand out from the pole or mast). This flag shall only pertain to skin and SCUBA (self-contained underwater breathing apparatus) diving and shall supplement any nationally recognized diver’s flag or marking. Unit of measurement shall not be less than two inches.

G. “Issuing authority” means a state that has a numbering system approved by the U.S. Coast Guard or the U.S. Coast Guard where a numbering system has not been approved.

H. “Master” means the captain, skipper, pilot or any person having charge of any vessel or watercraft.

I. “Obstruction” means any vessel or watercraft or any matter which may in any way blockade, interfere with or endanger any vessel or watercraft or impede navigation, or which cannot comply with the “Pilot Rules for Certain Inland Waters of the Atlantic and Pacific Coasts and of the Coast of the Gulf of Mexico” (C.F. 236479).

J. “Oil” means any oil or liquid, whether of animal, vegetable or mineral origin, or a mixture, compound or distillation thereof.

K. “Operator” means a person who is in control or in charge of a vessel or watercraft while it is in use.

L. “Owner” means the person who has lawful possession of a vessel or watercraft or obstruction by virtue of legal title or equitable interest therein which entitles him to such possession.

M. “Person,” when necessary, means and includes natural persons, associations, copartnerships and corporations, whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or employee; the singular number, when necessary, means the plural, and the masculine pronoun includes the feminine.

N. “Pier” means any pier, wharf, dock, float, gridiron or other structure to promote the convenient loading or unloading or other discharge of vessels or watercraft, or the repair thereof.

O. “Reporting authority” means the same as “Issuing authority.”

P. “Restricted area” means an area that has been marked in accordance with and as authorized by the law or regulations of the City to be used for, or closed to, certain designated purposes such as swimming, skin diving, ferry landings and aquatic events, the method of marking and designation of which shall have been made by the Kenmore police department in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

Q. “Skin diving” means any free swimming person and/or any person who uses an artificial or mechanical means to replace his air, including self-contained underwater breathing apparatus, snorkel tube equipment and free diving gear, but shall not mean swimmers using patrolled public beaches designated as swimming areas.

R. “State” means a state of the United States, the commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the District of Columbia.

S. “State of principal use” means the state on whose water a vessel is used or to be used a majority of a calendar year.

T. “Testing course” means a course or area on waters subject to the jurisdiction of the City of Kenmore, designated in accordance with this chapter or pursuant to other applicable laws and regulations, for use in industrial development and testing of experimental and production watercraft and vessels.

U. “Towboat” means any vessel or watercraft engaged in towing or pushing another vessel or watercraft or anything other than a vessel or watercraft.

V. “Undocumented watercraft” means a boat which does not have a valid marine document as a vessel of the United States.

W. “Vessel” means any contrivance 110 feet or more in length overall, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water.

X. “Water ski” means all forms, manners, means or contrivances of person or persons being towed behind a motor boat.

Y. “Watercraft” means every description of watercraft 12 feet or greater but less than 110 feet in length or equipped with motor propulsion machinery of more than five horsepower, other than a seaplane, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water, or required to be registered by the Boat Safety Act of 1971; provided, that this definition does not include vessels under four feet in beam which have no propulsion machinery of any type; provided further, that this definition shall not include vessels used exclusively for commercial purposes. Aircraft, cribs or piles, shingle bolts, booms of logs, rafts of logs and rafts of lumber shall not be included within the terms “watercraft” or “vessel,” but shall be included within the term “obstruction” when they shall be floating loose and not under control or when under control and obstructing any navigable channel. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.020).]


8.15.030 Interpretation and application of regulations.

The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all vessels and watercraft. The provisions of this chapter shall be construed to supplement United States laws and State laws and regulations when not expressly inconsistent therewith. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.030).]


8.15.040 Operation of personal watercraft.

Personal watercraft as defined by RCW 88.12.010 shall for the purposes of this chapter comply with all provisions of the law as watercraft and vessels defined under KMC 8.15.020. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.035).]


8.15.050 Required distance from powercraft to swimmers and row boats.

It is unlawful for any motor-powered craft to be operated while the propeller is engaged within 50 feet of any swimmer or any row boat, canoe, or other water conveyances on any nonnavigable lake within the City of Kenmore. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.060).]


8.15.060 Speed limit specified – Lakes – Exception.

Except on lakes otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, no motor-powered watercraft shall be operated on any lake within the City of Kenmore at a speed in excess of eight miles per hour. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.070).]


8.15.070 Speed limit specified – Rivers – Exception.

Except as otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, no motor-powered watercraft shall be operated on any river within the City of Kenmore at a speed in excess of five miles per hour. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.080).]


8.15.080 Speed regulations within 100 yards of shore on Lake Washington.

Except as otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter it is unlawful for any person to operate any watercraft or vessel at a speed in excess of eight miles per hour within 100 yards of any shoreline, pier, restricted area or shore installation on Lake Washington. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.090).]


8.15.090 Interference with navigation.

No person shall operate any watercraft or vessel in a manner which shall unreasonably or unnecessarily interfere with other watercraft or vessels or with the free and proper navigation of the waterways of the City. Anchoring or mooring under bridges or in heavily travelled channels shall constitute such interference if unreasonable under the prevailing circumstances. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.100).]


8.15.100 Sunken vessels.

When any vessel or watercraft or obstruction has been sunk or grounded, or has been delayed in such manner as to stop or seriously interfere with or endanger navigation, the sheriff may order the same immediately removed and if the owner, or other person in charge thereof, after being so ordered does not proceed immediately with such removal, the sheriff may take immediate possession thereof and remove the same, using such methods as in his judgment will prevent unnecessary damage to such vessel or watercraft or obstruction, and the expense incurred by the sheriff in such removal shall be paid by such vessel or watercraft or obstruction, or the owner or other person in charge thereof, and in case of failure to pay the same, the City may maintain an action for the recovery thereof. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.110).]


8.15.110 Floating objects.

All vessels, watercraft, logs, piling, building material, scows, houseboats or any other article of value found adrift in City waters may be taken in charge by the sheriff and shall be subject to reclamation by the owner thereof, on payment by him to the City of any expenses incurred by the City and in case of failure to reclaim may be sold or disposed of according to law. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.120).]


8.15.120 Accidents.

The operator of any watercraft involved in an accident resulting in injury or death to any person or in damage to property shall immediately stop such watercraft at the scene of such accident and shall give his name, address, and the name and/or number of his watercraft, and the name and address of the owner, to the person struck or the operator or occupants of the vessel or watercraft collided with or property damaged, and shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.150).]


8.15.130 Accident reports.

The master, owner or operator of any watercraft shall file a written report within 48 hours with the sheriff’s department or Washington State Patrol of any accident involving death or personal injury requiring medical treatment or property damage in excess of $200.00 in which such watercraft shall have been involved on waters of the City of Kenmore. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.160).]


8.15.140 Accident reports confidential, inadmissible as evidence.

All required accident reports and supplemental reports and copies thereof shall be without prejudice to the individual so reporting and shall be for the confidential use of the sheriff’s department, prosecuting attorney, or other peace and enforcement officer as provided herein, except that any such officer may disclose the identity of a person reported as involved in an accident when such identity is not otherwise known or when such person denies his presence at such accident. No such accident report or copy thereof shall be used as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal, arising out of an accident, except that any officer above named for receiving accident reports shall furnish, upon demand of any person who has, or who claims to have, made such a report, or upon demand of any court, a certificate showing that a specified accident report has or has not been made to the sheriff, solely to prove a compliance or a failure to comply with the requirement that such a report be made in the manner required by law. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.170).]


8.15.150 Overloading.

A. No watercraft shall be loaded with passengers or cargo beyond its safe carrying capacity nor carry passengers in an unsafe manner taking into consideration weather and other existing operating conditions.

B. Whenever it appears reasonably certain to any police officer that any person is operating a watercraft or vessel loaded beyond its safe capacity, said officer may take reasonable measures to prevent any such person from so operating the craft. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.180).]


8.15.160 Swimming.

Swimming in the waters of the City of Kenmore shall be confined to:

A. Restricted swimming areas; or

B. Within a distance of 50 feet from the shore, or a pier unless the swimmer is accompanied by a watercraft. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.210).]


8.15.170 Skin diving.

Skin diving shall be prohibited in the waters of the City of Kenmore:

A. Within 300 feet of any ferry slip, public boat ramp, patrolled public beach designated as a swimming area, except pursuant to permit therefor issued by the sheriff and except for commercial diving; or

B. In any other area unless the diver shall be accompanied by a watercraft or the area in which he is diving shall be marked by an adequately displayed diver’s flag. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.220).]


8.15.180 Water skiing.

Water skiing on City of Kenmore lakes and rivers shall be regulated as follows:

A. No watercraft which has in tow a person on water skis, aquaplane, surfboard or similar contrivance shall be operated or propelled in the waters of the City of Kenmore unless such watercraft is occupied by at least two competent persons.

B. It is unlawful to water ski within 100 yards of shore. Water skiers may start at and return to shore by means of the most expeditious route. For purposes of starting at and returning to shore, water skiers may temporarily exceed the speed limit of eight miles per hour.

C. No operator of a watercraft shall have in tow a person on water skis, aquaplane, surfboard or similar contrivance from sunset to sunrise.

D. All persons being towed by watercraft shall wear an adequate flotation device.

E. All watercraft having in tow or otherwise assisting a person on water skis, aquaplanes, surfboards or similar contrivance shall comply with KMC 8.15.050.

F. Regulations stated in subsections (A) and (D) of this section shall not apply to watercraft used in water ski tournaments, competitions, expositions, or trials therefor, which have been duly authorized by the Kenmore police department. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.230).]


8.15.190 Whistles and lights.

It is unlawful for the master, owner or any other person in charge of any watercraft or vessel, while lying at any pier or while navigating in the waters of the City of Kenmore, unnecessarily to cause any whistle or siren to be blown or sounded, nor shall any person flash the rays of a searchlight or other blinding light onto the bridge or into the pilothouse of any vessel or watercraft under way for any purpose other than those authorized by law. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.350).]


8.15.200 Equipment and numbering.

All watercraft or vessels shall carry the equipment required by any applicable United States laws as now or hereafter amended, and shall be numbered or designated in accordance with any applicable United States laws as now or hereafter amended. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.360).]


8.15.210 Life preservers and running lights.

Federal regulations covering equipping of boats with life preservers for each passenger, and also use of running lights for night operation, shall be strictly complied with. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.370).]


8.15.220 Races and testing.

Nothing in the provisions of this chapter shall be construed to mean that the operator of a watercraft competing in a race or regatta, or trials therefor, which has been duly authorized by the Kenmore police department, or an operator engaged in industrial development and testing of experimental and production watercraft and vessels, shall be prohibited from attempting to obtain high speeds on racing and testing courses, duly designated by the Kenmore police department, nor while so engaged, shall such watercraft, vessels or operators be required to comply with KMC 8.15.060, 8.15.070, 8.15.080, 8.15.190 and 8.15.210. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.380).]


8.15.230 Aircraft on the water.

All vessels or watercraft shall keep clear of aircraft landing within any area now or hereafter set aside by law for such purpose. Aircraft on the water shall keep clear of all vessels and watercraft and avoid impeding their navigation. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.390).]


8.15.240 Rules of the road.

Except as herein otherwise specified, vessels or watercraft shall be subject to the “Rules to Prevent Collisions of Vessels and Pilot Rules for Certain Inland Waters of the Atlantic and Pacific Coasts and of the Coast of the Gulf of Mexico” (C.F. 23679), promulgated by the United States Coast Guard, pursuant to act of Congress, as such rules are now or may hereafter from time to time be adopted; and be it further provided, that sailing vessels or other watercraft, while engaged in a sanctioned or authorized race, predicted log race, regatta or similar event shall be subject to the applicable rules for such event including, but not limited to, differing right-of-way rules. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.400).]


8.15.250 Propellers.

No master, owner or other person in charge of any vessel or watercraft shall, while the same is lying in any slip or at any pier, either cause or allow the propeller or wheel of such vessel or watercraft to be worked in such a manner as to endanger any other vessel, watercraft or structure. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.410).]


8.15.260 Unsafe piers.

Whenever any pier or gangway devoted to passenger traffic is damaged or appears to the sheriff to become unsafe so as to render the same, or any portion thereof, unsafe for life or property, the sheriff shall report the matter to the city engineer, who shall inspect the same and shall order any unsafe portion thereof barricaded with proper fencing until such time as necessary repairs thereto shall be made, and if the owner, agent or lessee of such pier shall fail to comply with the orders of the city engineer immediately, the city engineer shall prohibit the use of the unsafe portion of such pier and may erect the necessary fencing or barricade and the expense thereof shall be paid by and recoverable from the owner, agent or lessee of such pier to the City, and it shall be unlawful for any person to allow any such pier or gangway to be used or open to use. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.420).]


8.15.270 Safety devices.

Every owner, agent or lessee having charge of any commercial pier shall furnish and keep for use on such pier at least one serviceable 30-inch ring life buoy and one serviceable 30-inch ring life buoy for every 300 lineal feet of berthing space to each of which shall be attached at least 200 feet of suitable line, one end of which shall be fastened to the ring buoy. Each ring buoy and line attached thereto shall be kept in a suitable box on the pier for the use of the public in case of accident, which box shall be properly labeled and be at all times kept clear of obstructions, and it shall be unlawful to take away, molest, injure or destroy the same or either of them or to disturb the same, or either of them, except for use in saving life and property. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.430).]


8.15.280 Pier barriers.

Every owner, lessee or agent of any pier open to the public use to or from vessels or watercraft or for any other purpose shall guard the frontage of any highway by substantial and adequate fences or other barriers and shall guard the sides and face thereof in a similar manner if used as a thoroughfare to or from any vessel or watercraft. All necessary openings or passages in such fences or barriers shall be provided with substantial gates which shall be closed and securely fastened when not in use. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.440).]


8.15.290 Drifting debris.

It is unlawful for the owner, agent or lessee in charge of any pier to allow the whole, or any part thereof, to fall into or remain adrift in City waters or to drift away. Fender piles, broken or loose, shall be removed by the owner, agent or lessee of any pier and, upon failure so to do, the same may be removed by the sheriff and the expense thereof shall be paid by and recoverable from the owner, agent or lessee of such pier to the City. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.460).]


8.15.300 Oil.

No owner, master or other person in charge of any vessel or watercraft, and no engineer or other person in charge of any engine room or machinery of any vessel or watercraft, and no owner, lessee, agent, employee, or other person in charge of or employed in or about any pier, or other structure, and no person along or upon the shore of the waters of the City of Kenmore, shall spill, throw, pump or otherwise cause oil of any description to be or float upon the waters of the City of Kenmore. Any person causing oil to be upon the waters of the City of Kenmore as aforesaid shall remove the same and upon his failure so to do, the same may be removed by the sheriff and the expense thereof shall be paid by and recoverable from the person causing said oil to be upon the water. The payment of such sum or the maintenance of an action therefor shall not be deemed to exempt such person from prosecution for causing such oil spillage. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.470).]


8.15.310 Nuisances.

Sunken vessels or watercraft, refuse of all kinds, structures or pieces of any structure, dock sweepings, dead fish or parts thereof, dead animals or parts thereof, timber, logs, piles, boom sticks, lumber, boxes, empty containers and oil of any kind floating uncontrolled on the water, and all other substances or articles of a similar nature, are hereby declared to be public nuisances and it is unlawful for any person to throw or place in, or cause or permit to be thrown or placed, any of the above named articles or substances in the waters of the City of Kenmore, or upon the shores thereof or in such position that same may or can be washed into said waters of the City of Kenmore, either by high tides, storms, floods or otherwise. Any person causing or permitting said nuisances to be placed as aforesaid shall remove the same and upon his failure so to do, the same may be removed by the sheriff or city engineer and the expense thereof shall be paid by and recoverable from the person creating said nuisance. In all cases such nuisances may be abated in the manner provided by law. The abatement of any such public nuisances shall not excuse the person responsible therefor from prosecution hereunder. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.480).]


8.15.320 Public health.

All watercraft and vessels entering or in the waters of the City of Kenmore shall comply with the applicable public health laws and regulations of the United States, the State of Washington and its political subdivisions. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.490).]


8.15.330 Boat rental records.

The owner or proprietor of a boat rental or charger operation shall cause to be kept a record of the name and address of the person or persons hiring any watercraft, the identification number of such watercraft, the departure date and the time and the date and the time of the return of such watercraft. Such record shall be preserved for not less than six months after the departure date of such watercraft and shall be kept available for inspection by any duly authorized agency or authority. Prior to departure from the premises of such boat rental or charter operation any such watercraft shall carry the equipment required by this chapter. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.500).]


8.15.340 Liability for damages.

Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to release any person owning or controlling any vessel, watercraft, pier, obstruction or other structure from any liability for damages, and the safeguards to life and property required in this chapter shall not be construed as relieving any person from installing and maintaining all other safeguards that may be required by law. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.510).]


8.15.350 Exemption to authorized emergency vessels and watercraft.

The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to the operation of any and all vessels or watercraft in the waters of the City of Kenmore except that they shall not apply in the following cases:

A. To any authorized emergency vessel or watercraft actually responding to an emergency call or in immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, within the purpose for which such emergency vessel or watercraft has been authorized; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not relieve the operator of an authorized emergency vessel or watercraft of the duty to operate with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall it protect the operator of any such emergency vessel or watercraft from the consequences of a reckless disregard for the safety of others; provided further, the provisions of this section shall in no event extend any special privilege or immunity in operation of an authorized emergency vessel or watercraft for any purpose other than for which the same has been authorized. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.520).]


8.15.360 Aiding and abetting violation.

It is unlawful to counsel, aid or abet the violation of, or failure to comply with, any of the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.530).]


8.15.370 Directing traffic, emergency powers.

The sheriff and his deputies are hereby authorized to direct all waterborne traffic either in person or by means of visible or audible signal in conformance with the provisions of this chapter; provided, that where necessary to expedite waterborne traffic, or to prevent or eliminate congestion or to safeguard persons or property, such officers and other authorized officers of appropriate governmental agencies or authorities may direct waterborne traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.540).]


8.15.380 Boating advisory commission.

A. There is hereby established a boating advisory commission composed of such members as may be selected by the city manager and approved by the city council.

B. The boating advisory commission shall recommend to the city council ways and means for improving boating conditions. The commission shall meet upon the call of the chairman.

C. The members shall select the chair of the commission from their membership. The sheriff shall furnish from his regular staff the necessary secretarial and support services and materials required by the commission. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.550).]


8.15.390 Appeal of denial for license, permit or authority.

If any license, permit or authority which may be granted under this chapter is denied, such denial may be appealed to the City of Kenmore by filing written notice of such appeal with the office of the city clerk within 10 days of such denial. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.560).]


8.15.400 Lake Washington restrictions.

A. No motor-powered watercraft shall be operated in excess of five miles per hour on the following portion of Lake Washington: commencing at the intersection of the centerlines of 60th Avenue Northeast and Northeast 180th Street in King County; thence south to the shoreline of Lake Washington, which shall be the true point of beginning; thence due south from such point 3,000 feet; thence in an easterly, northeasterly direction, more or less, to a point on the shoreline of Lake Washington located midway between the extensions of the centerlines of Northeast 170th Street and Northeast 165th Street, King County, Washington.

B. The provisions contained in subsection (A) of this section shall not apply to aircraft landing, taxiing, or ascending from Lake Washington. Each person operating an aircraft on the water shall, insofar as possible, keep clear of all vessels and avoid impeding their navigation.

C. Such off-site/on-site control devices as navigational buoys, speed limit signs, night lights, safety signs, and other devices as deemed appropriate shall be installed, per the provisions contained in Motion 4482 and King County Ordinance 4933. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.600).]


8.15.410 Authority of officers to board boats.

Commissioned officers of the Kenmore police department are hereby given the authority to board any vessel or watercraft found underway in the waters of the City of Kenmore for the purpose of inspection and enforcement of this chapter. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.710).]


8.15.420 Emergency rescues.

The restrictions in this chapter shall not preclude the use of boats powered by internal combustion engines for emergency rescues. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(B) (KCC 12.44.1000).]


8.15.430 Penalty.

Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be penalized as set forth in Chapter 1.15 KMC. [Ord. 98-0035 § 2.]


Chapter 8.20 MOORAGE AND ANCHORAGE REGULATIONS

Sections:

8.20.010    Purpose.

8.20.020    Definitions.

8.20.030    Applicability.

8.20.040    Unlawful acts.

8.20.050    Anchoring and mooring permit required.

8.20.060    Temporary anchorage or moorage.

8.20.070    Exemptions.

8.20.080    Application procedures.

8.20.090    Permit renewals and extensions.

8.20.100    Suspension and revocation.

8.20.110    Assignment of permit.

8.20.120    Lights and audible devices.

8.20.130    Declaration of nuisance.

8.20.140    Right of entry.

8.20.150    Impoundment.

8.20.160    Impoundment-in-place.

8.20.170    Abatement.

8.20.180    Penalty.


8.20.010 Purpose.

The Kenmore city council finds that the unregulated anchoring and moorage of vessels, watercraft and obstructions in waters within the geographical boundaries of the City of Kenmore constitute a hazard to navigation and to the safety and health of citizens of the City of Kenmore. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a reasonable means of regulating such anchoring and moorage through a permit system, administered and enforced by the Kenmore police department, which will protect public safety, health and navigation while allowing for reasonable uses of the surface waters of the City. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(C) (KCC 12.46.010).]


8.20.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings set forth herein:

A. “Anchorage” means a designated position where vessels or watercraft may anchor or moor.

B. “Anchor” means the act of making a vessel, watercraft or obstruction secure to the bed of any body of water through use of a direct connection between the vessel, watercraft or obstruction and the bed.

C. “Boat” means any contrivance up to 65 feet in length overall, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water.

D. “Director” means the chief of the Kenmore police department or his or her designee.

E. “Master” means the captain, skipper, pilot or any other person having charge of any vessel or watercraft and shall include any agent or employee of such person.

F. “Moor” means the act of securing a vessel, watercraft or obstruction either to a lawfully installed pier or to a lawfully installed anchored buoy or float.

G. “Obstruction” means any vessel or watercraft or any matter which may in any way blockade, interfere with or endanger any vessel or watercraft or impede navigation, or which cannot comply with the “Pilot Rules for Certain Inland Waters of the Atlantic and Pacific Coasts and of the Coast of the Gulf of Mexico” (C.F. 236479).

H. “Owner” means the person who has lawful possession of a vessel or watercraft or obstruction by virtue of legal title or equitable interest therein which entitles him to such possession, and includes any agent or employee of such person.

I. “Person” means and includes natural persons, associations, copartnerships and corporations, whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or employee; the singular number, when necessary, means the plural, and the masculine pronoun includes the feminine.

J. “Pier” means any pier, dock, wharf or other structure built in or over or floating upon the water, extending from the shoreline, which may be used as a landing place to promote the loading or unloading of vessels or watercraft for recreational or commercial purposes.

K. “Vessel” means any contrivance 110 feet or more in length overall, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water.

L. “Watercraft” means any contrivance less than 110 feet in length overall and at least 65 feet in length overall, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water. Aircraft, cribs or piles, shingle bolts, booms of logs, rafts of logs and rafts of lumber shall not be included within the terms “watercraft” or “vessel”, but shall be included within the term “obstruction” when they are anchored or moored and obstructing any navigable channel. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(C) (KCC 12.46.020).]


8.20.030 Applicability.

This chapter shall apply to vessels, watercraft and obstructions located in lakes, rivers, streams, tidewaters and any other waters within the geographical boundaries of the City of Kenmore; provided, that any such vessels, watercraft or obstructions presently anchored or moored in such waters shall have 60 days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to achieve compliance therewith; provided, further, that this chapter shall not apply to boats. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(C) (KCC 12.46.030).]


8.20.040 Unlawful acts.

It is unlawful to anchor, moor, beach, ground or otherwise secure any vessel, watercraft or obstruction to the bed or shoreline of any waters or to any shoreline structure except under the following specific conditions:

A. Where anchored or moored in compliance with the temporary anchorage and moorage provisions contained in KMC 8.20.060;

B. Where anchored or moored under authority of a valid and effective permit issued to the owner or master by the director in accordance with KMC 8.20.050 and 8.20.070;

C. Where authorized or directed in writing by the United States Army Corps of Engineers or the United States Coast Guard to anchor, moor or otherwise locate in a specific area so designated by the federal agency for that particular purpose;

D. Where moored to a private pier with the permission of the owner or lessee of the real property to which the pier is attached; provided, that the vessel, watercraft or obstruction so moored shall remain within the legal property waterline or the established boundaries as defined by the appropriate government agency;

E. Where moored to a public pier, buoy or float, specifically intended for public use, in a manner consistent with any posted regulations displayed on-site or any applicable laws, rules or regulations of the public agency with jurisdiction over use of such public property; or

F. Where the vessel, watercraft or obstruction is exempted from the permit requirements of this chapter by KMC 8.20.070. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(C) (KCC 12.46.040).]


8.20.050 Anchoring and mooring permit required.

Any owner or master who desires to anchor or moor his vessel, watercraft or obstruction and who is not temporarily at anchor or moored in compliance with KMC 8.20.060 shall apply for and obtain from the director a conditional permit prior to anchoring or mooring such craft. Issuance of such permit shall be subject to compliance with the following conditions, as determined by the director:

A. Less Than 30 Days’ Duration.

1. The moorage or anchorage shall be compatible with the general public use of the requested area and with the existing land use and land use planning in the vicinity;

2. The moorage or anchorage shall not deprive or materially interfere with the reasonable water access of properties adjacent to or in the vicinity of the requested water area, nor shall the moorage or anchorage encroach on or over privately owned property without the consent of the property owner;

3. No public food sales or retail sales of any other kind, charged or donated admission, holding of animals or fowl, or storage of toxic chemicals or petroleum products (except for propulsion of the craft) shall be permitted without first having obtained all legally required inspections and permits, approvals or licenses from the public agencies with jurisdiction, including but not limited to the Seattle-King County department of public health, the Kenmore police department, the department of public works, planning and community development department, the department of executive administration, and the appropriate fire district;

4. Moorage or anchorage for purpose of residential use shall not be permitted;

5. The applicant shall provide to the director and maintain during the period of the permit a bond, cash deposit or sight irrevocable letter of credit from a reputable lending institution approved by the director in an amount specified by the director, but not to exceed $500,000, sufficient to cover the potential cost of removal of the watercraft, vessel or obstruction in the event of sinking, and in the event of adjacent publicly owned structures, the cost of repair thereof in event of collision;

6. The applicant shall provide to the director written proof from the auditor or comptroller of the vessel’s or watercraft’s home port or principal place of business or use showing that all current taxes and assessments are paid; and

7. The applicant shall execute and deliver to the director upon a form supplied by the director an agreement in writing and acknowledged by the applicant to hold and save harmless the City of Kenmore from any and all claims, actions or damages of every kind and description which may accrue to, or be suffered by, any persons by reason of or related to the use and occupation of the waters by the permit holder.

B. Thirty Days’ or Greater Duration.

1. All conditions necessary for a permit of less than 30 days’ duration must be met, except that the bond, cash deposit or sight irrevocable letter of credit from a reputable lending institution approved by the director shall not exceed $1,000,000;

2. The applicant shall provide to the director a certificate of seaworthiness from a marine surveyor who is certified by the National Association of Marine Surveyors or from a person certified by a similar professional organization acceptable to the director, except this condition shall not apply to obstructions;

3. Maximum duration shall be 365 days, subject to renewal in accordance with KMC 8.20.090.

C. Discretionary Conditions. In addition to the mandatory conditions specified above, the director may, within his reasonable discretion, require that any one or combination of the following conditions be met:

1. That the applicant, prior to issuance of the permit, provide and maintain in full force and effect while the permit is in force, public liability insurance in an amount specified by the director sufficient to cover potential claims for bodily injury, death or disability and for property damage, which may arise from or be related to the applicant’s use of the waters, naming the City of Kenmore as an additional insured;

2. That the vessel, watercraft or obstruction connect its plumbing system to the nearest available City sanitary sewers;

3. That the vessel, watercraft or obstruction permit the moorage of vessels or watercraft alongside and access thereto;

4. That the vessel, watercraft or obstruction be removed as soon as privately owned or controlled moorage space becomes available; or

5. Any other condition reasonably related to protecting the public safety, health or welfare. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(C) (KCC 12.46.050).]


8.20.060 Temporary anchorage or moorage.

Any vessel or watercraft may anchor or moor without being subject to the permit requirements of KMC 8.20.050 and 8.20.070; provided, that the vessel or watercraft does not remain within a one-mile radius of the original anchorage or moorage for a period longer than 72 hours out of any 120-hour period. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(C) (KCC 12.46.060).]


8.20.070 Exemptions.

The following vessels, watercraft and obstructions are exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter:

A. Where owned, leased or under the control of licensed and bonded marine contractors at the site of and necessary for the completion of a construction project which has received all necessary federal, State and local permits, approvals and licenses; and

B. Where anchorage or moorage is necessary because of an emergency situation created by an immediate threat to life, the craft and/or the property of others. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(C) (KCC 12.46.070).]


8.20.080 Application procedures.

A. Any person may apply for an anchoring and mooring permit by submitting to the director a written application stating the owner’s and master’s name, address and telephone number; the type, description and size of the vessel, watercraft or obstruction; the reason for the application; the area of proposed anchorage or moorage, readily identifiable on a current chart or map; a description of the means by which the vessel, watercraft or obstruction will be anchored or moored; and the length of time, including inclusive dates, for which the permit is desired.

B. The director may process the application in conjunction with review of an application for a United States Army Corps of Engineers permit, if such a permit is required.

C. The application shall be referred to the department of planning and community development for comment and recommendation thereon.

D. In the event that the director determines that granting the permit might deprive or materially interfere with reasonable water access of privately or publicly owned properties, the director shall notify such property owners and/or public agencies in writing and give them a reasonable time to comment on the application.

E. The director is authorized to impose on the applicant reasonable fees designed to reimburse the City for processing of the application and administration of the permit system, including any notice or publication required under this chapter. Fees shall be set by a schedule promulgated by the director through appropriate rules and regulations. Where anchorage is exclusively for the public benefit, such as the Sea Scouts, Maritime Schooling Vessels, or scientific research, such fees may be reduced or waived for a period of time not to exceed six months. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(C) (KCC 12.46.080).]


8.20.090 Permit renewals and extensions.

A. Any permit may be renewed for the same or a different duration under the terms, conditions and procedures specified in this chapter for original applications; provided, that for renewal applications which, when considered together with the original permit or previous renewals, would create a continuous usage in excess of 365 days, the director shall take the following additional steps in processing the application:

1. Cause to be published in a City newspaper of general circulation a notice of the application soliciting public comment;

2. Post such notice in prominent places in the immediate vicinity of the moorage or anchorage; and

3. Notify and solicit comment from the State Commissioner of Public Lands.

B. The director may extend a permit past its expiration date if mechanical or structural failures or acts of nature have occurred which would make moving unsafe and a threat to life, the craft and/or property of others. The sole inability of a vessel, watercraft or obstruction to propel itself shall not, however, constitute grounds for an extension. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(C) (KCC 12.46.090).]


8.20.100 Suspension and revocation.

The director may upon written notice suspend or revoke permanently any permit previously granted under this chapter for any one or more of the following causes:

A. Failure of the holder to comply with any requirement of this chapter or rule or regulation adopted thereunder, or with any term or condition of the permit, or with any written notice from the director ordering corrective measures;

B. Failure of the holder to comply with any federal, State or local law, ordinance, rule or regulation pertaining to the subject craft or its use;

C. Discovery by the director that the permit was issued by mistake or on incorrect information or by the fraud of the applicant; or

D. Interference by the applicant, owner, master or any agent or employee thereof with the director or any other City official or employee in the performance of his legal duties. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(C) (KCC 12.46.100).]


8.20.110 Assignment of permit.

The anchoring and mooring permit is personal to the grantee and shall not be assigned except with the written consent of the director. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(C) (KCC 12.46.110).]


8.20.120 Lights and audible devices.

All vessels, watercraft and obstructions which are anchored or moored must comply with federal, State and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to the display of lights, sounding of audible devices and obstruction of navigation. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(C) (KCC 12.46.120).]


8.20.130 Declaration of nuisance.

All violations of this chapter are determined to be detrimental to the public safety, health and welfare and are declared public nuisances subject to abatement. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(C) (KCC 12.46.130).]


8.20.140 Right of entry.

Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce or determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the director or his duly authorized inspector has cause to believe that a violation of this chapter has been or is being committed, the inspector may board and enter any vessel, watercraft or obstruction at reasonable times to inspect the same, subject to the following conditions:

A. If such craft is occupied, the inspector shall present identification credentials, state the reason for the inspection, and demand entry;

B. If such craft is unoccupied, the inspector shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner, master or other persons having charge or control of the craft and demand entry. If the inspector is unable to locate the owner, master or such other persons, and he has reason to believe that conditions therein create an immediate and irreparable safety or health hazard, he shall make entry;

C. It is unlawful for any owner, master or any other person having charge, care or control of such craft to fail or neglect after proper demand has been given to permit prompt entry thereon where the inspector has reason to believe that conditions therein create an immediate and irreparable safety or health hazard;

D. Unless entry is consented to by the owner, master or person in control of the craft or conditions are believed to exist which create an immediate and irreparable safety or health hazard, the inspector, prior to entry, shall obtain a search warrant as authorized by the laws of the State of Washington. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(C) (KCC 12.46.140).]


8.20.150 Impoundment.

A. Grounds. The director may take immediate possession of and impound any vessel, watercraft or obstruction under the following conditions:

1. The vessel, watercraft or obstruction is moored or anchored after expiration, suspension, revocation or violation of an anchoring and mooring permit or appears after reasonable investigation to be abandoned; or

2. The vessel, watercraft or obstruction is in violation of this chapter and remains at anchor or moored 72 hours after service on the owner or master, either personally or by registered or certified mail, of an order from the director to remove the same; or

3. The vessel, watercraft or obstruction appears after reasonable investigation to be unsafe or incapable of water transportation.

B. Removal. The director may remove any vessel, watercraft or obstruction using such methods as in his judgment will prevent unnecessary damage to such vessel, watercraft or obstruction and/or assign the removal and impounding of such vessel, watercraft or obstruction to a private corporation.

C. Expenses. In the event possession is taken of any vessel, watercraft or obstruction the expenses incurred by the City in the removal, towing, impounding and moorage of the same shall be paid by such craft or the owner, master or other person in charge thereof. When a vessel, watercraft or obstruction is moored or impounded at a City facility, the director shall assess a reasonable moorage charge therefor, which shall be paid by such craft or the owner, master or other person in charge thereof. The director may decline to release possession of any vessel, watercraft or obstruction until all charges are paid.

D. Sale at Auction. In the event a vessel, watercraft or obstruction shall remain impounded for 90 days and the charges of towing and impounding remain unpaid, the director may sell the same at public auction. The City may maintain an action against the owner, master or person in charge of the vessel, watercraft or obstruction for the recovery of the expenses of towing and impounding, or the remaining balance thereof, in the event of sale of the same.

E. Liability. The director shall not be held personally responsible for damages incurred as a result of impound of a vessel, watercraft or obstruction so long as reasonable practices are employed in such operation. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(C) (KCC 12.46.150).]


8.20.160 Impoundment-in-place.

When taking possession of a vessel, watercraft or obstruction as authorized by KMC 8.20.150, the director may impound the vessel, watercraft or obstruction in place by posting the same with one or more signs or notices in conspicuous places stating “POLICE IMPOUND – KEEP OFF” and notifying the owner, master or person in charge of the impounding. The director may in his discretion appoint as custodian the owner or master, or the owner or operator of the facility or property where the vessel is moored or anchored. Upon the posting of such signs, it shall be unlawful for any person:

A. To move, load or unload, rebuild, or enter upon such vessel, watercraft or obstruction without written permission from the director, other than for necessary maintenance and repair to prevent deterioration of the same or sinking;

B. To remove, mutilate, destroy or conceal any notice or sign posted by the director or any other City official or employee under authority of law. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(C) (KCC 12.46.160).]


8.20.170 Abatement.

A. In addition to or as an alternative to any other judicial or administrative remedy provided in this chapter or by law or other ordinance, the director may order a condition in violation of this chapter to be abated. The director may order any person who creates or maintains such violation to commence corrective work and to complete the work within such time as the director determines reasonable under the circumstances.

B. If the required corrective work is not commenced or completed within the time specified, the director may proceed to abate the violation and cause the necessary work to be accomplished. The City of Kenmore shall have a lien for the cost of the work accomplished pursuant to this chapter, which shall be the joint and separate personal obligations of the person or persons responsible for the violation. The director shall cause a claim for lien to be filed for records with the division of records and elections.

C. The lien created by this chapter shall be paramount to all other liens, except for federal, State and county taxes, with which it shall be on a parity. The prosecuting attorney on behalf of the City of Kenmore may collect the abatement work costs by use of all appropriate legal remedies, including foreclosure of the lien. [Ord. 98-0035 § 1(C) (KCC 12.46.170).]


8.20.180 Penalty.

Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be penalized as set forth in Chapter 1.15 KMC. [Ord. 98-0035 § 2.]


Chapter 8.25 JUNK VEHICLES

Sections:

8.25.010    Purpose.

8.25.020    Junk vehicle – Definition.

8.25.030    Public nuisance – Exceptions.

8.25.040    Certification.

8.25.050    Abatement and removal – Notice.

8.25.060    Abatement and removal – Hearing and decision.

8.25.070    Enforcement.

8.25.080    Abatement and removal.

8.25.090    Costs of removal and disposal.


8.25.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for the abatement and removal of junk vehicles or parts of junk vehicles, as a public nuisance, from private property pursuant to RCW 46.55.240. [Ord. 18-0461 § 2.]


8.25.020 Junk vehicle – Definition.

“Junk vehicle” means any vehicle that meets at least three of the following requirements:

A. Is three years old or older;

B. Is extensively damaged, including but not limited to: a broken window or windshield, or missing wheels, tires, motor or transmission;

C. Is apparently inoperable; or

D. Has an approximate fair market value equal only to the approximate value of the scrap in it. [Ord. 18-0461 § 2; Ord. 02-0161 § 1. Formerly 8.25.010.]


8.25.030 Public nuisance – Exceptions.

A. Public Nuisance. It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance to park, store, abandon or retain a junk vehicle on private property, where the junk vehicle is visible from a public street, right-of-way, Lake Washington, Sammamish River, or any public or private ingress/egress easement. A junk vehicle that is in violation of this section shall be subject to abatement and removal in accordance with the procedures stated in this chapter, in addition to any other remedy or penalty provided for in this code.

B. Exceptions. This chapter shall not apply to a vehicle or part thereof which is: (1) completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner, where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or (2) stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler or licensed vehicle dealer and is fenced in accordance with RCW 46.80.130. [Ord. 18-0461 § 2; Ord. 17-0442 § 5 (Exh. A); Ord. 02-0161 § 2. Formerly 8.25.020.]


8.25.040 Certification.

The city manager or the city manager’s designee (the certifying individual) may inspect and certify that a vehicle meets the requirements to be a junk vehicle. The certification shall be in writing and shall record the make and vehicle identification number and license number of the vehicle if available. The certifying individual shall verify that the approximate value of the junk vehicle is equivalent only to the approximate value of the parts, and describe the damage to the vehicle or the missing equipment or vehicle parts, as applicable, to establish that KMC 8.25.020(B) and/or (D) are satisfied. [Ord. 18-0461 § 2.]


8.25.050 Abatement and removal – Notice.

A. If the certifying individual determines that a vehicle, or part of a vehicle, is a junk vehicle in violation of this chapter, the certifying individual shall provide notice of the determination to the last registered vehicle owner of record and the property owner of record by certified mail with a five-day return receipt requested. The notice shall state the City’s intent to dispose of the junk vehicle, that a hearing may be requested before the hearing examiner, and that if no hearing is requested within 15 days from the date of the notice, the vehicle or vehicle parts shall be removed.

B. If a request for a hearing is received within 15 days of the date of the notice, a notice stating the time, location and date of the hearing on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or vehicle parts as a public nuisance shall be mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return receipt requested, to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owner of record of the vehicle unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership.

C. If no request for hearing is received within 15 days of the date of the notice, then no person properly served may contest the contents of the notice. [Ord. 18-0461 § 2.]


8.25.060 Abatement and removal – Hearing and decision.

A. The hearing examiner shall conduct the hearing on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or vehicle parts as a public nuisance. The City and the person(s) to whom the notice was issued may participate in the hearing and each party, or its legal representatives, may call witnesses and present evidence and rebuttal. The standards and procedures stated in KMC 1.20.150 shall apply.

B. The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing or present a written statement in time for consideration at the hearing and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, stating the reason for the denial. If the hearing examiner determines that the vehicle was placed on the land without consent of the land owner and that the land owner has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, then the City shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise collect the cost from the land owner; provided, that nothing in this chapter shall relieve the property owner from any civil penalties which may accrue from any code violation related to the improper placement, parking, or storage of vehicles or parts thereof.

C. The hearing examiner shall issue a written decision within 10 business days following the conclusion of the hearing. The decision shall contain findings and conclusions based on the record which include a determination of whether the vehicle is a junk vehicle in violation of this chapter. Within two business days of the issuance of the written decision, the hearing examiner shall cause a copy of the written decision to be served upon the parties by mail in accordance with KMC 1.20.060(B)(2).

D. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be final unless the decision is appealed to superior court in accordance with KMC 1.20.210. [Ord. 18-0461 § 2.]


8.25.070 Enforcement.

If a person entitled to notice under KMC 8.25.050 does not timely request a hearing, or after a hearing the hearing examiner finds that the vehicle is a junk vehicle in violation of this chapter, the City may enforce the violation in court. Prior to enforcing the violation in court, the City shall send notice via regular U.S. mail to those persons entitled to notice under KMC 8.25.050(B), informing them that if they do not grant the City permission to enter the property and remove the junk vehicle(s), or parts of vehicles, within 10 days of the mailing of the notice, that the City will commence an action to obtain authority to enter the property to abate and remove the junk vehicle(s), or part(s) thereof. The notice shall state that the City is entitled to recover all costs incurred, including but not limited to court costs, filing costs, lien fees, and attorney’s fees incurred in the abatement and removal proceedings. [Ord. 18-0461 § 2.]


8.25.080 Abatement and removal.

After notice has been given that the City intends to dispose of the vehicle(s), or part(s) thereof, and after a hearing has been held if requested consistent with this chapter, the vehicle(s) or part(s) thereof shall be removed at the direction of a law enforcement officer or code enforcement officer. The vehicle(s), or part(s) thereof, shall be disposed at a licensed vehicle wrecker, hulk hauler or scrap processor with notice given to the Washington State Patrol and to the Department of Licensing that the vehicle has been wrecked. [Ord. 18-0461 § 2.]


8.25.090 Costs of removal and disposal.

A. The costs of removal and disposal of the vehicle shall be assessed against the last registered owner of the vehicle if the identity of the owner can be determined unless the owner in the transfer of ownership complied with RCW 46.12.650, or against the property and the owner of the property on which the vehicle is stored subject to KMC 8.25.060(B), or both. If both the owner of the vehicle and the property owner are assessed the costs of removal, then liability for the costs shall be their joint and separate obligation.

B. The costs of removal and disposal shall include, but not be limited to, court costs, filing fees, lien fees, attorney’s fees, administrative costs, wrecking and towing costs, and all other amounts related to the abatement, removal and disposition of the vehicle(s) or part(s) thereof. [Ord. 18-0461 § 2.]


Chapter 8.30 EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN

Sections:

8.30.010    Purpose.

8.30.020    Emergency management policy.

8.30.030    Definitions.

8.30.040    Emergency operations plan.

8.30.050    Emergency management organization.

8.30.060    Disaster emergency powers of the manager.

8.30.070    Disaster and emergency powers of the emergency coordinator.

8.30.080    Functions and duties of departments and employees.

8.30.090    Private liability.

8.30.100    Penalty.


8.30.010 Purpose.

The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery for persons and property within Kenmore in the event of an emergency or disaster, and to provide for the coordination of emergency functions and services of Kenmore with the emergency services coordinating agency and other affected public agencies and private persons, corporations and organizations. Any expenditures made in connection with such emergency management activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of Kenmore. [Ord. 01-0106 § 1.]


8.30.020 Emergency management policy.

It is the policy of Kenmore to make effective preparation and use of manpower, resources, and facilities for dealing with any emergency or disaster that may occur. Disasters and emergencies, by their very nature, may disrupt or destroy existing systems and the capability of the City of Kenmore to respond to protect life, public health and public property. Therefore, citizens are advised to be prepared to be on their own for up to 72 hours should an emergency or disaster occur. [Ord. 01-0106 § 2.]


8.30.030 Definitions.

A. “Deputy emergency coordinator” shall mean the person appointed by the emergency coordinator to represent him/her in his or her absence.

B. “Emergency or disaster”, as used in this chapter, shall mean an event or set of circumstances which:

1. Demands immediate action to preserve public health, protect life, protect public property, or to provide relief to any stricken who are within the City overtaken by such occurrences; or

2. Reaches such a dimension or degree of destructiveness as to warrant the city manager proclaiming the existence of a disaster or the Governor declaring a state of emergency in accordance with appropriate local and State statute.

C. “Emergency coordinator” shall mean the person appointed by the manager responsible for the administration and operation of the emergency management program for the City of Kenmore.

D. “Emergency management” shall mean the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which the military forces are primarily responsible, to mitigate, prepare for, respond to and recover from emergencies and disasters and to aid victims suffering from injury or damage resulting from disasters caused by all hazards, whether natural or manmade, and to provide support for search and rescue operations for persons or property in distress. [Ord. 01-0106 §§ 3 – 6.]


8.30.040 Emergency operations plan.

The emergency operations plan, prepared by the emergency coordinator and promulgated by the manager is official emergency operations plan of the City of Kenmore. The emergency coordinator shall file a copy of said plan in the office of the city clerk, and distribute copies of said plan to appropriate City departments. [Ord. 01-0106 § 7.]


8.30.050 Emergency management organization.

The emergency management organization of the City of Kenmore is hereby created, and shall consist of:

A. The city manager who shall be the administrative head and have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the emergency management program for the City of Kenmore and direct responsibility for the emergency operations of departments in Kenmore.

B. The emergency coordinator, who shall be appointed by the city manager and who shall develop and maintain the emergency operations plan and program in cooperation with the emergency services coordinating agency and the emergency management committee and shall have such other duties as may be assigned to him or her by the city manager.

C. An emergency management committee appointed by the city manager that shall provide staff support to the emergency coordinator in the development, implementation and maintenance of the emergency operations plan, and to staff the emergency operations center and perform any other necessary functions during an emergency or disaster. The committee shall consist of such key personnel as are designated by the department directors, personnel from the emergency services coordinating agency and such personnel from outside professional and volunteer organizations having key roles in emergency preparedness, planning and response activities as determined by the director of the emergency services coordination agency.

D. The City of Kenmore has, in conjunction with other cities, in consideration of mutual benefits to be derived, and as authorized under Chapter 39.34 RCW, formed the emergency services coordinating agency to provide combined emergency management services in accordance with Chapter 38.52 RCW.

E. Other as deemed appropriate by the City of Kenmore. [Ord. 01-0106 § 8.]


8.30.060 Disaster emergency powers of the manager.

In the event of a proclamation of a disaster as herein provided, or upon the proclamation of a state of extreme emergency by the Governor of the State, the city manager is hereby empowered:

A. To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such disaster; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the Kenmore council;

B. To proclaim a local emergency when, in the opinion of the city manager, the resources of the City area or region are inadequate to cope with the disaster;

C. To request the city manager to proclaim a local emergency when, in the opinion of the city manager, the resources of the area or region are inadequate to cope with the disaster;

D. To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of the life and property of the people and to bind the City of Kenmore for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use;

E. To control and direct the efforts of the emergency management organization of the City of Kenmore for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;

F. To require emergency services of any Kenmore officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a state of extreme emergency by the Governor in the region in which Kenmore is located, to command the aid of as many citizens of Kenmore as may be deemed necessary in the execution of the city manager’s duties, and such persons to be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by State law for registered emergency workers;

G. To requisition necessary personnel or material of any City department or agency;

H. To execute all of the special powers conferred upon the city manager by this chapter, by any other statute, agreement or lawful authority, as necessary;

I. Other as deemed appropriate by the City of Kenmore. [Ord. 01-0106 § 9.]


8.30.070 Disaster and emergency powers of the emergency coordinator.

The emergency coordinator is hereby empowered:

A. To request the manager to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of the disaster and the termination thereof, if the city council is in session or to issue such proclamation, if the city council is not in session, subject to confirmation by the city council at the earliest practicable time;

B. To direct coordination and cooperation between divisions, services and staff of the departments and services of Kenmore in carrying out the provisions of the emergency management plan, and to resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;

C. To represent the adoption by the city council emergency management policies and mutual aid agreements;

D. To act on behalf of the city manager if he or she is unable to carry out his or her duties, in carrying out purposes of this chapter or the provisions of the emergency management plan;

E. To represent the emergency management organization of the City of Kenmore in dealing with issues pertaining to emergency management;

F. To prepare and maintain the emergency management plan of the City of Kenmore and manage the day-to-day responsibilities of the emergency management program activities of the City in coordination of the emergency services coordination agency;

G. Other as deemed appropriate by the City of Kenmore. [Ord. 01-0106 § 10.]


8.30.080 Functions and duties of departments and employees.

The city council hereby assigns to the various departments and so the officers and employees thereof the functions, duties, and powers set forth in the emergency management plan referenced in KMC 8.30.070. [Ord. 01-0106 § 11.]


8.30.090 Private liability.

No individual, firm, association, corporation or other party owning, maintaining or controlling any building or premises, who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the City of Kenmore a license or privilege or otherwise permits said City to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such building or emergency or disaster, or their successors in interest, or the agents or employees of any of them, shall be subject to liability for injuries sustained by any person while in or upon said building in or premises as a result of any act or omission in connection with the upkeep or maintenance thereof except a willful act of misconduct, when such a person has entered or gone into or upon said building or premises for the purpose of seeking refuge therein during an emergency or disaster or an attack by enemies of the United States or during a disaster drill, exercise or test ordered by a lawful authority. [Ord. 01-0106 § 12.]


8.30.100 Penalty.

Any person who shall:

A. Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed upon such member by virtue of this chapter;

B. Do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this chapter if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of the City, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof;

C. Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency management agency of the State, shall upon conviction be fined in any sum not exceeding $1,000, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both, at the discretion of the court. [Ord. 01-0106 § 13.]


Chapter 8.35 PUBLIC NUISANCES

Sections:

8.35.010    Unlawful public nuisances declared.

8.35.020    Definitions.

8.35.030    Enforcement and violations.


8.35.010 Unlawful public nuisances declared.

It shall be a public nuisance for any person owning, occupying, leasing or having charge or possession of any property in the City to maintain or allow to be maintained on such property where visible from a public street, right-of-way, Lake Washington, Sammamish River, or public/private ingress/egress easement any of the following conditions:

A. Public Nuisances.

1. The accumulation of weeds contained in the then-current King County Noxious Weeds List or contained within then-current Chapter 16-750 WAC, Noxious Weed List Classes A, B, C.

2. Neglected or improperly maintained landscaping, including but not limited to dead, debris-laden, weed-infested or overgrown vegetation, such as trees, shrubs, hedges, grass and ground covers, or vegetation dying as a result of physical damage, disease, insect infestation or lack of water. For purposes of this subsection, a lawn area shall be deemed overgrown if 50 percent or more of its area exceeds 12 inches in height.

3. Any vegetation that is growing rampant and unmaintained so as to provide unsightly, unsanitary and/or unsafe conditions, is destructive to other vegetation, that blocks public rights-of-way as described in KMC 12.70.040, that blocks the sight lines within the public rights-of-way, or that impacts or threatens to impact public utilities.

4. Except when placed there for removal for a period of less than 14 days, the exterior accumulation of broken, abandoned or discarded furniture or other household equipment or fixtures, packing boxes, lumber, junk, trash, rubbish or other materials or debris. Prohibited actions include the dumping, spillage or storage of solids or liquids, which may negatively impact the visual or olfactory nature of the area.

5. Storage or maintenance in a residential zone of any metal storage bin or container with a horizontal surface area of 120 square feet or greater (10 by 12).

6. Open storage of rubbish or junk including, but not limited to, refuse, garbage, scrap metal or lumber, concrete, asphalt, tin cans, tires and piles of earth, not including compost bins.

7. Combustible material likely to become easily ignited or debris resulting from any fire and which constitutes a fire hazard, as defined in the fire code as adopted by the City pursuant to KMC 15.10.010.

8. Abandoned vehicles, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or remnant parts thereof.

9. The exterior storage or maintenance of parts or machinery of any type or description unless specifically authorized by a City license or permit; building materials or merchandise unless specifically authorized by use permit; or construction equipment except while excavation, construction, or demolition operations covered by an active building permit or other City permit are in progress on the subject or adjoining property.

10. The exterior storage of used tires in a manner that allows accumulation of water that may create a health hazard.

B. Unsafe Structures or Buildings.

1. Buildings, fences or other structures which are cracked, broken, leaning, fallen, decayed, deteriorated or defaced or in any condition that poses a life/safety hazard or attractive nuisance to children.

2. Any condition constituting a “substandard building” as defined in the adopted codes referenced in Chapter 15.20 KMC.

C. Vehicles, Boats, Trailers or Other Mobile Equipment Storage Which Presents Potential Public Health, Safety or Fire Hazards.

1. The parking or storage of any vehicle, boat, trailer, camper, motor home, or other mobile equipment, whether or not motorized, or portions or parts and components thereof, on property used or zoned for residential purposes, if:

a. Located on any front lawn or front yard; or

b. Located in any side or rear yard so as to prevent a three-foot-wide continuous fire access way from the front of the property.

D. Right-of-Way or Public Property Encroachment. Obstruction or encroachment upon any public property, including but not limited to any public street, sidewalk, highway, right-of-way, park or building, without prior City consent. Such obstructions or encroachments include but are not limited to overgrown trees and shrubs, building materials, merchandise or other personal property and buildings or portions of buildings or structures, fences or retaining walls protruding onto public property.

E. Other Nuisances.

1. Land, as a result of grading operations, excavation or fill, causes erosion, subsidence, or surface water drainage problems of such magnitude as to be injurious to the public health, safety, and welfare or to public properties or rights-of-way.

2. Maintenance of any substance which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may either cause, or substantially contribute to, an increase in mortality or serious illness or pose a significant present or potential hazard to human health or the environment if improperly managed.

3. The existence of any property condition which is unlawful or declared to be a public nuisance pursuant to any other provision of the Kenmore Municipal Code or the Revised Code of Washington (RCW) or the Washington Administrative Code (WAC). This subsection shall be construed to place an affirmative duty on property owners and occupants to maintain their property in conformity with all applicable codes. Each day that any condition which constitutes a public nuisance continues shall be deemed to be a separate violation of this chapter. [Ord. 17-0442 § 7 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0171 § 1.]


8.35.020 Definitions.

“Graffiti” means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure or design that is written, marked, etched, scratched or drawn or painted on any real or personal property regardless of its content or nature of the material used in the commission of the act.

“Junk” shall mean any cast-off, damaged, discarded, obsolete, salvaged, scrapped, unusable, worn out or wrecked object, thing or material, including tires.

“Property” shall mean any real property or lot or parcel of land, including any alley, sidewalk or parkway abutting such lot or parcel of land.

“Substandard building” shall mean any building or portion thereof that is determined to be an unsafe building in accordance with the adopted codes referenced in Chapter 15.20 KMC, or any building or portion thereof, including any dwelling unit, guest room or suite of rooms, or the premises on which the same is located, in which there exists any of the conditions referenced in this section to an extent that endangers life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof, shall be deemed and hereby are declared to be substandard. [Ord. 17-0442 § 8 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0171 § 2.]


8.35.030 Enforcement and violations. 

Violations of this chapter shall be processed pursuant to Chapter 1.20 KMC as now in effect, or as may be subsequently amended. [Ord. 03-0171 § 3.]


Chapter 8.40 SPECIAL EVENTS

Sections:

8.40.010    Title.

8.40.015    Purpose.

8.40.020    Definitions.

8.40.025    Special event permit required.

8.40.030    Exceptions to special event permit requirement.

8.40.035    Issuance of a special event permit does not obligate City services.

8.40.040    Priority of special event permit issuance.

8.40.045    Use of City seal or name prohibited.

8.40.050    Time for filing application for special event permit – Time for notifying city manager of demonstration.

8.40.055    When application for special event permit is deemed complete.

8.40.060    Date of special event not confirmed until permit issued.

8.40.065    Content of special event permit application.

8.40.070    Conditions affecting the issuance of a special event permit.

8.40.075    Denial of a special event permit.

8.40.080    Display of special event permit required.

8.40.085    Contents of special event permit.

8.40.090    Insurance and indemnity required to conduct special event.

8.40.095    Waiver of insurance requirements.

8.40.100    Revocation of special event permit.

8.40.105    Cost recovery for special events.

8.40.110    Expressive activity special event.

8.40.120    City manager authorized to adopt rules and regulations.

8.40.125    Enforcement authority.

8.40.130    Unlawful to conduct or promote attendance at special event without permit.

8.40.135    Other permits and licenses.

8.40.140    Unlawful to sell goods in special event venue without authorization.

8.40.145    Unlawful selling of tickets to special event within special event venue.

8.40.150    Unlawful to display signs in special event venue.

8.40.165    Unlawful to interfere with special event or demonstration.

8.40.170    Cost recovery for unlawful special event.


8.40.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as the “special events ordinance.” [Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.015 Purpose.

It is the purpose of the city council to establish a process for permitting special events conducted by both the private and public sectors on private or public property that affect the ordinary use of the property, and that use City streets, facilities or services. It is recognized that these special events enhance the Kenmore lifestyle and provide benefits to the citizens through the creation of unique venues for expression and entertainment that are not normally provided as a part of governmental services. By recognizing special event venues, it is further intended to supersede other City regulations, to provide a coordinated process for the regulation of certain activities to be conducted in conjunction with special events, to ensure the health and safety of patrons of special events, to prohibit illegal activity from occurring within special event venues, and to protect the rights and interests granted a special event permit holder as well as the City. [Ord. 17-0442 § 9 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.020 Definitions.

A. “Applicant” means a person who files an application for a permit under this chapter and who is either the event organizer or authorized agent of such person.

B. “Building” means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. It includes push carts or sidewalk cafes, for which the sale of goods, food or beverages has been authorized.

C. “City manager” means the City of Kenmore city manager or his or her designee(s).

D. “Demonstration” means a public display of group opinion as by a rally or march, the principal purpose of which is expressive activity.

E. “Event” is a special event.

F. “Event organizer” means any person who conducts, manages, promotes, organizes, aids or solicits attendance at a special event. Upon submittal of an application for a special event permit, the event organizer shall also mean the “applicant” as referenced throughout this chapter.

G. “Expressive activity” includes conduct the sole or principal object of which is the expression, dissemination, or communication by verbal, visual, literary, or auditory means of political or religious opinion, views, or ideas and for which no fee or donation is charged or required as a condition of participation in or attendance at such activity. For purposes of this chapter, expressive activity does not include sports events, including, but not limited to, marathons, fundraising events, or events the principal purpose of which is entertainment.

H. “Goods” means goods, wares, personal property, merchandise or any other similar item which is generally sold.

I. “March” means an organized walk or event whose principal purpose is expressive activity in service of a public cause.

J. “Rally” means a gathering whose principal purpose is expressive activity, especially one intended to inspire enthusiasm for a cause.

K. “Sidewalk” means that portion of a street, other than the roadway, set apart by curbs, barriers, markings or other delineation for pedestrian travel.

L. “Sign” means any sign, pennant, flag, banner, inflatable display, or other attention-seeking device.

M. “Special event” includes but is not limited to the following:

1. Any organized formation, parade, procession or assembly, and which may include animals, vehicles or any combination thereof, which is to assemble or travel in unison on any street and which does not comply with normal or usual traffic regulations or controls.

2. Any organized assemblage of persons at any public beach or public park which is to gather for a common purpose under the direction and control of a person, which interferes with normal or ordinary use of the property.

3. Any organized assemblage or gathering of 75 or more persons at any private property which does not comply with normal or ordinary use of the property.

4. Rentals or sales on publicly owned property.

5. Examples of special events include, but are not limited to, concerts, performances, parades, circuses, fairs, festivals, block parties, community events, demonstrations, farmer or outdoor market, mass participation sports (such as marathons and running events, fundraising walks, fun runs, bicycle races or tours), golf tournaments, spectator sports (such as football, basketball and baseball games) or jet-ski rentals at a public park.

N. “Special event permit” means a permit issued under this chapter.

O. “Special event venue” means that area for which a special event permit has been issued.

P. “Street” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Street includes highway.

Q. “Vendor” means any person who sells or offers to sell any goods, food, or beverages within a special event venue. [Ord. 17-0442 § 10 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.025 Special event permit required.

A. Except as provided in this chapter, an event organizer of a special event shall obtain a special event permit from the city manager. The city manager reserves the right to require a special event permit.

B. The city manager is authorized to issue permits for special events occurring within the City limits of the City pursuant to this chapter. The city manager is authorized to determine the special event venue. The city manager shall set reasonable boundaries for the special event venue, balancing the special event requirements and public health, safety, and welfare. The city manager is authorized to coordinate the issuance of a special event permit with other public agencies through whose jurisdiction or property the event or portion thereof occurs and to issue a special event permit upon the concurrence of other public agencies involved. [Ord. 17-0442 § 11 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.030 Exceptions to special event permit requirement.

A. A special event permit is not required for any activity listed in subsection C of this section.

B. Although not required to obtain a special event permit, an event organizer of an activity exempted pursuant to subsection C of this section is required to comply with all other local, State and Federal regulations applicable to the activity.

C. The following activities are exempt from the special event permit requirement:

1. Funeral processions by a licensed mortuary;

2. Weddings and wedding processions;

3. Lawful picketing on sidewalks;

4. Special events on private property with fewer than 75 people;

5. Special events that are sponsored or conducted by the City of Kenmore, and activities conducted by other governmental agency acting within the scope of its authority;

6. A fireworks display involving an assembly of persons gathered on City public property for the primary purpose of watching such fireworks display, unless the fireworks display also involves the sale of food or alcohol at a location not exempted by subsection (C)(8) of this section;

7. Special events conducted entirely on private property intended for such activities that do not involve the use of or have an impact on public property or facilities and that do not require the provision of City public safety services. However, an application for a special event may be submitted for any special event conducted on private property if the event organizer so desires;

8. Activities held inside a building or a facility intended for such activities that do not involve the use of or have an impact on public property or facilities and that do not require the provision of City public safety services; and

9. Facilities rented and approved by the City through other means of reserving or contracting. [Ord. 17-0442 § 12 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.035 Issuance of a special event permit does not obligate City services.

Issuance of a special event permit pursuant to this chapter does not obligate or require the city manager to provide City services, equipment or personnel in support of an event. [Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.040 Priority of special event permit issuance.

Except for events sponsored by the City, and wherever possible, priority shall be given for the issuance of a special event permit to local tax-exempt nonprofit organizations operating in and providing services to the citizens of the City or county. [Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.045 Use of City seal or name prohibited.

It is unlawful for any event organizer to use in the title of an event the words “The City of Kenmore” or “City of Kenmore,” or a facsimile of the seal of the City of Kenmore, without the prior approval of the city manager. [Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.050 Time for filing application for special event permit – Time for notifying city manager of demonstration.

A. An application for a special event permit shall be filed with the city manager not less than 60 calendar days, nor more than two years, before the time when it is proposed to conduct the special event. Upon good cause shown and provided that there is no significant risk or burden to the City, the city manager may, in his or her discretion, allow a later filing.

B. An application for an expressive activity special event permit shall be filed with the city manager no less than seven calendar days before the time when it is proposed to conduct the expressive activity special event. Upon good cause shown and provided that no risk or burden to the City ensues, the city manager may, in his or her discretion, allow a later filing. [Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.055 When application for special event permit is deemed complete.

An application for a special event permit is deemed completed when the applicant has provided all of the information required in KMC 8.40.065, including any additional information required by the city manager. [Ord. 17-0442 § 13 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.060 Date of special event not confirmed until permit issued.

Notwithstanding the city manager’s acceptance of a completed application, no date shall be considered confirmed until a special event permit is issued. [Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.065 Content of special event permit application.

Applications for a special event permit may include the following:

A. An application form provided by the department and completed by the applicant that includes, at minimum, the name, address, email, and telephone number of the applicant; and

B. An application fee pursuant to the City’s current fee schedule. [Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.070 Conditions affecting the issuance of a special event permit.

A. The city manager may issue a special event permit when all of the conditions listed in subsections (A)(1) through (10) of this section are met.

1. The event will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of aerial or marine navigation.

2. The event will not substantially interrupt public transportation or other vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the area of its route.

3. The event will not cause an unresolvable conflict with construction or development in the public right-of-way or at a public facility.

4. The event will not block traffic lanes or close streets during peak commuter hours on weekdays between 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. on State Route 522 or any streets designated as “principal arterials.”

5. The event will not require the diversion of a great number of police employees from their normal duties, thereby preventing reasonable police protection to the remainder of the City.

6. The concentration of persons, animals or vehicles will not unduly interfere with the movement of police, fire, ambulance, and other emergency vehicles on the streets.

7. The event will move from its assembly location to its disbanding location expeditiously and without stopping en route.

8. The event will not substantially interfere with any other special event for which a permit has already been granted or with the provision of City services in support of other scheduled events or unscheduled governmental functions such as visits of chiefs of state.

9. The event will not have unmitigatable adverse impact upon residential or business access and traffic circulation in the same general venue.

10. If the event is a marathon, it will not occur within 30 calendar days of another marathon.

B. To make the determination under subsection A of this section, the city manager shall consider pedestrian and traffic circulation, traffic volume and population density.

C. In order to ensure that the conditions in subsection A of this section are met, the city manager may place conditions on the special event permit. [Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.075 Denial of a special event permit.

A. The city manager may deny a special event permit if the city manager determines that the applicant has not:

1. Provided a sufficient number of traffic controllers trained, certified and appointed pursuant to the City’s road standards;

2. Provided sufficient monitors for crowd control and safety;

3. Provided sufficient safety, health or sanitation equipment, services or facilities that are reasonably necessary to ensure that the event will be conducted with due regard for safety;

4. Provided sufficient off-site parking or shuttle service, or both, when required to minimize any substantial adverse impacts on general parking and traffic circulation in the vicinity of the event; or

5. Met all of the requirements for submitting an application for a special event permit.

B. The city manager may deny a special event permit if the city manager determines that:

1. The event will create the imminent possibility of violent disorderly conduct likely to endanger public safety or to result in significant property damage;

2. The event will violate public health or safety laws;

3. The event fails to conform to the requirements of law or duly established City ordinance;

4. The applicant demonstrates an inability or unwillingness to conduct an event pursuant to the terms and conditions of this chapter;

5. The applicant has failed to conduct a previously authorized or exempted special event in accordance with law or the terms of a permit, or both;

6. The event will require the exclusive use of beach or park areas during any period from Memorial Day through Labor Day in a manner which will adversely impact upon the reasonable use or access to those areas by the general public;

7. The applicant has not obtained the approval of any other public agency within whose jurisdiction the special event or portion thereof will occur;

8. The applicant has failed to provide an adequate first aid or emergency medical services plan based on event risk factors; or

9. The applicant has failed to comply with any term of this chapter, or with any condition of a special event permit previously issued to the applicant.

C. If the city manager denies the application for the special event permit pursuant to this section, he or she shall notify the applicant in writing as soon as is reasonably practical. The city manager’s decision shall be final. [Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.080 Display of special event permit required.

A copy of the special event permit shall be displayed in the special event venue in the method prescribed by the city manager applicable to the particular event and shall be exhibited upon demand of any City official. [Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.085 Contents of special event permit.

A. A special event permit shall contain the following information or conditions:

1. The location of the special event venue, which may be identified by a map attached to the special event permit;

2. The date, assembly area, time for assembly and starting time of the special event;

3. The specific route plan to the special event;

4. The minimum and maximum speeds of the special event;

5. The number of persons, number and types of animals, vehicles and bands, other musical units and equipment capable of producing sound, if any, and limitations thereon pertaining to noise mitigation;

6. The maximum interval of space to be maintained between booths or other structures to be used for the special event;

7. The portion of the street and sidewalk that is to be occupied by the event and the location of reviewing or audience stands, if any;

8. The number and location of traffic controllers, monitors, other support personnel and equipment and barricades to be furnished by the special event organizer;

9. The area and time for disbanding;

10. Conditions or restrictions on the use of alcoholic beverages and authorization for and conditions of the exclusive control or regulation of vendors and related sales activity by the event organizer during the special event;

11. Provisions for any required emergency medical services; and

12. Such other information and conditions as are reasonably necessary for the conduct of the special event and the enforcement of this chapter, including the requirement for the on-site presence of the event organizer or its designated representative for all event coordination and management purposes.

B. As a condition of the issuance of a special event permit, the applicant shall be required to make adequate provisions for cleaning up the area or route of the event both during and upon completion of the event and to return the area or route to the same condition of material preservation and cleanliness as existed prior to the event. [Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.090 Insurance and indemnity required to conduct special event.

A. Indemnification/Hold Harmless. Applicant shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City, its officers, officials, employees and volunteers from and against any and all claims, suits, actions, or liabilities for injury or death of any person, or for loss or damage to property, which arises out of the use of special event venue or from any activity, work or thing done, permitted, or suffered by applicant in or about the special event venue, except only such injury or damage as shall have been occasioned by the sole negligence of the City.

B. Insurance Term. Applicant shall procure and maintain for the duration of the use or rental period insurance against claims for injuries to persons or damage to property which may arise from or in connection with the use of the facilities and the activities of the applicant and his or her guests, representatives, volunteers and employees.

C. No Limitation. Applicant’s maintenance of insurance as required by the special events permit shall not be construed to limit the liability of the applicant to the coverage provided by such insurance, or otherwise limit the City’s recourse to any remedy available at law or in equity.

D. Required Insurance. Applicant’s required insurance shall be as follows:

General liability insurance shall be at least as broad as Insurance Services Office (ISO) occurrence form CG 00 01 covering premises, operations, products-completed operations and contractual liability. The City shall be named as an additional insured on applicant’s general liability insurance policy using ISO additional insured-managers or lessors of premises Form CG 20 11 or an endorsement providing at least as broad coverage. The general liability insurance shall be written with limits no less than $1,000,000 each occurrence, $1,000,000 general aggregate.

The insurance policy shall contain, or be endorsed to contain, that the applicant’s insurance coverage shall be primary insurance as respect the City. Any insurance, self-insurance, or self-insured pool coverage maintained by the City shall be excess of the applicant’s insurance and shall not contribute with it.

E. City Full Availability of User Limits. If the applicant maintains higher insurance limits than the minimums shown above, the City shall be insured for the full available limits of commercial general and excess or umbrella liability maintained by the applicant, irrespective of whether such limits maintained by the applicant are greater than those required by this contract or whether any certificate of insurance furnished to the City evidences limits of liability lower than those maintained by the applicant.

F. Certificate of Insurance and Acceptability of Insurers. The applicant shall provide a certificate of insurance evidencing the required insurance before using the special event venue. [Ord. 17-0442 § 14 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.095 Waiver of insurance requirements.

A. Except for special events where the sale of alcoholic beverages is authorized or where a traffic control plan is required, the insurance requirements of KMC 8.40.090 may be waived by the city manager.

B. Even though insurance is waived, the city manager may require the event organizer of a special event to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City from any claim or liability arising from the event in conformance with KMC 8.40.090(F). [Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.100 Revocation of special event permit.

A. Any special event permit issued pursuant to this chapter is subject to revocation pursuant to this section.

B. A special event permit may be revoked if the city manager determines:

1. That the event cannot be conducted without violating the standards or conditions for special event permit issuance;

2. The event is being conducted in violation of any condition of the special event permit;

3. The event poses a threat to health or safety;

4. The event organizer or any person associated with the event has failed to obtain any other permit required pursuant to this code; or

5. The special event permit was issued in error or contrary to law.

C. Except as provided in subsection D of this section, notices of revocation shall be in writing and specifically set forth the reasons for the revocation.

D. If there is an emergency requiring immediate revocation of a special event permit, the city manager may notify the permit holder verbally of the revocation. [Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.105 Cost recovery for special events.

A. Upon approval of an application for a permit for a special event not protected under the First and Fourteenth Amendments of the U.S. Constitution, the city manager should provide the applicant with a statement of the estimated cost of City services and of equipment, materials and permit fees. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, or when funded or waived by the City, the city manager shall charge for the actual and indirect cost (including allocated salary, benefit and overhead costs associated with the position) for:

1. City personnel involvement in event traffic control, fire safety or other facility or event support; and

2. The use of City equipment and other nonpersonnel expense.

B. The city manager shall require payment of fees required pursuant to subsection A of this section, or a reasonable estimate thereof, at the time the completed application is approved, unless the city manager for good cause extends time for payment.

C. If the event organizer fails to comply with KMC 8.40.085(B), the event organizer will be billed for actual City costs for clean-up and repair of the area or route occasioned by the event. If the event organizer failed to comply with KMC 8.40.085(B) under a previously issued special event permit, the city manager may require the event organizer to deposit adequate surety in the form of cash or bond. [Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.110 Expressive activity special event.

A. When a special event permit is sought for an expressive activity such as a demonstration, rally, or march as defined in this chapter, the following exceptions shall apply:

1. Where the special event will not require temporary street closures, cost recovery, pursuant to KMC 8.40.105, shall be limited solely to a fee based on the cost of processing the permit application.

2. The insurance requirement of KMC 8.40.090 shall be waived; provided, that the event organizer has filed with the application a verified statement that he or she intends the special event purpose to be First Amendment expression and the cost of obtaining insurance is financially burdensome and would constitute an unreasonable burden on the right of First Amendment expression. The verified statement shall include the name and address of one insurance broker or other source for insurance coverage contacted to determine premium rates for coverage.

3. Where the special event will require temporary street closures and any one or more of the conditions of subsection (A)(4) of this section are met requiring the City to provide services in the interests of public health, safety, and welfare, the city manager may condition the issuance of the special event permit upon payment of actual, direct costs incurred by the City to a maximum of $500.00. Any fee schedule adopted by the City shall contain a provision for waiver of, or a sliding scale for payment of, fees for City services, including police costs, on the basis of ability to pay.

4. The city manager may deny a special event permit for a demonstration, rally or march if:

a. The special event will substantially interrupt public transportation or other vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the area of its route;

b. The special event will cause an irresolvable conflict with construction or development in the public right-of-way or at a public facility;

c. The special event will block traffic lanes or close streets during peak commuter hours on weekdays between 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. on streets designated as arterials by the City’s public works department;

d. The special event will require the diversion of police employees from their normal duties;

e. The concentration of persons, animals, or vehicles will unduly interfere with the movement of police, fire, ambulance, and other emergency vehicles on the streets;

f. The special event will substantially interfere with another special event for which a permit has already been granted or with the provision of City services in support of other scheduled special events; or

g. The special event will have significant adverse impact upon residential or business access and traffic circulation in the same general venue.

B. With regard to the permitting of expressive activity special events where the provisions in this section conflict with the provisions in any other section of this chapter, the provisions of this section shall prevail.

C. KMC 8.40.070 and 8.40.075 shall not apply to expressive activity special events. [Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.120 City manager authorized to adopt rules and regulations.

The city manager is authorized to promulgate additional rules and regulations that are consistent with and that further the terms and requirements set forth within this chapter and the provisions of law that pertain to the conduct and operation of a special event. [Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.125 Enforcement authority.

The city manager is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The city manager and his or her designated code enforcement officer may exercise any enforcement powers as set forth in Chapter 1.20 KMC. [Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.130 Unlawful to conduct or promote attendance at special event without permit.

A. It is unlawful to conduct a special event without a special event permit as required pursuant to this chapter.

B. It is unlawful for any person to conduct, promote or manage any special event for which a special event permit has not been issued. [Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.135 Other permits and licenses.

A. The issuance of a special event permit does not relieve any person from the obligation to obtain any other permit or license required pursuant to this code.

B. The issuance of any other permit or license issued pursuant to this code does not relieve any person from the obligation to obtain a special event permit pursuant to this chapter. [Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.140 Unlawful to sell goods in special event venue without authorization.

It is unlawful for any person to sell, resell, or offer to sell or resell any goods, food or beverages in a special event venue, except:

A. From any building; or

B. From any tent, booth or temporary structure expressly authorized pursuant to a special event permit; or

C. As authorized pursuant to a conditional use permit pursuant to the City of Kenmore zoning code. [Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.145 Unlawful selling of tickets to special event within special event venue.

It is unlawful for any person to sell for profit, or offer to sell for profit, any ticket of admission to a special event within a special event venue, except:

A. From any ticket office, booth, or other similar place established and maintained for the purpose of selling tickets; and

B. With the express authorization of the city manager pursuant to a special event permit. [Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.150 Unlawful to display signs in special event venue.

It is unlawful for any person to place, post, paint, erect, display, secure, or maintain any sign or advertising in violation of those provisions of Chapter 18.42 KMC, regulating signs and advertising displays, except with the express authorization of the city manager pursuant to a special event permit. [Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.165 Unlawful to interfere with special event or demonstration.

It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, impede or interfere with any authorized assembly, person, vehicle or animal participating in an event for which a special event permit has been issued. [Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


8.40.170 Cost recovery for unlawful special event.

Whenever a special event is conducted without a special event permit when one is required, or an event is conducted in violation of the terms of an issued special event permit, the event organizer shall be responsible for, and the city manager shall charge the event organizer for, all City costs incurred for personnel and equipment for a public safety response caused or necessitated by the adverse impacts of the event, or the violation of the special event permit, upon public safety. [Ord. 12-0335 § 1 (Exh. A).]


Chapter 8.44 HEAVY MANUFACTURING

Sections: 

8.44.010    Purpose.

8.44.020    Application of chapter.

8.44.030    Noise levels.

8.44.040    Enforcement and violations.


8.44.010 Purpose.

The city council finds that inadequately controlled noise generated by heavy manufacturing businesses and activities in the City adversely affects the health, safety and welfare of the residents and citizens of the City. Existing City ordinances, however, have not adequately protected the residents and citizens of the City from the adverse effects of such noise, particularly during nighttime hours. The Washington State Department of Ecology has adopted maximum noise levels for specific environments and properties to protect against adverse effects of noise. However, those noise levels are enforceable only with sound level meters and sound level programs, which are expensive to establish and difficult to enforce. The purpose of this chapter is to supplement existing City authority to control noise generated by heavy manufacturing businesses and activities in the City. [Ord. 15-0403 § 1.]


8.44.020 Application of chapter.

The rules and regulations of this chapter shall govern the operations and activities of heavy manufacturing, as that term is defined in KMC 18.20.1676. The standards and requirements of this chapter shall be complied with immediately, unless a compliance schedule or deadline is established as part of the standard or requirement. [Ord. 15-0403 § 1.]


8.44.030 Noise levels.

A. Noise levels for heavy manufacturing businesses and activities shall comply with Chapter 173-60 WAC. No person shall cause or permit noise to intrude onto other property in violation of Chapter 173-60 WAC or this chapter. The owner of the business or operator of the activity shall ensure that the noise levels are monitored by a technician with the qualifications contained in Chapter 173-58 WAC, using instruments that meet the requirements of Chapter 173-58 WAC, at the boundary line of the lot or lots on which the business is located or the activities are conducted. If the noise exceeds the permissible levels, the owner or operator shall take immediate action to satisfy the noise level requirements, and to prevent noise level violations in the future. At least quarterly, or more frequently if requested by the city manager (as defined in KMC 18.20.468), the owner or operator shall provide a report of the noise monitoring.

B. Each owner or operator of heavy manufacturing businesses or activities must file with the city manager a proposed plan for monitoring the noise levels of such businesses or activities, in such form and with such information and content as is required by the city manager. The owner or operator must modify the monitoring plan as requested and required by the city manager. The owner or operator must comply with the monitoring plan. [Ord. 15-0403 § 1.]


8.44.040 Enforcement and violations.

Violations of this chapter and the plan required by KMC 8.44.030 shall be processed pursuant to Chapter 1.20 KMC. [Ord. 15-0403 § 1.]


Chapter 8.50 PLASTIC BAG POLICY

Section:

8.50.010    Definitions.

8.50.020    Regulations.

8.50.030    Exemptions.

8.50.040    Violations.


8.50.010 Definitions.

A. “Compostable” means that the product completely breaks down into a stable product due to the action of microorganisms in a controlled, aerobic commercial process that results in a material safe and desirable as a soil amendment meeting the compost quality standards found under WAC 173-350-220 for metals, physical parameters, pathogens, manufactured inert material, and other testing parameters set by the local health department, has been found to degrade satisfactorily at the composting facility receiving the material, meets standard specification ASTM D6400, and has been certified as compostable by the Biodegradable Products Institute or similar national or international certification authority.

B. “Carryout bag” means any bag that is provided by a retail establishment at the checkstand, cash register, point-of-sale or other point of departure to a customer for use to transport or carry away purchases such as merchandise, goods or food from the retail establishment. This also includes bags provided for home delivery. Carryout bags do not include:

1. Bags used by consumers inside stores to package bulk items, such as fruit, vegetables, nuts, grains, candy, greeting cards or small hardware items such as nails, bolts or screws, contain or wrap frozen foods, meat or fish regardless of whether they are prepackaged, contain or wrap flowers, potted plants or other items where dampness may be a problem, contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods, or contain prescription drugs; or

2. A bag used to protect a purchased item from damaging or contaminating other purchased items when placed in a recycled paper bag or reusable bag, such as prepared take-out foods or prepared liquids intended for consumption away from the retail establishment; or

3. Newspaper bags, door-hanger bags, tire bags, laundry dry cleaning bags or bags sold in packages containing multiple bags for uses such as food storage, garbage, pet waste or yard waste.

C. “Recycled paper carryout bag” means a paper carryout bag provided by a store to a customer at the point-of-sale that meets all of the following requirements:

1. Except as provided in subsection (C)(2) of this section, the paper carryout bag contains an average of 40 percent postconsumer recycled materials;

2. An eight-pound or smaller recycled paper bag shall contain a minimum of 20 percent postconsumer recycled material;

3. The paper carryout bag is accepted for recycling in curbside programs in a majority of households that have access to curbside recycling programs in the City;

4. The paper carryout bag is capable of composting, consistent with the timeline and specifications of the American Society of Testing and Material (ASTM) Standard D6400, as published in Master Environmental Assessment on Single Use and Reusable Bags, March 2010; and

5. Printed on the paper carryout bag is the minimum percentage of postconsumer content.

D. “Retail establishment” means any person, corporation, partnership, business, facility, vendor, organization or individual that sells or provides merchandise, goods, or materials, including, without limitation, clothing, food, or personal items of any kind, directly to a customer; “retail establishment” includes, by way of example, and not limitation, any grocery store, department store, hardware store, pharmacy, liquor store, restaurant, catering truck, convenience store, and any other retail store or vendor, including temporary ones at farmers markets, street fairs, and festivals.

E. “Reusable carryout bag” means a bag made of cloth or other material with handles that is specifically designed and manufactured for long-term multiple reuse and meets all of the following requirements:

1. Is machine washable or made from a material that can be cleaned or disinfected; and

2. If made of film plastic, is a minimum of at least 2.25 mils thick.

F. “Single-use plastic carryout bag” means any bag that is less than 2.25 mils thick and is made from plastic or any nonrenewable resource.

G. “Pass-through charge” means a charge to be collected by retailers from their customers when providing plastic or recycled paper carryout bags, and retained by retailers to offset the cost of bags and other costs related to the pass-through charge. [Ord. 18-0465 § 1.]


8.50.020 Regulations.

A. No retail establishment in the City shall provide a carryout bag to a customer unless otherwise permitted pursuant to this chapter.

B. No retail establishment shall distribute a carryout bag at any City facility, City-managed concession, City-sponsored event, or City-permitted event unless otherwise permitted pursuant to this chapter.

C. Retail establishments in the City may, subject to this chapter, provide to a customer at the point-of-sale a reusable carryout bag or a recycled paper carryout bag.

D. No retail establishment in the City shall provide a paper carryout bag with a manufacturer’s stated capacity of one-eighth barrel (882 cubic inches) or larger that is not a recycled paper carryout bag.

E. A retail establishment may make reusable carryout bags available to customers through sale.

F. No retail establishment in the City shall use or provide polyethylene or other noncompostable plastic film bags tinted green or brown for customers to bag products in stores, as carryout bags, or for home delivery.

G. Any film bags meeting the definition of compostable that retail establishments provide to customers for food or other products, such as vegetables bagged in stores prior to checkout, must be tinted green or brown and shall be clearly labeled “COMPOSTABLE,” including language following the Federal Trade Commission’s “Green Guides.”

H. No film bag that retail establishments provide to customers to bag products in stores, as carryout bags, or for home delivery may be labeled with the term “biodegradable,” “degradable,” “decomposable,” or any similar terms, or in any way imply that the product will break down, fragment, biodegrade, or decompose in a landfill or other environment.

I. Each retail establishment that provides a customer with a reusable carryout bag or a recycled paper carryout bag shall collect a pass-through charge of not less than $0.05 for each reusable or recycled paper carryout bag provided. [Ord. 18-0465 § 1.]


8.50.030 Exemptions.

A. Notwithstanding the requirements contained in this chapter, retailer may not collect a pass-through charge from anyone with a voucher or electronic benefits card issued under programs including, but not limited to, Women, Infants and Children (WIC); Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF); Federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), also known as Basic Food; and the Washington State Food Assistance Program (FAP).

B. Food banks and other food assistance programs are exempt from the requirements for this chapter.

C. The city manager or designee may exempt a retail establishment from the requirements of this chapter for up to a one-year period, upon a request by the retail establishment showing that the conditions of this chapter would cause undue hardship. An “undue hardship” shall only be found in:

1. Circumstances or situations unique to the particular retail establishment, such that there are no reasonable alternatives to single-use plastic carryout bags or a pass-through charge cannot be collected; or

2. Circumstances or situations unique to the retail establishment, such that compliance with the requirements of this chapter would deprive a person of a legally protected right.

D. If a retail establishment requires an exemption beyond the initial exemption period, the retail establishment must reapply prior to the end of the exemption period and must demonstrate continued undue hardship if it wished to have the exemption extended. Extensions may only be granted for intervals not to exceed one year.

E. An exemption request shall include all information necessary for the City to make its decision, including, but not limited to, documentation showing the factual support for the claimed exemption. The city manager or designee may require the applicant to provide additional information to permit the City to determine facts regarding the exemption request.

F. The city manager or designee may approve the exemption request, in whole or in part, with or without conditions.

G. Exemption decisions are effective immediately. A party aggrieved by a final decision may appeal or seek review of the decision in accordance with applicable law. Unless another period of time applies under applicable law or court rule, an appeal of the decision must be filed within 21 calendar days from the date the final decision was served personally or placed in the United States mail, postage prepaid and properly addressed.

H. The city council may, by resolution, establish a fee for exemption requests. The fee shall be sufficient to cover the costs of processing the exemption request. [Ord. 18-0465 § 1.]


8.50.040 Violations.

A. Upon a first violation of any part of this chapter, the code enforcement officer may issue a notice of violation to the offending person or business. The notice of violation shall contain the date of and alleged type of violation. The notice of violation shall be regarded as a warning and no other sanctions shall be implemented. Notice shall be served upon the premises to the highest ranking employee currently on duty at the time of delivery.

B. If after the issuance of a notice of violation the code enforcement officer becomes aware of subsequent noncompliance, he or she has the authority to issue a civil infraction. Any subsequent violation of this chapter shall be designated as a Class 1 civil infraction. Each day of any such violation is a separate civil infraction; a notice of infraction may be issued for each day of any such violation. Civil infractions shall be heard and determined according to Chapter 7.80 RCW, as amended, and any applicable court rules.

C. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any retail establishment to penalize, discipline, or discriminate against any employee for performing any duty necessary to comply with this chapter. [Ord. 18-0465 § 1.]


Chapter 8.55 NOTICE OF RENT INCREASE

Section:

8.55.010    Definitions.

8.55.020    Regulations.

8.55.030    Provisions in violation of restrictions null and void.

8.55.040    Rental agreement that waives tenant’s remedies prohibited – Exception.


8.55.010 Definitions.

A. “Landlord” means a landlord as defined in and within the scope of RCW 59.18.030 and 59.18.040 of the Residential Landlord-Tenant Act of 1973 (RLTA) in effect at the time the rental agreement is executed. At the time of passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter, RLTA defined landlord as “the owner, lessor, or sublessor of the dwelling unit or the property of which it is a part,” and included any person designated as representative of the landlord, including, but not limited to, an agent, a resident manager, or a designated property manager.

B. “Rental agreement” means a rental agreement as defined in and within the scope of RCW 59.18.030 and 59.18.040 of the RLTA in effect at the time the rental agreement is executed. At the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the RLTA defined rental agreement as “all agreements which establish or modify the terms, conditions, rules, regulations, or any other provisions concerning the use and occupancy of a dwelling unit.”

C. “Rental unit” means a residential dwelling unit as defined in KMC 18.20.810, occupied or rented by a tenant.

D. “Tenant” means a tenant as defined in and within the scope of RCW 59.18.030 and 59.18.040 of the RLTA in effect at the time the rental agreement is executed. At the time of passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the RLTA defined “tenant” as “any person who is entitled to occupy a dwelling unit primarily for living or dwelling purposes under a rental agreement.” [Ord. 19-0484 § 2 (Exh. A).]


8.55.020 Regulations.

For any rental agreement or renewal of a rental agreement for a residential rental unit in the City of Kenmore entered into after September 1, 2019, the landlord shall include or shall be deemed to include a provision requiring a minimum of 90 days’ prior written notice whenever the periodic or monthly housing costs to be charged a tenant are to increase by 10 percent or more over the periodic or monthly rental rate charged the same tenant for the same rental unit and same services for any period or month during the preceding 12-month period. [Ord. 19-0484 § 2 (Exh. A).]


8.55.030 Provisions in violation of restrictions null and void.

Any provisions in violation of KMC 8.55.020 in a rental agreement are null and void and of no lawful force and effect. [Ord. 19-0484 § 2 (Exh. A).]


8.55.040  Rental agreement that waives tenant’s remedies prohibited – Exception.

A. No rental agreement, whether oral or written, may provide that the tenant waives or foregoes rights or remedies under this chapter, except as provided by subsection B of this section.

B. A landlord and tenant may agree, in writing, to waive specific requirements of this chapter if all of the following conditions have been met:

1. The agreement to waive specific provisions is in writing and identifies the specific provisions to be waived; and

2. The agreement may not appear in a standard form written lease or rental agreement; and

3. There is no substantial inequality in the bargaining position of the two parties; and

4. The attorney for the tenant has approved in writing the agreement as complying with subsections (B)(1), (2) and (3) of this section. [Ord. 19-0484 § 2 (Exh. A).]


Title 9 CRIMINAL CODE

Chapters:

9.05    General Provisions – Statutes Adopted by Reference

9.10    Dumping of Trash in Waterways

9.15    False Alarms

9.20    Pistol Sales

9.25    Impersonating Public Officers – Unauthorized Sale, Possession or Use of Official Property

9.30    Loitering

9.35    Regulation of Conduct on Transit Property

9.40    Parks – Rules for Use of Facilities

9.45    Roadside Stands

9.50    Prostitution

9.55    Firearms

9.57    Furnishing Liquor to Minors

9.60    Controlled Substances

9.65    Obscene Materials

9.70    Violation of Court-Ordered Probation


Chapter 9.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS – STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE

Sections:

9.05.010    Preliminary statement.

9.05.020    Purposes – Principles of construction.

9.05.030    City criminal jurisdiction.

9.05.040    Classes of crimes.

9.05.050    Punishment and restitution.

9.05.060    Limitation of action.

9.05.070    Proof beyond a reasonable doubt.

9.05.080    General provisions – Adoption by reference.

9.05.090    Principles of liability.

9.05.100    Defenses.

9.05.110    Anticipatory offenses.

9.05.120    Abandoned refrigeration equipment.

9.05.130    Advertising – Crimes relating to.

9.05.140    Alcoholic beverage control.

9.05.150    Animals – Crimes relating to.

9.05.160    Animals – Injury to.

9.05.170    Assault and other crimes relating to persons.

9.05.180    Competitive bidding.

9.05.190    Controlled substances.

9.05.200    Controlled substances – Minors.

9.05.210    Controlled substances – Minors excluded.

9.05.220    Controlled substances – Sale and display rooms.

9.05.230    Controlled substances – Sale restriction.

9.05.240    Controlled substances – Nuisance.

9.05.250    Corporations – Crimes relating to.

9.05.260    Custodial interference.

9.05.270    Disorderly conduct.

9.05.280    Disruption of school activities.

9.05.290    Domestic violence protection.

9.05.300    False representations.

9.05.310    False swearing and tampering.

9.05.320    Fire alarms – Crimes relating to.

9.05.330    Firearms and dangerous weapons.

9.05.340    Shooting within the City limits.

9.05.350    Fraud.

9.05.360    Gambling offenses.

9.05.370    Harassment.

9.05.380    Inhaling toxic fumes.

9.05.390    Juries – Crimes relating to.

9.05.400    Littering and pollution.

9.05.410    Miscellaneous crimes.

9.05.420    Misconduct in signing a petition.

9.05.430    Obstructing governmental operation.

9.05.440    Obstructing public officers.

9.05.450    Bicycle helmets.

9.05.460    Public disturbance.

9.05.470    Public nuisances.

9.05.480    Reckless burning and malicious mischief.

9.05.490    Sexual offenses – Unlawful acts of prostitution or pandering.

9.05.500    Special offenses relative to minors.

9.05.510    Telephone credit cards.

9.05.520    Tobacco use by minors.

9.05.530    Theft and possession of stolen property.

9.05.540    Throwing objects at moving vehicles.

9.05.550    Trademarks and other marks.

9.05.560    Trespass and prowling.

9.05.570    Urinating in public.

9.05.580    Vehicles resembling police or fire vehicles.

9.05.590    Violating right of privacy.

9.05.600    Interference with health care facility.

9.05.610    Abandonment of a dependent person in the third degree.

9.05.620    Crimes not specifically referenced.

9.05.630    Copies to be available.

9.05.640    Certified copies to be furnished to court.


9.05.010 Preliminary statement.

A. This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the Kenmore Criminal Code.

B. The provisions of this code shall apply to any offense committed on or after 12:01 a.m. on March 1, 1999.

C. The provisions of this code do not apply to, nor govern the construction of and punishment for any offense committed prior to 12:01 a.m. on March 1, 1999, nor to the construction and application of any defense to a prosecution for such an offense. Such an offense must be construed and punished according to the provisions of the law existing in the City at the time of the commission thereof in the same manner as if this code had not been enacted.

D. The sections of the Revised Code of Washington (RCW) and the King County Code (KCC), now in effect and as subsequently amended, specifically enumerated in this chapter are adopted by reference into this code.

E. Section captions are for organizational purposes only and shall not be construed as part of this code. [Ord. 01-0101 § 1.]


9.05.020 Purposes – Principles of construction.

A. The general purposes of the provisions governing the definition of offenses are to:

1. Forbid and prevent conduct that inflicts or threatens substantial harm to individual or public interests;

2. Safeguard conduct that is without culpability from condemnation as criminal;

3. Give fair warning of the nature of the conduct declared to constitute an offense; and

4. Differentiate on reasonable grounds between serious and minor offenses, and to prescribe proportionate penalties for each.

B. The provisions of this code shall be construed according to the fair import of their terms, and when the language is susceptible to differing constructions, it shall be interpreted to further the general purposes stated in this code.

C. In adopting State statutes by reference, only those crimes and offenses under the jurisdiction of a municipality are intended to be adopted and, in those sections adopted which define both misdemeanors and felonies, only the language applicable to misdemeanors and gross misdemeanors is to be applied. [Ord. 01-0101 § 2.]


9.05.030 City criminal jurisdiction.

Any person who commits any offense defined by this code, in whole or in part, within the corporate limits of the City is liable to arrest, prosecution and punishment. [Ord. 01-0101 § 3.]


9.05.040 Classes of crimes.

Any offense defined by this code for which a sentence of imprisonment is authorized constitutes a violation of City ordinance and is a crime. Crimes are classified as gross misdemeanors or misdemeanors. [Ord. 01-0101 § 4.]


9.05.050 Punishment and restitution.

A. Unless specifically provided otherwise, every person convicted of a gross misdemeanor, or a crime not otherwise classified, shall be punished by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term of not more than one year, or by a fine in an amount of not more than $5,000, or by both such imprisonment and fine.

B. Unless specifically provided otherwise, every person convicted of a misdemeanor shall be punished by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term of not more than 90 days, or by a fine in an amount of not more than $1,000, or by both such imprisonment and fine.

C. A person who is convicted of a misdemeanor violation of any provision of Chapter 69.50 RCW adopted by reference shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than 24 consecutive hours, and by a fine of not less than $250.00. On a second or subsequent conviction, the fine shall not be less than $500.00. These fines shall be in addition to any other fine or penalty imposed. Unless the court finds that the imposition of the minimum imprisonment will pose a substantial risk to the defendant’s physical or mental well-being or that local jail facilities are in an overcrowded condition, the term of imprisonment shall not be suspended or deferred. If the court finds such risk or overcrowding exists, it shall sentence the defendant to a minimum of 40 hours of community service. If a minimum term of imprisonment is suspended or deferred, the court shall state in writing the reason for granting the suspension or deferral and the facts upon which the suspension or deferral is based. Unless the court finds the person to be indigent, the minimum fine shall not be suspended or deferred.

D. The court may impose restitution as provided in RCW 9A.20.030.

E. In the event there is a conflict in the penalties which can be imposed upon conviction for a specific offense between the provisions of the Kenmore criminal code and the RCW, the penalty provisions of the RCW shall apply. [Ord. 01-0101 § 5.]


9.05.060 Limitation of action.

A. A gross misdemeanor, or a crime not otherwise classified, may not be prosecuted more than two years after its commission. A misdemeanor may not be prosecuted more than one year after its commission.

B. Periods of limitation toll for any period of time the person charged is not usually and publicly resident within this State, or for any other reason authorized by law or court rule.

C. If a complaint or an information filed before the end of a period of limitation is thereafter set aside, then the period is extended by a period equal to the length of time from the filing to the setting aside. [Ord. 01-0101 § 6.]


9.05.070 Proof beyond a reasonable doubt.

A. Every person charged with an offense is presumed innocent unless proven guilty by competent evidence establishing each element of the offense beyond a reasonable doubt.

B. When an offense has been proven against a person but a reasonable doubt exists as to the degree of the crime, a conviction shall be entered only as to the lowest degree. [Ord. 01-0101 § 7.]


9.05.080 General provisions – Adoption by reference.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.04.050    People capable of committing crimes – Culpability of children.

9A.04.060    Common law to supplement statutes.

9A.04.070    Who amenable to criminal statutes.

9A.04.090    Application of general provisions of code.

9A.04.110    Definitions.

9.01.055    Citizen immunity if aiding officer, scope – When.

9.01.110    Omission, when not punishable.

9.01.130    Sending letter, when complete.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 8.]


9.05.090 Principles of liability.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.08.010    General requirements of culpability.

9A.08.020    Liability for conduct of another – Complicity.

9A.08.030    Criminal liability of corporations and persons acting or under a duty to act in their behalf.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 9.]


9.05.100 Defenses.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.12.010    Insanity.

9A.16.010    Definitions.

9A.16.020    Use of force – When lawful.

9A.16.030    Homicide – When excusable.

9A.16.040    Justifiable homicide or use of deadly force by public officer, peace offer, person aiding.

9A.16.050    Homicide – By other person – When justifiable.

9A.16.060    Duress.

9A.16.070    Entrapment.

9A.16.080    Action for being detained on mercantile establishment premises for investigation – “Reasonable grounds” as defense.

9A.16.090    Intoxication.

9A.16.100    Use of force on children – Policy – Actions presumed unreasonable.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 10.]


9.05.110 Anticipatory offenses.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.28.020    Criminal attempt.

9A.28.030    Criminal solicitation.

9A.28.040    Criminal conspiracy.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 11.]


9.05.120 Abandoned refrigeration equipment.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.03.010    Abandoning, discarding refrigeration equipment.

9.03.020    Permitting unused equipment to remain on premises.

9.03.040    Keeping or storing equipment for sale.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 12.]


9.05.130 Advertising – Crimes relating to.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.04.010    False advertising.

9.04.040    Advertising cures of lost sexual potency – Evidence.

9.04.090    Advertising fuel prices by service station.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 13.]


9.05.140 Alcoholic beverage control.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

66.04.010    Definitions.

66.20.160    “Card of identification,” “licensee,” “store employee” defined for certain purposes.

66.20.170    Card of identification may be accepted as identification card and evidence of legal age.

66.20.180    Card of identification to be presented on request of licensee.

66.20.200    Unlawful acts relating to card of identification and certification card – Penalty.

66.28.090    Licensed premises or banquet permit premises open to inspection – Failure to allow, violation.

66.32    Search and Seizure; entire chapter.

66.44    Enforcement – Penalties; entire chapter.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 14.]


9.05.150 Animals – Crimes relating to.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.08.030    False certificate of registration of animals – False representation as to breed.

9.08.070    Pet animals – Taking, concealing, injuring, killing, etc. – Penalty.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 15.]


9.05.160 Animals – Injury to.

Any person who willfully and without authority in law kills, maims or disfigures an animal belonging to another, or exposes any poisons or noxious substance with intent that it should be taken by such animal, is guilty of a misdemeanor. [Ord. 01-0101 § 16.]


9.05.170 Assault and other crimes relating to persons.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.36.041    Assault in the fourth degree.

9A.36.050    Reckless endangerment.

9A.36.070    Coercion.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 17.]


9.05.180 Competitive bidding.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.18.120    Suppression of competitive bidding.

9.18.130    Collusion to prevent competitive bidding.

9.18.140    Penalty.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 18.]


9.05.190 Controlled substances.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

69.50.101    Definitions.

69.50.102    Drug paraphernalia – Definitions.

69.50.204(c)(14)    Schedule I – Marihuana or marijuana.

69.50.309    Containers.

69.50.4014    Possession of forty grams of marihuana – Penalty.

69.50.408    Second or subsequent offenses.

69.50.412    Prohibited acts – E-Penalties.

69.50.420    Violations – Juvenile driving privileges.

69.50.425    Misdemeanor violations – Minimum imprisonment.

69.50.505    Seizure and forfeiture.

69.50.506    Burden of proof, liabilities.

69.50.509    Search and seizure of controlled substances.

[Ord. 04-0205 § 1; Ord. 01-0101 § 19.]


9.05.200 Controlled substances – Minors.

No owner, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of any room in any place of business where any device, contrivance, instrument or paraphernalia which is primarily designed for or intended to be used for the smoking, ingestion, or consumption of marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance, other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, is sold, or displayed for the purpose of sale, may allow or permit any person under the age of 18 years to be in, remain in, enter or visit such room unless such minor person is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. [Ord. 01-0101 § 20.]


9.05.210 Controlled substances – Minors excluded.

No person under the age of 18 years may be in, remain in, enter or visit any room in any place used for the sale or displaying for sale of devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia which are primarily designed for or intended to be used for the smoking, ingestion or consumption of marijuana, hashish, PCP or any controlled substance, other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs unless such person is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. [Ord. 01-0101 § 21.]


9.05.220 Controlled substances – Sale and display rooms.

No person may maintain, in any place of business to which the public is invited, the display for sale or the offering to sell of devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia which are primarily designed for or intended to be used for the smoking, ingestion or consumption of marijuana, hashish, PCP or any controlled substance, other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs unless within a separate room or enclosure to which minors not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian are excluded. Each entrance to such a room or enclosure shall be posted with a sign in reasonably visible and legible words to the effect that items which are defined as drug paraphernalia under this chapter are being offered for sale in such a room and that minors, unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, are excluded. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. [Ord. 01-0101 § 22.]


9.05.230 Controlled substances – Sale restriction.

No person shall sell or give, or permit to be sold or given, to any person under the age of 18 years any device, contrivance, instrument or paraphernalia which is primarily designed for or intended to be used for the smoking, ingestion or consumption of marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance, other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. [Ord. 01-0101 § 23.]


9.05.240 Controlled substances – Nuisance.

The distribution or possession for the purpose of sale, exhibition or display, in any place of business from which minors are not excluded as set forth in this code, of devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia which are primarily designed for or intended to be used for the smoking, ingestion or consumption of marijuana, hashish, PCP or any controlled substance, other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by the City. This remedy shall be in addition to any other remedy provided by the law including the penalty provision applicable for the violation of the terms and provisions of this code. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. [Ord. 01-0101 § 24.]


9.05.250 Corporations – Crimes relating to.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.24.010    Fraud in stock subscription.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 25.]


9.05.260 Custodial interference.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference: 

RCW

9A.40.010    Definitions.

9A.40.070    Custodial interference in the second degree.

9A.40.080    Custodial interference – Assessment of costs – Defense – Consent defense, restricted.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 26.]


9.05.270 Disorderly conduct.

Any person who engages in disorderly conduct is guilty of a misdemeanor. A person engages in disorderly conduct when that person:

A. Uses abusive language and thereby intentionally creates a risk of assault;

B. Intentionally disrupts any lawful assembly or meeting of persons without lawful authority;

C. Intentionally obstructs vehicular or pedestrian traffic without lawful authority;

D. Intentionally and without lawful authority makes noise which unreasonably disturbs another;

E. Intentionally engages in any conduct which tends to or does disturb the public peace, provides disorder, or endangers the safety of others; or

F. Fights by agreement, except as part of an organized athletic event. [Ord. 01-0101 § 27.]


9.05.280 Disruption of school activities.

A. Any person who enters or remains in any school building, classroom or upon any school ground, street sidewalk or public way adjacent thereto and intentionally causes disruption of the activities of the school is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.

B. As used in this section, “school” has its ordinary meaning and also includes universities, colleges, community colleges and institutions of higher education. [Ord. 01-0101 § 28.]


9.05.290 Domestic violence protection.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.36.150    Interfering with the reporting of domestic violence.

10.99.020    Definitions.

10.99.030    Law enforcement officers – Training, powers, duties – Domestic violence reports.

10.99.040    Restrictions upon and duties of court.

10.99.045    Appearances by defendant – No-contact order.

10.99.050    Victim contact – Restriction, prohibition – Violation, penalties – Written order – Procedures.

10.99.055    Enforcement of orders.

26.09.300    Restraining orders – Notice – Refusal to comply – Arrest – Penalty – Defense – Peace officers, immunity.

26.50.010    Definitions.

26.50.020    Commencement of action – Jurisdiction – Venue.

26.50.025    Orders under this chapter and Chapter 26.09, 26.10, or 26.26 RCW – Enforcement – Consolidation.

26.50.030    Petition for an order for protection – Availability of forms and informational brochures – Bond not required.

26.50.040    Fees not permitted – Filing, service of process, certified copies.

26.50.050    Hearing – Service – Time.

26.50.060    Relief – Duration – Realignment of designation of parties – Award of costs, service fees, and attorneys’ fees.

26.50.070    Ex parte temporary order for protection.

26.50.080    Issuance of order – Assistance of peace officer – Designation of appropriate law enforcement agency.

26.50.090    Order – Service – Fees.

26.50.100    Order – Transmittal to law enforcement agency – Record in law enforcement information system – Enforceability.

26.50.110    Violation of order – Penalties.

26.50.115    Enforcement of ex parte order – Knowledge of order prerequisite to penalties – Reasonable efforts to serve copy of order.

26.50.120    Violation of order – Prosecuting attorney or attorney for municipality may be requested to assist – Cost and attorney’s fees.

26.50.130    Order – Modification – Transmittal.

26.50.140    Peace officers – Immunity.

26.50.160    Judicial information system – Data base.

26.50.200    Title to real estate – Effect.

26.50.210    Proceedings additional.

26.50.900    Short title.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 29.]


9.05.300 False representations.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.38.010    False representation concerning credit.

9.38.020    False representation concerning title.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 32.]


9.05.310 False swearing and tampering.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.72.010    Definitions.

9A.72.040    False swearing.

9A.72.050    Perjury and false swearing – Inconsistent statements – Degree of crime.

9A.72.060    Perjury and false swearing – Retraction.

9A.72.070    Perjury and false swearing – Irregularities no defense.

9A.72.080    Statement of what one does not know to be true.

9A.72.140    Jury tampering.

9A.72.150    Tampering with physical evidence.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 33.]


9.05.320 Fire alarms – Crimes relating to.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.40.040    Operating engine or boiler without spark arrester.

9.40.100    Tampering with fire alarm or fire fighting equipment – False alarm – Penalties.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 34.]


9.05.330 Firearms and dangerous weapons.*

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.41.010    Terms defined.

9.41.050    Carrying firearms.

9.41.060    Exceptions to restrictions on carrying firearms.

9.41.070    Concealed pistol license – Application – Fee – Renewal.

9.41.075    Concealed pistol license – Revocation.

9.41.080    Delivery to ineligible persons.

9.41.090    Dealer deliveries regulated – Hold on delivery.

9.41.0975    Officials and agencies – Immunity, writ of mandamus.

9.41.098    Forfeiture of firearms – Disposition – Confiscation.

9.41.100    Dealer licensing and registration required.

9.41.110    Dealer’s licenses, by whom granted, conditions, fees – Employees, fingerprinting and background checks – Wholesale sales excepted – Permits prohibited.

9.41.120    Firearms as loan security.

9.41.140    Alteration of identifying marks – Exceptions.

9.41.170    Alien’s license to carry firearms – Exceptions.

9.41.230    Aiming or discharging firearms, dangerous weapons.

9.41.240    Possession of pistol by person from eighteen to twenty-one.

9.41.250    Dangerous weapons – Penalty.

9.41.260    Dangerous exhibitions.

9.41.270    Weapons apparently capable of producing bodily harm – Unlawful carrying or handling – Penalty – Exceptions.

9.41.280    Possessing dangerous weapons on school facilities – Penalty – Exceptions.

9.41.300    Weapons prohibited in certain places – Local laws and ordinances – Exceptions – Penalty.

9.41.810    Penalty.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 35(1).]

*Code reviser’s note: For additional provisions, see Chapter 9.20 KMC.


9.05.340 Shooting within the City limits.

Any person who knowingly discharges a firearm within the City is guilty of a misdemeanor; provided, however, that the provisions of this section do not apply to a person acting in self defense; engaged in military activities sponsored by the federal or State governments, while engaged in official duties; law enforcement personnel; security personnel while engaged in official duties; or a person utilizing a properly licensed institutional, membership, and/or commercial shooting range. [Ord. 01-0101 § 36.]


9.05.350 Fraud.*

A. The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.26A.110    Fraud in obtaining telecommunications service – Penalty.

9.45.060    Encumbered, leased, or rented personal property – Construction.

9.45.070    Mock auctions.

9.45.080    Fraudulent removal of property.

9.45.090    Knowingly receiving fraudulent conveyance.

9.45.100    Fraud in assignment for benefit of creditors.

9A.56.096    Theft of rental, leased, or lease-purchased property.

9A.60.010    Definitions.

9A.60.040    Criminal impersonation in the first degree.

9A.60.045    Criminal impersonation in the second degree.

9A.60.050    False certification.

9A.61.010    Definitions.

9A.61.020    Defrauding a public utility.

9A.61.050    Defrauding a public utility in the third degree.

9A.61.060    Restitution and costs.

[Ord. 04-0205 § 2; Ord. 01-0101 § 37(1).]

*Code reviser’s note: For additional provisions, see Chapter 9.25 KMC.


9.05.360 Gambling offenses.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.46.190    Violations relating to fraud or deceit.

9.46.193    Cities and towns – Ordinance adopting certain sections of chapter – Jurisdiction of courts.

9.46.195    Obstruction of public servant – Penalty.

9.46.196    Cheating.

9.46.198    Working in gambling activity without license as violation – Penalty.

9.46.210    Enforcement – Commission as law enforcement agency.

9.46.215    Ownership or interest in gambling device – Penalty – Exceptions.

9.46.217    Gambling records – Penalty – Exceptions.

9.46.222    Professional gambling in the third degree.

9.46.231    Gambling devices, real and personal property – Seizure and forfeiture.

9.46.235    Slot machines, antique – Defenses concerning – Presumption created.

9.46.240    Gambling information, transmitting or receiving.

9.46.250    Gambling property or premises – Common nuisances, abatement – Termination of interests, licenses – Enforcement.

9.46.260    Proof of possession as evidence of knowledge of its character.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 38.]


9.05.370 Harassment.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.61.230    Telephone harassment.

9.61.240    Telephone harassment – Permitting telephone to be used.

9.61.250    Telephone harassment – Offense, where deemed committed.

9A.46.010    Legislative finding.

9A.46.020    Definition – Penalties.

9A.46.030    Place where committed.

9A.46.040    Court-ordered requirements upon person charged with crime – Violation.

9A.46.050    Arraignment – No-contact order.

9A.46.060    Crimes included in harassment.

9A.46.070    Enforcement of orders restricting contact.

9A.46.080    Order restricting contact – Violation.

9A.46.090    Nonliability of peace officer.

9A.46.100    “Convicted,” time when.

9A.46.110    Stalking.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 39.]


9.05.380 Inhaling toxic fumes.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.47A.010    Definition.

9.47A.020    Unlawful inhalation – Exception.

9.47A.030    Possession of certain substances prohibited, when.

9.47A.040    Sale of certain substances prohibited, when.

9.47A.050    Penalty.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 40.]


9.05.390 Juries – Crimes relating to.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.51.010    Misconduct of officer drawing jury.

9.51.020    Soliciting jury duty.

9.51.030    Misconduct of officer in charge of jury.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 41.]


9.05.400 Littering and pollution.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

70.54.010    Polluting water supply.

70.93.060    Littering prohibited – Penalties.

70.160.020    Definitions.

70.160.030    Smoking in public places except designated smoking areas prohibited.

70.160.040    Designation of smoking areas in public places – Exceptions – Restaurant smoking areas – Entire facility or area may be designated as nonsmoking.

70.160.050    Owners, lessees to post signs prohibiting or permitting smoking – Boundaries to be clearly designated.

70.160.060    Intent of chapter as applied to certain private workplaces.

70.160.070    Intentional violation of chapter – Removing, defacing, or destroying required sign – Fine – Notice of infraction – Exceptions – Violations of RCW 70.160.040 or 70.160.050 – Subsequent violations – Fine – Enforcement by fire officials.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 42.]


9.05.410 Miscellaneous crimes.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.91.010    Denial of civil rights – Terms defined.

9.91.025    Unlawful bus conduct.

9.91.060    Leaving children unattended in parked automobile.

9.91.110    Metal buyers – Records of purchases – Penalty.

9.91.130    Disposal of trash in charity donation receptacle.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 44(1).]


9.05.420 Misconduct in signing a petition.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.44.080    Misconduct in signing a petition.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 45.]


9.05.430 Obstructing governmental operation.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.76.010    Definitions.

9A.76.030    Refusing to summon aid for a peace officer.

9A.76.040    Resisting arrest.

9A.76.050    Rendering criminal assistance – Definition of terms.

9A.76.060    Relative defined.

9A.76.070    Rendering criminal assistance in the first degree.

9A.76.080    Rendering criminal assistance in the second degree.

9A.76.090    Rendering criminal assistance in the third degree.

9A.76.100    Compounding.

9A.76.130    Escape in the third degree.

9A.76.160    Introducing contraband in the third degree.

9A.76.170    Bail jumping.

9A.76.175    Making a false or misleading statement to a public servant.

9.31.090    Escaped prisoner recaptured.

9.62.010    Malicious prosecution.

9.62.020    Instituting suit in name of another.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 46.]


9.05.440 Obstructing public officers.

A. It is unlawful for any person to make any willfully untrue, misleading or exaggerated statement to, or to willfully hinder, delay or obstruct any public officer in the discharge of his or her official powers or duties. Obstructing public officers is a misdemeanor.

B. “Public officer” as used in this section shall mean any police officer, the fire chief and his or her designees, any health officer, the public works director and his or her designees, the city clerk and his or her designees, code enforcement personnel and other City personnel authorized to enforce City ordinances, statutes and codes. [Ord. 01-0101 § 47.]


9.05.450 Bicycle helmets.

The following provisions of the King County Board of Health Code as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

KCBHC

Chapter 9.10    General Requirements 	Regarding Bicycle 	Helmets; entire chapter.

Chapter 9.15    Enforcement; entire 	chapter.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 49.]


9.05.460 Public disturbance.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.27.015    Interference, obstruction of any court, building or residence – Violations.

9A.84.010    Riot.

9A.84.020    Failure to disperse.

9A.84.040    False reporting.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 50.]


9.05.470 Public nuisances.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.66.010    Public nuisance.

9.66.020    Unequal damage.

9.66.030    Maintaining or permitting nuisance.

9.66.040    Abatement of nuisance.

9.66.050    Deposit of unwholesome substance.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 51.]


9.05.480 Reckless burning and malicious mischief.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.48.010    Definitions.

9A.48.050    Reckless burning in the second degree.

9A.48.060    Reckless burning – Defense.

9A.48.090    Malicious mischief in the third degree.

9A.48.100    Malicious mischief – “Physical damage” defined.

9A.56.180    Obscuring identity of a machine.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 52.]


9.05.490 Sexual offenses – Unlawful acts of prostitution or pandering.*

A. Except as otherwise required by State law, any single conviction under Chapter 9.50 KMC within any period of 12 months shall be a misdemeanor. Any second or subsequent conviction under Chapter 9.50 KMC within any period of 12 months from a first or prior conviction of the same or similar offense shall be a gross misdemeanor.

B. The court may suspend all or a portion of the term of imprisonment or fine on condition that a person convicted of a crime under Chapter 9.50 KMC never enter into, or be present in, any anti-prostitution emphasis area during the term of any such suspension or deferral. The court may further require AIDS testing and counseling, as a condition of suspension or deferral pursuant to RCW 70.24.350, at the defendant’s expense; provided, that King County, as agent for the City pursuant to interlocal agreement, may require such testing and counseling as provided in RCW 70.24.360 upon imprisonment in jail of any such convicted person.

C. The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.88.010    Indecent exposure.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 54(2), (3), (4).]

*Code reviser’s note: For additional provisions, see Chapter 9.50 KMC.


9.05.500 Special offenses relative to minors.*

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.68A.011    Definition.

9.68A.080    Processors of depictions of minors engaged in sexually explicit conduct – Report required.

9.68A.090    Communication with minor for immoral purposes.

9.68A.120    Seizure and forfeiture of property.

9.68A.140    Definitions.

9.68A.150    Allowing minor on premises of live erotic performance.

9.68A.160    Penalty.

9.69.100    Duty of witness of offense against child or any violent offense – Penalty.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 55(1).]

*Code reviser’s note: For additional provisions, see Chapters 9.55, 9.57, 9.60 and 9.65 KMC.


9.05.510 Telephone credit cards.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.26A.090    Telephone company credit cards – Prohibited acts.

9.26A.100    Definitions.

9.26A.110    Fraud in obtaining telecommunications service – Penalty.

9.26A.120    Fraud in operating coin-box telephone or other receptacle.

9.26A.130    Penalty for manufacture or sale of slugs to be used for coin.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 56.]


9.05.520 Tobacco use by minors.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

26.28.080    Selling or giving tobacco to minor – Belief of representative capacity, no defense – Penalty.

70.155.080    Purchasing or obtaining tobacco by persons under the age of eighteen – Civil infraction.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 57.]


9.05.530 Theft and possession of stolen property.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.56.010    Definitions.

9A.56.020    Theft – Definition, defense.

9A.56.050    Theft in the third degree.

9A.56.060    Unlawful issuance of checks or drafts.

9A.56.100    Theft and larceny equated.

9A.56.140    Possessing stolen property – Definition – Presumption.

9A.56.170    Possessing stolen property in the third degree.

9A.56.180    Obscuring the identity of a machine.

9A.56.220    Theft of subscription television services.

9A.56.230    Unlawful sale of subscription television services.

9A.56.240    Forfeiture and disposal of device used to commit violation.

9A.56.260    Connection of channel converter.

9A.56.270    Shopping cart theft.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 58.]


9.05.540 Throwing objects at moving vehicles.

Any person who throws, pushes, rolls, drops, swings or otherwise propels or projects any object, thing, or substance in such a manner as to strike or be likely to strike any moving vehicle on the public highways or streets is guilty of a misdemeanor. [Ord. 01-0101 § 59.]


9.05.550 Trademarks and other marks.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.16.030    Counterfeiting trademark, brand, etc.

9.16.040    Displaying goods with false trademark.

9.16.050    When deemed affixed.

9.16.060    Fraudulent registration of trademark.

9.16.070    Form and similitude defined.

9.16.080    Sales of petroleum products improperly labeled or by wrong grade.

9.16.090    Sales of petroleum products improperly labeled or by wrong grade – Penalty for violations.

9.16.100    Use of the words “sterling silver,” etc.

9.16.110    Use of the words “coin silver,” etc.

9.16.120    Use of the word “sterling” on mounting.

9.16.130    Use of the words “coin silver” on mounting.

9.16.140    Unlawfully marking article made of gold.

9.16.150    “Marked, stamped or branded,” defined.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 60.]


9.05.560 Trespass and prowling.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.52.010    Definitions.

9A.52.060    Making or having burglar tools.

9A.52.070    Criminal trespass in the first degree.

9A.52.080    Criminal trespass in the second degree.

9A.52.090    Criminal trespass – Defenses.

9A.52.100    Vehicle prowling in the second degree.

9A.52.120    Computer trespass in the second degree.

9A.52.130    Computer trespass – Commission of other crime.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 61.]


9.05.570 Urinating in public.

Any person who intentionally urinates or defecates in a public place, other than a washroom or toilet room, or at a place and under circumstances where such act could be observed by any member of the public, shall be subject to a civil fine not to exceed $250.00 for a first offense. For second and subsequent charges, the person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. [Ord. 01-0101 § 63.]


9.05.580 Vehicles resembling police or fire vehicles.

Any person who operates a motor vehicle painted and exhibiting decals, numbers, name, insignia, or other objects which simulate a City or county police or fire department vehicle, or City vehicle, without prior authorization from the police chief, fire chief, city manager, or their designees is guilty of a misdemeanor. [Ord. 01-0101 § 64.]


9.05.590 Violating right of privacy.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9.73.010    Divulging telegram.

9.73.020    Opening sealed letter.

9.73.030    Intercepting, recording or divulging private communication – Consent required – Exceptions.

9.73.070    Persons and activities excepted from chapter.

9.73.090    Certain emergency response personnel exempted from RCW 9.73.030 through 9.73.080 – Standards – Court authorizations – Admissibility.

9.73.100    Recordings available to defense counsel.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 65.]


9.05.600 Interference with health care facility.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.50.020    Interference with health care facility.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 67.]


9.05.610 Abandonment of a dependent person in the third degree.

The following provisions of the RCW as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

9A.42.080    Abandonment of a dependent person in the third degree.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 68.]


9.05.620 Crimes not specifically referenced.

Any act or omission defined as a misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor in State law and not specifically identified in this chapter is also adopted by reference. [Ord. 01-0101 § 69.]


9.05.630 Copies to be available.

A copy of each portion of the RCW, the King County Code, and the King County Board of Health Code adopted by reference shall be authenticated and recorded by the city clerk and not less than one copy thereof shall be available in the office of the city clerk for use and examination by the public. [Ord. 01-0101 § 70.]


9.05.640 Certified copies to be furnished to court.

The city clerk is directed to provide to the court administrator of the King County district court, shoreline division, at City expense, adequate numbers of certified copies of this chapter to permit enforcement of this chapter. [Ord. 01-0101 § 71.]


Chapter 9.10 DUMPING OF TRASH IN WATERWAYS

Sections:

9.10.010    Dumping trash in waterways prohibited.


9.10.010 Dumping trash in waterways prohibited.

The dumping, depositing, placing or leaving of any garbage, ashes, debris, gravel, earth, rock, stone or other material upon the banks, channels, beds or bars of any navigable water in the City of Kenmore, or the felling of any tree or trees, so that the same shall in whole or in part project within the high water bank of any navigable watercourse, or the casting, placing, depositing or leaving of any logs, roots, snags, stumps or brush upon the banks or in the bed or channel of any navigable watercourse is prohibited. [Ord. 01-0101 § 30 (KCC 12.36.010); Ord. 98-0035 § 1(A).]


Chapter 9.15 FALSE ALARMS

Sections:

9.15.010    Purpose.

9.15.020    Definitions.

9.15.030    Repealed.

9.15.040    Exceptions.

9.15.050    Service charges for excessive false alarms.

9.15.060    No response to excessive false alarms.

9.15.070    Additional duties of alarm user.

9.15.080    Alarm business duties.

9.15.090    Nonpermitted systems and uses.

9.15.100    Special registrations.

9.15.110    Appeals.


9.15.010 Purpose.

It is the intent of this chapter to reduce the number of false alarms occurring within the City and the resultant waste of City resources by providing for corrective administrative action, including the imposition of fees, potential disconnection and/or civil penalties. [Ord. 19-0485 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 98-0044 § 1.]


9.15.020 Definitions.

Unless the context or subject matter clearly otherwise requires, terms defined herein shall have the following meanings when used in this chapter:

A. “Alarm business” means the business of selling, leasing, maintaining, monitoring, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system on real property.

B. “Alarm system” means any system, device or mechanism which, when activated, transmits a telephone signal to a private monitoring company or some other entity, or emits an audible or visible signal that can be heard or seen by persons outside the protected premises, or transmits a signal beyond the premises in some other fashion, except any system, device or mechanism primarily protecting a motor vehicle, or any medical alarm.

C. “Alarm user” means the person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind to whom a registration is required under this chapter.

D. “Automatic dialing device” means a device that is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit by voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for emergency response.

E. “Burglary alarm system” means an alarm system designed or used for detection and reporting of an unauthorized entry or attempted unauthorized entry upon real property protected by the system.

F. “Chief” means the chief of police for the City of Kenmore.

G. “City” means the City of Kenmore.

H. “Contact card” means a registration of authorized persons designated by the alarm user to respond, access the establishment and correct, reset, or shut off the alarm.

I. “Contact card registration year” means July 1st to and including the following June 30th.

J. “Department” means the Kenmore police department.

K. “False alarm” means the activation of any burglary alarm system when no crime is being committed or attempted on the premises. An alarm shall be presumed to be false if the police officers responding do not locate any evidence of an intrusion or commission of an unlawful act or emergency on the premises that might have caused the alarm to sound, but does not include alarms caused by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm business operator or alarm user. 

L. “Interconnect” means to connect an alarm system including an automatic dialing device to a telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a telephone for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit a message upon activation of the alarm system.

M. “No response” means police officers shall not be dispatched to investigate a report of an alarm signal.

N. “Panic/trouble alarm” means an alarm system designated or used for alerting police of the need for immediate assistance or aid in order to avoid injury or serious bodily harm.

O. “Premises” means any area and any portion of any area protected by an alarm system.

P. “Response” means a response that occurs when the police department begins to proceed toward the premises as a result of the activation of any alarm system.

Q. “Robbery alarm systems” means an alarm system designed or used for alerting others of a robbery or other crime in progress, which involves potential serious bodily injury or death.

R. “Sheriff” means the King County sheriff or his/her designee.

S. “System subscriber” means the person, corporation, firm, partnership, association, company, organization or other business entity who purchased or contracted for any alarm system.

T. “Verification” means an independent method of determining that a signal from an automatic alarm system reflects a need for immediate police assistance or investigation. [Ord. 19-0485 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 98-0044 § 2.]


9.15.030 Alarm user contact card registration required.

Repealed by Ord. 19-0485. [Ord. 98-0044 § 3.]


9.15.040 Exceptions.

This chapter shall not be construed to apply to persons duly authorized to test or activate an alarm when such may be deemed proper by the chief. [Ord. 19-0485 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 98-0044 § 4.]


9.15.050 Service charges for excessive false alarms.

A. Service charges will be assessed by the city clerk’s office for excessive false alarms during any registration year in an amount imposed by the city council by resolution.

B. The city clerk’s office shall notify the alarm user and the alarm business by regular mail of the fourth false alarm, the fine and the consequences of the failure to pay the fine. [Ord. 19-0485 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 98-0044 § 5.]


9.15.060 No response to excessive false alarms.

After the sixth false alarm in any six consecutive month period, the chief or his/her designee shall send a notification to the alarm user by mail, which will contains the following:

A. That the sixth false alarm has occurred;

B. That if any additional false alarms occur within the remainder of the six-month period, the police may not respond to any subsequent alarms;

C. That the alarm user may apply in writing for reinstatement. The chief or his/her designee may reinstate the alarm user upon a finding that reasonable effort has been made to correct the false alarms which includes consideration of a letter from user’s alarm company, which states the alarm system is operating properly and the alarm user’s agents are properly trained in the alarm system operation. The City shall not be responsible for any costs incurred by the user to qualify for reinstatement; and

D. That reinstated alarm users will be billed for any false alarm responses after reinstatement, and will be subject to further revocation after any more false alarm responses during the remainder of the registration year. Alarm user will not be reinstated if there are any outstanding fees or service charges due. [Ord. 19-0485 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 98-0044 § 6.]


9.15.070 Additional duties of alarm user.

A. The premises shall display the registration decal at or near the main entrance, which shall be clearly visible and readable from the exterior of the premises.

B. The premises shall display the street address at or near the front of the premises and at other places where access is available, such as from an alley or parking lot. The street address shall be clearly visible and readable from the exterior of the premises.

C. If requested to do so by the chief, the alarm user or his or her designee shall respond to a premises following activation of an alarm system for which a contact call has been issued within a reasonable time, and in any event, within one hour after said notification. [Ord. 19-0485 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 98-0044 § 7.]


9.15.080 Alarm business duties.

Every alarm system monitoring company engaging in business activities in the City shall:

A. Submit standard user form instructions to the chief’s office. If the chief’s office finds the instructions are unclear or inadequate, the chief may require the alarm business to revise the instructions to comply with KMC 9.15.060 and then to distribute the revised instructions to its alarm users.

B. Provide the chief’s office information about the nature of its alarms, its method of monitoring, its program for preventing false alarms, and its method of disconnecting audible alarms.

C. Furnish the alarm user with instructions that provide information to enable the user to operate the alarm system properly and information on how to obtain service for the alarm system at any time. The alarm business shall also inform each alarm user of the requirements to obtain a contact card and where it can be obtained.

D. Establish a process for alarm verification. The verification process shall not take more than five minutes, calculated from the time that the alarm signal has been accepted by the alarm business monitoring the system until a decision is made whether to call for a police dispatch. The means of verification may include one or more of the following:

1. The establishment of voice communication with an authorized person at or near the premises who may indicate whether or not need for immediate police assistance or investigation exists;

2. A feature that permits the alarm system user or a person authorized by the user to send a special signal to the alarm system monitoring company that will cancel an alarm immediately after it has been sent and prevent the monitoring company calling for a police dispatch;

3. The installation of a video system that provides the alarm system monitoring company when the signal is received with the ability to ascertain that activity is occurring which warrants immediate police assistance or investigation;

4. A confirmation that a signal reflects a need for immediate police assistance or investigation either by the alarm user, or a person at or near the premises before dispatching police; or

5. An alternate system that the chief determines has, or is likely to have, a high degree of reliability. [Ord. 19-0485 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 98-0044 § 8.]


9.15.090 Nonpermitted systems and uses.

A. No person shall operate or use an alarm system which emits an audible sound where such emission does not automatically cease within 15 minutes. Nothing in this section shall limit the duration of a fire or other evacuation alarm during a bona fide emergency.

B. No person shall use an alarm system to protect more than one business and/or private residence.

C. No person shall operate or use any alarm system for which the contact card registration has been revoked.

D. No person shall operate or use any alarm system which automatically dials the department or City directly and delivers a prerecorded message. [Ord. 19-0485 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 98-0044 § 9.]


9.15.100 Special registrations.

A. An alarm user required by federal or state law, regulation, rule or ordinance to install, maintain and operate an alarm system shall be subject to the alarm system regulations of this chapter, provided:

1. The alarm company shall designate the special alarm user’s status and provide it to the King County sheriff’s office communications center when reporting an activation.

2. A special alarm user’s contact card for a system that has false alarms during a six-month period shall not be subject to the no response procedure and shall pay the penalty fees and service charges.

B. An alarm user that is a governmental political unit shall be subject to this chapter, but shall not be subject to service charges or the imposition of any penalty provided herein. [Ord. 19-0485 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 98-0044 § 10.]


9.15.110 Appeals.

An alarm user may appeal the validity of a false alarm determination to the City’s hearing examiner pursuant to City ordinance. [Ord. 19-0485 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 98-0044 § 11.]


Chapter 9.20 PISTOL SALES*

Sections:

9.20.010    Definitions.

9.20.020    Sale and registration.

9.20.030    Delivery following sheriff’s report.

9.20.040    Purchase unlawful for certain persons.

9.20.050    Violation.

*Code reviser’s note: For additional provisions, see KMC 9.05.330.


9.20.010 Definitions.

The following words and phrases used herein shall be construed as follows:

A. “Pistol” means any firearm or other weapon for the purpose of discharging a projectile by means of compressed air, chemical combustion or otherwise and having a barrel less than 12 inches in length, but shall not include antique pistols or revolvers manufactured prior to 1898 and held as collector’s items.

B. “Crime of violence” means any of the following crimes or an attempt to commit any of the same: murder, manslaughter, rape, mayhem, first degree assault, robbery, burglary and kidnapping.

C. “Fugitive from justice” means a person who, having committed a crime, flees from the jurisdiction where it was committed to evade arrest.

D. “Law enforcement officer” means any person who by virtue of his office or public employment is vested by law with a duty to maintain public order or to make arrests for offenses. [Ord. 01-0101 § 35(2) (KCC 12.48.010).]


9.20.020 Sale and registration.

It is unlawful for any merchant or secondhand dealer, or any clerk, agent or employee of any merchant or secondhand dealer, to sell, give away or dispose of any pistol to any person at retail, unless such person is personally known to the seller or shall present clear evidence of his identity, nor without completing a true record in triplicate of every pistol sold or disposed of. Such record shall be personally signed by the purchaser and by the person affecting the sale, each in the presence of the other, and shall contain the date of sale, the caliber, make, model and manufacturer’s number of the weapon, the name, address, occupation, and place of birth of the purchaser, and a statement signed by the purchaser that he is not a fugitive from justice and that he has never been convicted in this State or elsewhere of a crime of violence, or of drug addiction or of habitual drunkenness and has never been confined to a mental institution. One copy shall within six hours be sent by registered mail to the sheriff of King County who shall, within 72 hours, exclusive of Sundays and holidays, investigate the information contained in said record and report his findings to the merchant or secondhand dealer. [Ord. 01-0101 § 35(2) (KCC 12.48.020).]


9.20.030 Delivery following sheriff’s report.

It is unlawful for any merchant or secondhand dealer or any clerk, agent or employee of any merchant or secondhand dealer to deliver any pistol to any purchaser until the merchant or secondhand dealer has received a report from the sheriff that the purchaser is not a fugitive from justice and that the purchaser has never been convicted in this State or elsewhere of a crime of violence, or of drug addiction or of habitual drunkenness and has never been confined to a mental institution; provided, that if such merchant or secondhand dealer does not receive such report from the sheriff within 72 hours, exclusive of Sundays and holidays, after he has mailed a copy of the record to the sheriff as required by KMC 9.20.020, then such merchant or secondhand dealer may deliver the pistol to the purchaser; provided further, that this section shall not apply to sales at wholesale, or to sales to persons exhibiting a valid license to carry a pistol concealed issued pursuant to RCW 9.41.070, or to sales to law enforcement officers. [Ord. 01-0101 § 35(2) (KCC 12.48.030).]


9.20.040 Purchase unlawful for certain persons.

It is unlawful for any person who is a fugitive from justice or who has been convicted in this State or elsewhere of a crime of violence or of drug addiction or of habitual drunkenness or has been confined to a mental institution to purchase a pistol and it is further unlawful for any such person to fail to disclose such information when applying for the purchase of a pistol. [Ord. 01-0101 § 35(2) (KCC 12.48.040).]


9.20.050 Violation.

Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. [Ord. 01-0101 § 35(2) (KCC 12.48.050).]


Chapter 9.25 IMPERSONATING PUBLIC OFFICERS – UNAUTHORIZED SALE, POSSESSION OR USE OF OFFICIAL PROPERTY*

Sections:

9.25.010    Impersonating members of police department.

9.25.020    Selling or disposing of police badges prohibited.

9.25.030    Possessing badge with intent to impersonate officer.

9.25.040    Intent to impersonate presumed.

9.25.050    Penalty for violation.

*Code reviser’s note: For additional provisions, see KMC 9.05.350.


9.25.010 Impersonating members of police department.

It is unlawful for anyone:

A. To represent himself falsely to be a member of the police department, hereinafter referred to as “the department”, or a special member appointed pursuant to RCW 36.28.020;

B. To wear without authority of the King County sheriff, uniforms or a distinctive part thereof, or any badge or insignia of the police department, or any facsimile of the aforementioned uniform, badge or insignia;

C. To wear or carry upon his person or display upon a vehicle without the authority of the Kenmore police department, any object, device or lettering containing the words “City of Kenmore police officer”, “City of Kenmore detective”, “City of Kenmore patrol”, “City of Kenmore police” or any such words of a similar nature reasonably designed to create the impression such person is in any manner connected with the department. [Ord. 01-0101 § 37(2) (KCC 12.08.010).]


9.25.020 Selling or disposing of police badges prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to sell, exchange, give away, or otherwise dispose of in any manner, without the authority of the department’s director, any police badge or insignia issued or authorized by the department. [Ord. 01-0101 § 37(2) (KCC 12.08.020).]


9.25.030 Possessing badge with intent to impersonate officer.

It is unlawful for any person, except a member of the department or such member appointed pursuant to RCW 36.28.020, to have in his possession any police badge issued or authorized by the department or any facsimile thereof, with intent falsely to represent himself to be a member or special member of the department. [Ord. 01-0101 § 37(2) (KCC 12.08.030).]


9.25.040 Intent to impersonate presumed.

The intent falsely to represent that a person is a member or special member of the department shall be presumed upon discovery of such possession as referred in the immediately foregoing section; provided, however, that such presumption shall be rebuttable. [Ord. 01-0101 § 37(2) (KCC 12.08.040).]


9.25.050 Penalty for violation.

Any violation of or failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall subject the offender upon conviction thereof to a fine of not exceeding $250.00 or to imprisonment for not exceeding 90 days or both. [Ord. 01-0101 § 37(2) (KCC 12.08.050).]


Chapter 9.30 LOITERING

Sections:

9.30.010    Unlawful – Determination.


9.30.010 Unlawful – Determination.

It is unlawful for any person to loiter or prowl in a place, at a time, or in a manner, and under circumstances that manifest an unlawful purpose or warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such unlawful purpose in manifested or such alarm is warranted include, but are not limited to, the following: flight by the actor upon appearance of a law enforcement officer, refusal to identify himself, or manifestly endeavoring to conceal himself or any object. [Ord. 01-0101 § 44(2) (KCC 12.64.010).]


Chapter 9.35 REGULATION OF CONDUCT ON TRANSIT PROPERTY

Sections:

Article I. General

9.35.010    Civil infractions – Misdemeanors.

Article II. Public Communication Activities

9.35.020    General.

9.35.030    Transit vehicles and tunnel platform areas.

Article III. Enforcement

9.35.040    General.

9.35.050    Immediate expulsion.

9.35.060    Suspension of use privileges.

9.35.070    Infractions – Penalty.

9.35.080    Misdemeanors – Penalty.

Article I. General


9.35.010 Civil infractions – Misdemeanors.

A. Infractions. The following actions are prohibited in, on or in relation to all transit properties. For conduct not amounting to a violation of another applicable State or local law bearing a greater penalty or criminal sanction than is provided under this section, a person who commits one of the following acts in, on or in relation to transit property is guilty of a civil infraction to which Chapter 7.80 RCW applies:

1. Allowing any animal to occupy a seat on transit property, to run at large without a leash, to unreasonably disturb others, or to obstruct the flow of passenger or bus traffic, but animals may occupy a passenger’s lap while in a transit vehicle or facility;

2. Allowing his or her animal to leave waste on transit property;

3. Rollerskating, rollerblading or skateboarding;

4. Riding a bicycle, motorcycle or other vehicle except for the purpose of entering or leaving passenger facilities on roadways designed for that use. In tunnel facilities, bicycles must be walked at all times and may not be transported on escalators. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to commissioned peace officers or City employees engaged in authorized activities in the course of their employment;

5. Eating or drinking. However, eating and drinking nonalcoholic beverages are permitted on the mezzanine and exterior plaza levels of tunnel stations and the exterior areas of other passenger facilities. Also, drinking a nonalcoholic beverage from a container designed to prevent spillage is permitted on transit property;

6. Bringing onto a transit passenger vehicle any package or other object which blocks an aisle or stairway or occupies a seat if to do so would, in the operator’s sole discretion, cause a danger to passengers or displace passengers or expected passengers;

7. Operating, stopping, standing or parking a vehicle in any roadway or location restricted for use only by transit vehicles or otherwise restricted;

8. Engaging in public communication activities or commercial activities except as authorized under Article II of this chapter;

9. Riding transit vehicles or using benches, floors or other areas in tunnel and other passenger facilities for the purpose of sleeping rather than for their intended transportation-related purposes;

10. Camping in or on transit property, storing personal property on benches, floors or other areas of transit property;

11. Entering or crossing the transit tunnel roadway or transit vehicle roadways in and about other passenger facilities, except in marked crosswalks or at the direction of City or police department personnel;

12. Extending an object or a portion of one’s body through the door or window of a transit vehicle while it is in motion;

13. Hanging or swinging on bars or stanchions, with feet off the floor, inside a transit vehicle or other transit property, hanging onto or otherwise attaching oneself at any time to the exterior of a transit vehicle or other transit property;

14. Engaging in any sport or recreational activities on transit property;

15. Parking a vehicle in an approved parking area on transit property for more than 72 consecutive hours;

16. Using a transit facility for residential or commercial parking purposes;

17. Performing any nonemergency repairs or cleaning of a vehicle parked on transit property; and

18. Conducting driver training on transit property.

B. Misdemeanors. The following actions are prohibited in, on or in relation to all transit properties. For conduct not amounting to a violation of another applicable State or local criminal law bearing a greater penalty than is provided under this chapter, a person who commits one of the following acts in, on or in relation to transit property is guilty of a misdemeanor:

1. Smoking or carrying a lighted or smoldering pipe, cigar or cigarette while in a transit vehicle or in the platform or mezzanine areas of the tunnel;

2. Discarding litter other than in designated receptacles;

3. Playing a radio, tape recorder, audible game device or any other sound-producing equipment, except when the equipment is connected to earphones that limit the sound to the individual listener. However, the use of communication devices by City employees, City contractors or police officers in the line of duty is permitted, as is the use of private communication devices used to summon, notify or communicate with other individuals (such as “beepers” or portable telephones);

4. Spitting, expectorating, urinating or defecating except in restroom facilities;

5. Carrying flammable liquids, flammable or nonflammable explosives, acid or any other article or material of a type or in a manner that is likely to cause harm to others. However, cigarette, cigar or pipe lighters, firearms, weapons, and ammunition may be carried if in a form or manner that is not otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance;

6. Intentionally obstructing or impeding the flow of transit vehicle or passenger movement, hindering or preventing access to transit property, causing unreasonable delays in boarding or deboarding, reclining or occupying more than one seat, or in any way interfering with the provision or use of transit services;

7. Unreasonably disturbing others by engaging in loud, raucous, unruly, harmful, abusive or harassing behavior;

8. Defacing, destroying or otherwise vandalizing transit property or any signs, notices or advertisements on transit property;

9. Drinking an alcoholic beverage or possessing an open container of an alcoholic beverage. However, possessing and drinking an alcoholic beverage is not prohibited in the tunnel facilities if authorized as part of a scheduled special event for which all required permits have been obtained and when said facilities are not in use for transit purposes;

10. Entering nonpublic areas, including but not limited to tunnel staging areas and equipment rooms, except when authorized by the director or when instructed to by City or police department personnel;

11. Dumping any materials whatsoever on transit property, including but not limited to chemicals and automotive fluids;

12. Throwing an object at transit property or at any person in transit property;

13. Failing to present a valid, unexpired pass, transfer or ticket or otherwise failing to pay the appropriate fare as required under City ordinance;

14. Possessing an unissued transfer or tendering an unissued transfer as proof of fare payment;

15. Falsely representing oneself as eligible for a special or reduced fare or obtaining any permit or pass related to the transit system by making a false representation;

16. Falsely claiming to be a transit operator or other transit employee, or through words, actions and/or the use of clothes, insignia or equipment resembling department-issued uniforms and equipment creating a false impression that he or she is a transit operator or other transit employee;

17. Bringing onto transit property odors which unreasonably disturb others or interfere with their use of the transit system, whether such odors arise from one’s person, clothes, articles, accompanying animal or any other source;

18. Engaging in gambling or any game of chance for the winning of money or anything of value; and

19. Discharging a laser-emitting device on a transit vehicle, directing such a device from a transit vehicle toward any other moving vehicle or directing such a device toward any transit operator or passenger. [Ord. 01-0101 § 44(2) (KCC 28.96.010); Ord. 98-0040 § 5.]

Article II. Public Communication Activities


9.35.020 General.

A. Purpose. In furtherance of its proprietary function as provider of public transportation, the City makes a variety of transit properties available to persons who use public transit services. Although transit properties may be accessed by the general public, they are not open public forums either by nature or by designation. Transit properties are intended to be used for public transit-related activities and provide little, if any, space for other activities.

Most public communication activities are generally prohibited in or on transit properties, regardless of viewpoint expressed, because they are incompatible with the City’s legitimate interests, including but not limited to:

1. Securing the use of scarce parking spaces and shelter space for persons who are using public transit services;

2. Maintaining safe, clean and secure transit properties to retain existing, and attract new users of public transit services;

3. Reducing litter pickup and other maintenance or other administrative expenses so as to maximize the provision of public transit services;

4. Preventing delays and inconvenience to passengers by minimizing congestion, and expediting their boarding, transferring, and deboarding of transit vehicles; and

5. Securing scarce space at the tunnel and other passenger facilities for potential commercial activities intended to produce revenues for the system and attract riders with convenience services and goods.

It is the purpose of this chapter to describe the varying degrees to which passengers and the public are allowed to engage in public communication activities on the three categories of transit property identified in KMC 9.35.030. This chapter does not apply to City activities or to City employees engaged in authorized activities in the course of their employment.

B. Obligations of Communicator. In addition to any civil infraction or criminal sanctions which may be applicable under this chapter or applicable federal, State and local law, any person engaged in public communication activities and found responsible for littler, damages or destruction of property, whether by accident or intent, shall be responsible for cleanup and/or shall be liable for the cost of cleanup, repair and replacement as necessary.

C. Noncity Uses. Notwithstanding the limitations and prohibitions contained in this chapter, the City reserves the right to enter into licenses, leases or other use agreements permitting noncity uses of transit properties which are found to be compatible with the City’s proprietary public transit function and interests; provided, the city manager shall comply with applicable King County Charter, King County Code and State law requirements in executing such licenses, leases and agreements. [Ord. 01-0101 § 44(2) (KCC 28.96.020).]


9.35.030 Transit vehicles and tunnel platform areas.

Public communication activities are prohibited in transit vehicles and tunnel platform areas. [Ord. 01-0101 § 44(2) (KCC 28.96.030).]

Article III. Enforcement


9.35.040 General.

In addition to any other remedies and sanctions available under applicable civil and criminal federal, State and local law, a person violating the rules and provision of this chapter shall be subject to the following:

A. Immediate expulsion from transit properties;

B. Suspension of the privilege of entering upon and using the transit system and properties;

C. Civil penalties if the violation constitutes an infraction; and

D. Criminal penalties if the violation constitutes a misdemeanor.

The classification of a violation as either an infraction or a misdemeanor under KMC 9.35.010 shall not limit or preclude any action or prosecution from being undertaken pursuant to another applicable local, State or federal law. [Ord. 01-0101 § 44(2) (KCC 28.96.410).]


9.35.050 Immediate expulsion.

Any person violating a rule or provision of KMC 9.35.010 through 9.35.030 or any federal, State or local law may be ordered to leave transit property by a commissioned peace officer, department personnel as authorized by the director or authorized personnel of a contracted service provider in accordance with the terms of the applicable service contract. Failure to immediately comply with such an expulsion order shall be grounds for prosecution for criminal trespass. [Ord. 01-0101 § 44(2) (KCC 28.96.420).]


9.35.060 Suspension of use privileges.

A. Violation of a rule or provision of this chapter or any federal, State or local law shall be cause for suspension of a person’s privileges to enter upon transit property and use the transit system. Such a suspension may be ordered by department personnel authorized by the director or by the authorized personnel of a contracted service provider in accordance with the terms of the applicable service contract. Notice of such suspension shall be in writing and shall inform the person suspended of the cause, the period of the suspension, and that failure to comply shall be grounds for criminal prosecution. Service of the suspension notice may be accomplished by personal delivery or by mailing a copy, addressed to the person’s last known address, by certified U.S. mail. Unless otherwise specified on the notice, the suspension shall take effect immediately upon actual or constructive receipt of the notice by the person being excluded. A person may not defeat the effectiveness of a suspension by refusing to accept the notice. Receipt of the notice is construed to have been accomplished if the person knew or reasonably should have known from the circumstances that his or her privileges to enter upon transit property and use the transit system have been suspended. Receipt of the notice is also construed to have been accomplished two days after a suspension notice is placed in the U.S. mail. Failure to immediately comply with such a suspension order shall be grounds for prosecution for criminal trespass.

B. A person whose use privileges have been suspended may submit a written request for a review of the suspension, which request must be received by the director within 10 calendar days after the effective date of the suspension. Upon receiving a timely request, the director shall designate a person to review the suspension. The suspended person may orally present his or her reasons why the suspension should not be served, by phone or in person at a time and location mutually agreed upon with the reviewer. Within 10 calendar days after the suspended person presents his or her reasons, the reviewer shall make a decision affirming, modifying or terminating the suspension. The reviewer’s decision shall be final. [Ord. 01-0101 § 44(2) (KCC 28.96.430).]


9.35.070 Infractions – Penalty.

A person who is guilty of committing an infraction under KMC 9.35.010(A) shall be subject to a monetary penalty of not more than $500.00 plus statutory assessments. Any person cited for a civil infraction shall be subject to the applicable Rules for Courts of Limited Jurisdiction and penalty schedules. [Ord. 01-0101 § 44(2) (KCC 28.96.440).]


9.35.080 Misdemeanors – Penalty.

A person who is guilty of committing misdemeanor infraction under KMC 9.35.010(B) shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 and by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days, or both. [Ord. 01-0101 § 44(2) (KCC 28.96.450).]


Chapter 9.40 PARKS – RULES FOR USE OF FACILITIES

Sections:

Article I. General

9.40.010    Definitions.

9.40.020    Program – Purpose.

Article II. Administration

9.40.030    Administrative rules – Hours and conditions of operation.

9.40.040    Permits for community groups.

9.40.050    Special use permits.

9.40.060    Cancellation of permit.

9.40.070    Religious services or group rallies.

9.40.080    Use of facilities – Building use hours.

9.40.090    Cleanup.

9.40.100    Liability.

9.40.110    Liability insurance.

9.40.120    Adults to accompany minors.

9.40.130    Storage of equipment – Liability of City.

9.40.140    Equipment regulations – Failure to perform.

9.40.150    Facility use – Sale of goods or services.

Article III. Rules Governing Use of Facilities – Infractions

9.40.160    Picnicking.

9.40.170    Food waste, washing of clothes or animals.

9.40.180    Parking lots and roadways – Games prohibited.

9.40.190    Motor vehicles – Parking.

9.40.200    Motor vehicles on roads and trails.

9.40.210    Motor vehicles – Speed limits.

9.40.220    Washing of vehicles.

9.40.230    Motor vehicles – Trucks and commercial vehicles.

9.40.240    Trail use.

9.40.250    Boating – Occupancy policy.

9.40.260    Commercial watercraft prohibited.

9.40.270    Overnight moorage.

9.40.280    Tandem moorage.

9.40.290    Use of marine heads.

9.40.300    Camping – In designated areas only.

9.40.310    Tents and shelters on beaches.

9.40.320    Clothing.

9.40.330    Ice.

9.40.340    Game fish.

9.40.350    Shellfish and food fish.

9.40.360    Pets in City park facilities.

9.40.370    Disturbances by animals prohibited.

9.40.380    Horseback riding.

9.40.390    Littering.

9.40.400    Swimming – In designated areas only.

9.40.410    Swimming and boating rules.

9.40.420    Swimming/scuba diving in boat launch areas prohibited.

9.40.430    Presence in parks during hours the park is closed.

Article IV. Rules Governing Use of Facilities – Misdemeanors

9.40.440    Loitering.

9.40.450    Horseback riding – May not endanger others.

9.40.460    Mechanical trapping devices – Capturing or injuring animals.

9.40.470    False alarm of drowning prohibited.

9.40.480    Games on beaches.

9.40.490    Moorage in swimming area prohibited.

9.40.500    Damage to property/wildlife.

9.40.510    Removal of property.

9.40.520    Outside household or commercial waste.

9.40.530    Waste from vehicles.

9.40.540    Dumping in water prohibited.

9.40.550    Aircraft.

9.40.560    Solicitation.

9.40.570    Fireworks.

9.40.580    Firearms, weapons.

9.40.590    Alcoholic beverages.

9.40.600    Intoxication.

9.40.610    Interference with trails.

Article V. Penalties

9.40.620    Infractions.

9.40.630    Misdemeanors.

9.40.640    Administrative sanctions.

Article VI. Park Safety – Enforcement

9.40.650    Park safety.

9.40.660    Responsibilities.

9.40.670    Enforcement methods.

9.40.680    Contractual agreements.

Article I. General


9.40.010 Definitions.

Whenever used in this chapter the following terms shall be defined as herein indicated:

A. “Aircraft” means any machine or device designed to travel through the air including but not limited to airplanes, helicopters and balloons;

B. “Alcoholic beverages” or “liquor” includes the four varieties of liquor defined as alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, all fermented, spirituous, vinous, or malt liquor, and all other intoxicating beverages, and every liquor, solid or semisolid or other substance, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, all drinks or drinkable liquids and all preparations or mixtures capable of human consumption. Any liquor, semisolid, solid or other substance which contains more than one percent alcohol by weight shall be conclusively deemed to be intoxicating;

C. “Associated marine area” means any water area within 100 feet of any “City of Kenmore trail, open space, park area” or “marine facility” such as a dock, pier, float, buoy, log boom, or other object which is part of a “City of Kenmore park area”; provided, that such area does not include private property;

D. “Boat” means any contrivance up to 65 feet in length overall, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water;

E. “Camper” means a motorized vehicle containing sleeping and/or housekeeping accommodations, and shall include a pickup truck with camper, a van-type body, a converted bus, or any similar type vehicle;

F. “Camping” means erecting a tent or shelter or arranging bedding or both for the purpose of or in such a way as will permit remaining overnight, or parking a trailer, camper, or other vehicle for the purpose of remaining overnight;

G. “Campsite” means designated camping sites which are designated for the use of tent campers, and which have no water and/or electrical facilities available for hookup to a trailer or a camper;

H. “City park” means land designated as a “park” in the City Park, Recreation and Open Space Plan section of the Comprehensive Plan or any City ordinance;

I. “Discrimination” means any action or failure to act, whether by single act or part of a practice, the effect of which is to adversely affect or differentiate between or among individuals or groups of individuals, because of race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex, marital status, parental status, sexual orientation, the presence of any sensory, mental or physical handicap, or the use of an animal guide by a blind or deaf or otherwise physically or mentally challenged person;

J. “Department” means the City department or outside agency assigned by the city manager to administer a portion of the City code;

K. “Facility” or “facilities” means any building, structure, or park area operated by the department;

L. “Facility manager” means a duly appointed department employee;

M. “City of Kenmore open space, trail or park area” means any area under the ownership, management, or control of the City of Kenmore or the department;

N. “Director” means director of the department;

O. “Motor vehicle” means any self-propelled device capable of being moved upon a road, and in, upon, or by which any persons or property may be transported or drawn, and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motor scooters, jeeps or similar type four-wheel drive vehicles, and snowmobiles, whether or not they can be legally operated upon the public highways;

P. “Person” means all persons, groups, firms, partnerships, corporations, clubs, and all associations or combination of persons whenever acting for themselves or as an agent, servant, or employee;

Q. “Rocket” means any device containing a combustible substance which when ignited propels the device forward;

R. “Trail” means any path, track, or right-of-way designed for use by pedestrians, bicycles, equestrians, or other nonmotorized modes of transportation;

S. “Trailer” means a towed vehicle which contains sleeping or housekeeping accommodations;

T. “Trailer site” means a designated camping site which has water and/or electrical facilities available for hookup, and which is designed for the use of persons with trailers or campers. [Ord. 16-0417 § 3; Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.010).]


9.40.020 Program – Purpose.

The playgrounds, activity centers, pools, and other facilities of the City are established by law for public recreation purposes. The public recreation programs consist primarily of activities planned and directed by the City, and secondarily of recreation activities of community groups brought under control of the City when authorized by and conducted under permit issued by the City. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.020).]

Article II. Administration


9.40.030 Administrative rules – Hours and conditions of operation.

The manager shall promulgate rules setting forth the times and conditions upon which the City parks and recreation facilities will be open, closed, or used by the public. Such rules shall be promulgated in accordance with the procedures established in Chapter 2.98 KCC. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.030).]


9.40.040 Permits for community groups.

A. The department may grant permits to community groups to meet or conduct activities in the department’s buildings or in the department’s other facilities if those buildings, portions of buildings, or facilities are not otherwise required by the department. A nominal fee may be charged according to the department’s current adopted fee ordinance. The fee ordinance is adopted by the Kenmore city council during its annual budget process.

B. Facilities cannot be reserved more than 90 days in advance unless otherwise authorized by the department. All such permits must be approved by the department. City of Kenmore swimming pools are excluded from the provisions of this section. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.040).]


9.40.050 Special use permits.

A. Groups which do not meet all of the requirements set forth in KMC 9.40.040 and groups which desire to use City of Kenmore swimming pools may be granted special use permits by the department, and will be charged a fee. Where appropriate, special conditions of use will be established by the department and so noted on the special use permit. A schedule of the charges for special services in City of Kenmore recreational facilities will be established by the department with the approval of the Kenmore city council.

B. Groups applying for special use permits for activities at which the consumption of alcoholic beverages is intended must meet the requirements of State law with respect to liquor permits as a precondition. During the course of the activity, the State liquor permit must be displayed within the area. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.050).]


9.40.060 Cancellation of permit.

The City reserves the right to cancel a permittee’s reservation for cause or if the City wishes to make use of the facility which in the judgment of the City supersedes the need of the permittee. Notice of the City’s cancellation for priority use shall be given at least 24 hours in advance. Notice of cancellation for cause may be given at any time. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.060).]


9.40.070 Religious services or group rallies.

Religious services or group rallies may be permitted in City of Kenmore park areas where facilities are adequate, and where such activities will not conflict in any way with normal park usage. To avoid conflict, permission for such activities must be obtained in advance from the manager. Permission for use of loudspeakers by groups must be obtained in advance. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.070).]


9.40.080 Use of facilities – Building use hours.

Activities for groups using the facilities Sundays through Thursdays shall normally cease at 10:00 p.m. unless otherwise approved on the use permit. On Fridays and Saturdays groups must agree to be out of the facilities by 12:30 a.m. unless otherwise approved in the use permit. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.080).]


9.40.090 Cleanup.

All persons must leave facilities in a condition considered satisfactory to the facility manager in charge who will supervise cleanup activity. No person shall conduct activities causing extra custodial work unless previous agreement has been made to pay for such work and this is so stated in the use permit. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.090).]


9.40.100 Liability.

Persons using facilities by permit will be required to protect, save and hold the City of Kenmore, its elected and appointed officials and employees while acting within the scope of their duties harmless from and against all claims, demands and causes of action of any kind or character, including the cost of defense thereof, arising in favor of a person or group’s members or employees or third parties on account of any action including but not limited to personal injuries, death or damage to property arising out of the use of premises, or in any way arising out of the acts or omissions of the person, group and/or its agents, employees or representatives. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.100).]


9.40.110 Liability insurance.

A. During all periods of use, persons using facilities by permit shall, except when a waiver is obtained from the department, obtain and maintain public liability insurance acceptable to the City and/or other insurance necessary to protect the public and the City on premises to be used, with limits of liability not less than:

1. Five hundred thousand dollars each person, personal injury;

2. Five hundred thousand dollars each occurrence, personal injury;

3. Two hundred fifty thousand dollars each occurrence, property damage; or

4. A combined single limit personal injury and/or property damage liability of $1,000,000 per occurrence.

B. Persons shall provide a certificate of insurance or, upon written request of the City, a duplicate of the policy, as evidence of the insurance protection provided. This insurance shall not be cancelled or reduced without prior written notice to the City at least 30 days in advance of the cancellation. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.110).]


9.40.120 Adults to accompany minors.

Adults must be present and responsible at all assemblies of minors throughout the entire function. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.120).]


9.40.130 Storage of equipment – Liability of City.

Persons using facilities should not expect storage space for equipment necessary for their programs. If temporary storage is provided, the City of Kenmore shall not be held responsible for loss or damage. City equipment shall not be loaned to any noncity person, group or organization without prior written permission from the department. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.130).]


9.40.140 Equipment regulations – Failure to perform.

The misuse of a park facility or the failure to conform with these regulations, the instructions of division employees, or the conditions of a permit will be sufficient reason for denying any future permits. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.140).]


9.40.150 Facility use – Sale of goods or services.

The use of park facilities for financial gain shall be allowed only through concession contracts secured by the City’s competitive bid process, negotiated concession contracts or by special use permit issued by the City. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.150).]

Article III. Rules Governing Use of Facilities – Infractions


9.40.160 Picnicking.

Picnicking is permitted only in designated and marked picnicking areas, or in such other places within a City of Kenmore park area as may from time to time be designated by a facility manager. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.220).]


9.40.170 Food waste, washing of clothes or animals.

No person shall clean fish or other food, or wash any clothing or other articles for personal or household use, or any dog or other animal, except at designated areas in any City of Kenmore park area. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.230).]


9.40.180 Parking lots and roadways – Games prohibited.

Games of any kind are prohibited in parking lots and roadways of all division facilities. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.240).]


9.40.190 Motor vehicles – Parking.

No operator of any automobile, trailer, camper, boat trailer, or other vehicle shall park such vehicle in any City of Kenmore park area, except where the operator is using the area for the designated recreational purpose and the vehicle is parked either in the designated parking area, or in another area with the permission of a facility manager. No person shall park, leave standing, or abandon a vehicle in any City of Kenmore park area after closing time except persons who have paid the applicable use fees to camp in designated campsites or trailer sites or to moor boats overnight at designated sites, and persons using park facilities as part of an event authorized by the City. In addition to the penalties found in Article V of this chapter, any vehicle found parked in violation of this section may be towed away at the owner’s expense. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.250).]


9.40.200 Motor vehicles on roads and trails.

No person shall operate any motor vehicle on a trail in any City of Kenmore park area unless such trail has been specifically designated and posted for such use. No person shall operate a motor vehicle within the boundaries of a City of Kenmore park area except on roads, streets, highways, parking lots, parking areas, or where otherwise permitted by proper posting. Through traffic is not permitted within the boundaries of any City of Kenmore park or open space; provided, that this section shall not apply to emergency vehicles, maintenance vehicles, or construction vehicles authorized by the department. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.260).]


9.40.210 Motor vehicles – Speed limits.

No person shall drive a motor vehicle within any City of Kenmore park area at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour or as otherwise posted, having due regard for traffic on and the surface and width of the road, and in no event at a speed which endangers the safety of persons, property, or wildlife; provided, however, that in no event shall a vehicle be driven at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour in camp, picnic, utility, or headquarters areas, or in areas of general public assemblage. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.270).]


9.40.220 Washing of vehicles.

No person shall clean or wash any automobile or other vehicle in any City of Kenmore park area except in areas specifically designated for that use. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.280).]


9.40.230 Motor vehicles – Trucks and commercial vehicles.

No person shall cause a truck or other vehicle while being used for commercial purposes to enter upon, use, or traverse any portion of any City of Kenmore park area or any park road except in the service of the City at the request of the employees of the City, or by express permission of the manager for a special activity not inconsistent with City of Kenmore park use; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to City roads or State highways. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.290).]


9.40.240 Trail use.

A. No person shall travel on a trail at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. In every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with others who are complying with the law and using reasonable care. Travel at speeds in excess of 15 miles per hour shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the person violated this section.

B. No person shall travel on a trail in a negligent manner. For the purposes of this section “travel on a trail in a negligent manner” shall be construed to mean any form of travel on a trail in such a manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger any persons or property.

C. For the purposes of this section “travel” shall be construed to include all forms of movement or transportation on a trail, including but not limited to foot, bicycle, horse, skateboard, and roller skates.

D. Every person traveling on a trail shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with applicable laws unless otherwise directed by a police officer.

E. No motorized vehicles shall be allowed on City of Kenmore trails. For the purposes of this section “motorized vehicles” means any form of transportation powered by an internal combustion or electric motor. This includes but is not limited to automobiles, golf carts, mopeds, motor scooters, and motorcycles. This section shall not apply to wheelchairs powered by electric motors, or authorized maintenance, police or emergency vehicles.

F. Regional trails, local trail corridors, and paved pathways are open to all nonmotorized users unless otherwise designated and posted. Pedestrians, bicyclists and equestrians are permitted on all maintained soft surface trails unless otherwise posted and designated. Trail restrictions may be posted at park entrances, trailheads or, in some cases, on individual trails. Trail use designations will be based on the park master plan, resource conservation, trail user conflicts, maintenance issues, and safety hazards.

G. Every person who shall use or travel on a trail shall obey the Model Trail User Code of Conduct.

H. Model Trail User Code of Conduct.

1. Using a Trail. Every person using a trail shall stay as near to the right side of the trail as is safe, excepting those movements necessary to prepare to make or make turning movements, or while overtaking and passing another user moving in the same direction.

2. Regard for Other Trail Users. Every user shall exercise due care and caution to avoid colliding with any other trail user. All users shall travel in a consistent and predictable manner.

3. Groups on Trail. No group of trail users, including their animal(s), shall occupy more than one-half of the trail as measured from the right side so as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of trail users.

4. Audible Signal When Passing. Every user shall give an audible warning signal before passing another trail user. The signal must be produced in such a manner as to allow adequate time for response. The signal may be given by voice, bell or horn.

5. Overtaking Trail Users on the Left. Any trail user overtaking another trail user proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left of such overtaken user at a safe distance, and shall stay to the left until safely clear of the overtaken user.

6. Entering and Crossing Trail. Trail users entering or crossing the trail at uncontrolled points shall yield to traffic on the trail.

7. Lights on Trail Users. All bicyclists using the trail from one-half hour before sunset to one-half hour before sunrise shall equip their bicycles with a headlight visible 500 feet to the front, and a red or amber light visible 500 feet to the rear.

8. Regard for Equestrian Users on Trail. Trail users shall exercise extreme caution to prevent frightening horses with sudden noise or movement and shall always yield right-of-way to horses and warn equestrian users when approaching from behind and attempting to pass.

9. Regard for Adjacent Property Owners. Trail users should respect private lands adjacent to City trails and should stay on trails to avoid trespassing on or interfering with adjacent private property. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.295).]


9.40.250 Boating – Occupancy policy.

In order to afford the general public the greatest possible use of marine facilities, continuous occupancy of marine facilities by the same person or group in any area is limited to any three days in a seven-day period, beginning midnight Wednesday and ending midnight the following Wednesday unless otherwise posted. Shorter or longer limitation of occupancy may be established and posted by the City for any individual facility or area. In addition to the penalties in Article V of this chapter, any boat found to be in violation of this chapter may be towed away at the owner’s expense. No person shall launch a boat in any City of Kenmore park except in areas specifically designated and/or marked for that purpose. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.300).]


9.40.260 Commercial watercraft prohibited.

Use of marine areas and marine facilities by commercial watercraft is prohibited. For the purpose of this rule, “commercial watercraft” means watercraft used for any commercial purpose but shall not include a commercial watercraft operated within the terms of a concession lease with the City. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.310).]


9.40.270 Overnight moorage.

No person or persons shall moor, anchor, dock or berth a boat or other object overnight in a City of Kenmore park area or associated marine area unless the area has been designated for such use. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.320).]


9.40.280 Tandem moorage.

No more than three boats or other objects may be tied or rafted together when moored, docked or berthed adjacent to a dock, pier, or float in a City of Kenmore park area. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.330).]


9.40.290 Use of marine heads.

No person shall use or flush any marine head which when flushed emits its contents directly into the waters of a lake, river, Puget Sound, or any other water area, nor cause any human or animal waste to be dumped into the waters while moored, anchored, docked or berthed in a City of Kenmore park area or associated marine area or when entering or leaving the area. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.340).]


9.40.300 Camping – In designated areas only.

No person shall camp in any City of Kenmore park area except in areas specifically designated and/or marked for that purpose. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.350).]


9.40.310 Tents and shelters on beaches.

No person shall erect, maintain, use or occupy a temporary tent or shelter on any swimming beach in any City of Kenmore park area unless there is an unobstructed view through such tent or shelter from at least two sides; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize overnight camping except in designated areas. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.360).]


9.40.320 Clothing.

Clothing sufficient to conform to community standards shall be worn at all times. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.370).]


9.40.330 Ice.

No person shall go out onto ice in any City of Kenmore park or park area, except in areas specifically designated for that purpose. This includes but is not limited to lakes, ponds, streams, rivers, and other bodies of water. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.380).]


9.40.340 Game fish.

All laws, rules and regulations of the State Game Commission relating to season, limits, and methods of fishing are applicable to fishing for game fish in City of Kenmore park areas. No person may fish for or possess any fish taken from any dam, dike, bridge, dock, boatland, or beach which is posted with a sign prohibiting fishing. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.390).]


9.40.350 Shellfish and food fish.

All laws, rules and regulations of the State Department of Fisheries relating to season, limits, and methods of taking are applicable to the taking of shellfish or food fish in City of Kenmore park areas, and in addition to such laws the City of Kenmore park system may, upon its finding and for good cause, close certain City of Kenmore park areas to the taking of shellfish for specific periods of time. Such closed areas shall be posted with appropriate signs. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.400).]


9.40.360 Pets in City park facilities.

A. Dogs, pets, or domestic animals are not permitted on any designated swimming beach, picnic or play area in any City of Kenmore park or in any building unless specifically permitted by posting; provided, that this section shall not apply to animal guides.

B. In permissible areas, dogs or other pets or domestic animals must be kept on a leash no greater than 15 feet in length, and under control at all times.

C. Any person whose dog or other pet is in any City of Kenmore park area shall be responsible for the conduct of the animal and for removing feces deposited by such animal from the park area. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.410).]


9.40.370 Disturbances by animals prohibited.

No person shall allow his or her dog or other pet or domestic animal to bite or in any way molest or annoy park visitors. No person shall permit his or her dog or other pet or domestic animal to bark continuously or otherwise disturb the peace and tranquility of the park. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.420).]


9.40.380 Horseback riding.

Horses are permitted on trails unless otherwise posted and designated. Horses shall be permitted in other City of Kenmore park areas that are specifically posted to permit such activity. Horses shall not be permitted in any designated swimming area or picnic area. No person shall allow a horse or other animal to stand unattended or insecurely tied. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.430).]


9.40.390 Littering.

No person shall leave, deposit, drop or scatter bottles, broken glass, ashes, food, waste paper, cans, or other rubbish in a City of Kenmore park area, except in a garbage can or other receptacle designated for such purposes. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.440).]


9.40.400 Swimming – In designated areas only.

City of Kenmore park swimming areas are marked with buoys, log booms, or other markers, clearly designating the boundaries of such areas. Swimming shall be permitted only within these areas. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.450).]


9.40.410 Swimming and boating rules.

Swimmers must obey rules. All persons using City of Kenmore parks, beaches and water resources shall obey all posted beach rules and/or the instructions of lifeguards, facility managers, or other park department employees.

A. In designated swimming areas, flotation devices are allowed only at lifeguards’ discretion. Using a designated swimming area as a flotation device launching or landing point to the greater body of water is prohibited.

B. False alarm of drowning is prohibited. No person shall give or transmit a false signal or false alarm of drowning in any manner.

C. Swimming in boat launch areas is prohibited. No person shall swim or sunbathe in any designated boat launching areas.

D. Boat launching is permitted in designated areas only. No person shall launch a boat in any City of Kenmore park except in areas specifically designated and/or marked for that purpose; provided, that this provision does not apply in an emergency situation. Boat operation is prohibited within 100 feet of any City of Kenmore parks, lifeguarded beach or dock facility during the months of June, July, August, and September when lifeguards are present and the beach is open to the public for swimming. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.460).]


9.40.420 Swimming/scuba diving in boat launch areas prohibited.

No person shall swim, sunbathe, or scuba dive in any designated boat launching area. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.470).]


9.40.430 Presence in parks during hours the park is closed.

No person shall enter or be present in a City park area during hours the park is closed except persons who have paid the applicable use fees to camp in designated campsites or trailer sites, or to moor boats overnight at designated sites and persons using park facilities as part of an event authorized by the department. Park areas are open dawn to dusk unless open for scheduled or reserved recreational activities. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.480).]

Article IV. Rules Governing Use of Facilities – Misdemeanors


9.40.440 Loitering.

Loitering as defined in Chapter 9.30 KMC is prohibited in restrooms and bathhouses in City of Kenmore park and recreation facilities. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.490).]


9.40.450 Horseback riding – May not endanger others.

No person shall ride any horse or other animal in such a manner that could cause physical harm to any person. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.500).]


9.40.460 Mechanical trapping devices – Capturing or injuring animals.

The use of a mechanical trapping device within any City of Kenmore park is prohibited. A “mechanical trapping device” shall be defined as any device, including but not limited to snares or machines, that shut suddenly upon contact by an animal, or a device which kills or inflicts physical pain and injury upon a captured animal. The act of capturing an animal, by other than lawful means is prohibited. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.510).]


9.40.470 False alarm of drowning prohibited.

No person shall give or transmit a false signal or false alarm of drowning. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.520).]


9.40.480 Games on beaches.

Activities including but not limited to sports and physical play which interfere or tend to interfere with and endanger other beach users and distract from or obstruct the performance of lifeguarding responsibilities of parks personnel are prohibited. When circumstances can safely permit games, such games will be conducted only with the consent of a facility manager, lifeguard, or other department employee. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.530).]


9.40.490 Moorage in swimming area prohibited.

No person or persons shall moor, dock, or berth a boat or other object to a log boom or float line which delineates a swimming area in a City of Kenmore park area or associated marine area. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.540).]


9.40.500 Damage to property/wildlife.

A. It is unlawful for any person except a duly authorized department employee in the performance of his or her duties, or other person duly authorized pursuant to law, to remove, destroy, mutilate or damage any structure, lawn, monument, statue, vase, fountain, wall, fence railing, vehicle, bench, shrub, tree, geological formation, plant, flower lighting system, sprinkling system, gate, barricade or lock or other property lawfully in any park, or to remove sand, soil, or sod in any park. No person shall cut down, destroy, or in any way injure any vegetation, living or dead, in any City of Kenmore park area unless authorized to do so by the department. No person shall deface, damage or destroy any property, material or equipment which is under the jurisdiction of the City.

B. Damage to Wildlife. Except for fishing and shellfishing in authorized areas and subject to rules promulgated by the Washington State Fish and Wildlife Commission, it is unlawful in any park in any manner to attempt to capture, tease, annoy, disturb, or strike any animal, with any stick, weapon or other device or throw or otherwise propel any missile or other object at or in the vicinity of any such animal. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.550).]


9.40.510 Removal of property.

No person shall change the position of or remove any City property, material, or equipment including vegetation and wildlife from its original position in any area under the jurisdiction of the department. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.560).]


9.40.520 Outside household or commercial waste.

No person shall deposit any household or commercial garbage, refuse, waste, or rubbish which is brought in such form from any private property in any City of Kenmore park area garbage can or other receptacle designated for such purpose. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.570).]


9.40.530 Waste from vehicles.

No person shall drain or dump refuse or waste from any trailer, camper, automobile, or other vehicle, except in designated disposal areas or receptacles in any City of Kenmore park area. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.580).]


9.40.540 Dumping in water prohibited.

No person shall pollute, or in any way contaminate by dumping or otherwise depositing any waste or refuse of any nature, kind or description, including human and bodily waste, into any stream, river, lake or other body of water running in, through, or adjacent to any City of Kenmore park area. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.590).]


9.40.550 Aircraft.

A. Aircraft Landing/Take Off. No aircraft shall land or take off from any body of water or land area in a City of Kenmore park area except:

1. Aircraft used to transport injured persons, evacuees, medical personnel, or public officials in the event of an accident, disaster, or emergency;

2. Model aircraft as provided in subsection (B) of this section;

3. No person shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of this section in the event of a bona fide emergency, provided the owner of the aircraft submits a written statement explaining the circumstances of the emergency to the director within 72 hours of an emergency landing.

B. Model Aircraft and Rockets.

1. No person shall fly rockets or model aircraft in any City of Kenmore park area except in areas specifically designated and/or posted for that purpose;

2. All engines over 0.15 cubic inches used in model aircraft being flown in designated City of Kenmore park areas shall be muffled;

3. All persons flying model aircraft in designated City of Kenmore park areas shall abide by the Official Academy of Model Aeronautics Safety Code;

4. All persons desiring to shoot model rockets in a City of Kenmore park area shall obtain a permit to do so from the parks and recreation services office. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.600).]


9.40.560 Solicitation.

No person shall solicit, sell, or peddle any goods, services, wares, merchandise, liquids, or edibles for human consumption, or distribute or post any handbills, circulars, or signs, or use any loudspeakers or other amplifying devices, in any City of Kenmore park area, except by concession contract or by special use permit issued by the City. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.610).]


9.40.570 Fireworks.

No person shall possess, discharge, set off, or cause to be discharged, in or into any City of Kenmore park area, any firecracker, torpedo, rocket, firework, explosive, or substance harmful to the life or safety of persons or property, unless so authorized by the City. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.620).]


9.40.580 Firearms, weapons.

No person except duly authorized law enforcement personnel shall possess a bow and arrow, crossbow, or air or gas weapon in a City park. No person shall discharge across, in, or into any City of Kenmore park area a firearm, bow and arrow, crossbow, air or gas weapon, or any device capable of injuring or killing any person or animal, or damaging or destroying any public or private property; provided, that where the department for good cause has authorized in writing a special recreational activity upon finding that it is not inconsistent with City of Kenmore park use this section shall not apply. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.630).]


9.40.590 Alcoholic beverages.

No person shall in a City park or associated marine area: sell an alcoholic beverage; open a bottle, can or other receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage; possess an alcoholic beverage in an open container; or consume an alcoholic beverage, unless such sale, opening, possession or consumption is authorized in connection with a use, special event or other activity for which all applicable permits or licenses, including but not limited to those required by the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Control Board under RCW Title 66 or this code, have been obtained; but in no case shall such sale, opening, possession or consumption be authorized in connection with a use, special event or other activity within Linwood Park, Moorlands Park, Northshore Summit Park, or Wallace Swamp Creek Park. [Ord. 16-0417 § 1; Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.640).]


9.40.600 Intoxication.

Being or remaining in, or loitering about in, any City park or associated marine area while in a state of intoxication is prohibited. [Ord. 16-0417 § 2; Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.642).]


9.40.610 Interference with trails.

A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or otherwise cause or suffer to be located any structure, device, or natural or artificial thing that threatens or endangers any portion of a trail owned or maintained by the City of Kenmore, or that tends to endanger persons traveling thereon, obstructs or tends to obstruct or constitutes a hazard to persons traveling thereon.

B. This section shall not apply to employees of the City of Kenmore in the performance of their duties or to persons acting pursuant to written direction of the City of Kenmore. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.645).]

Article V. Penalties


9.40.620 Infractions.

A. Failure to perform any act required or the performance of any act prohibited by Article III of this chapter shall be designated as an infraction.

B. Any person cited for a violation of Article III of this chapter shall be subject to the applicable Justice Court Rules and bail schedules.

C. Any person found guilty of committing an infraction shall be assessed a monetary penalty not to exceed $500.00.

D. A finding that an infraction has been committed shall not give rise to any other legal disability which is based upon conviction of a crime. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.650).]


9.40.630 Misdemeanors.

Any person found guilty of violating any provision of Article IV of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days, or both. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.660).]


9.40.640 Administrative sanctions.

In addition to any prescribed penalty, any person failing to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the loss of park or recreation facility use privileges and ejection from the City park area or associated marine park area. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.670).]

Article VI. Park Safety – Enforcement


9.40.650 Park safety.

A. General. Park rules, as promulgated in this chapter, are established to provide a system by which the greatest number of people may obtain the maximum satisfaction from the use of City parks and recreation facilities. For the rules to serve this purpose, they must be understood and followed by the park users. Accordingly, park safety involves both public awareness and rule enforcement programs.

B. Application of Park Safety Program. The degree and extent to which the application of park safety shall be adapted to City parks shall be based on purpose and location of each park and recreation facility, its environment and surrounding community, the number and type of persons using it, the number and type of rule violations that have occurred in the past, and the perception that the people of the City have of the park or facility as a safe place to use. The City shall keep records of safety problems and rules violations in each facility and continuously evaluate its safety program for each facility based on those records. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.680).]


9.40.660 Responsibilities.

Park safety is the responsibility of both the police department and the department of parks, cultural and natural resources. Specific responsibilities include the following:

A. Parks, Cultural and Natural Resources Department.

1. Enforcing rules of conduct set forth in the ordinance for which department personnel have appropriate authority.

2. Developing and implementing public awareness programs regarding the purpose of the facilities and the rules governing their use.

3. Encouraging voluntary compliance with rules based on awareness.

4. Training department personnel in the appropriate use of administrative sanctions as a means of park rule enforcement.

5. Notification of law enforcement officers who have primary jurisdiction in a particular geographic area whenever department personnel observe violations of park rules requiring further law enforcement authority or other violations of local, State, or federal laws, whenever there is an emergency requiring law enforcement assistance, or whenever they need assistance in executing their responsibilities pursuant to this chapter.

B. Police Department.

1. Deputizing and training of personnel authorized to issue citations for infractions and misdemeanor offenses.

2. Providing supplementary patrols in natural resources and parks facilities as jointly determined by the director of the department of parks, cultural and natural resources and the director of the police department.

3. Responding, as appropriate, to requests from department personnel for assistance in situations beyond their capacity or authority to act. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.690).]


9.40.670 Enforcement methods.

Violation of the park rules may be a civil infraction or criminal misdemeanor. The initial method of enforcement shall be by a request for voluntary compliance. Violation of this code may be subject to enforcement by the King County sheriff pursuant to KMC 9.40.620 and 9.40.630. In addition, any person failing to comply with the park rules shall be subject to the loss of park or recreation facility use privileges and ejection from City park areas or associated marine park areas. In the future, at the direction of the department director, the park rules ordinance may be updated to request that certain department personnel be commissioned by the King County sheriff for the purpose of issuing citations to the violators of adopted park rules. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.700).]


9.40.680 Contractual agreements.

Any other provisions of this chapter notwithstanding, the manager is authorized to enter into a contract or agreement with the director of the City of Kenmore police department to provide specific park patrol services to enforce the laws and ordinances of the City of Kenmore within City of Kenmore park areas. [Ord. 01-0101 § 48 (KCC 7.12.710).]


Chapter 9.45 ROADSIDE STANDS

Sections:

9.45.010    Unlawful to erect certain structures along roads.

9.45.020    Required distance from right-of-way.

9.45.030    Nuisance declared – Authority of engineer.

9.45.040    Violation – Misdemeanor.


9.45.010 Unlawful to erect certain structures along roads.

It is unlawful for any person to build, erect, establish, operate, maintain or conduct along and upon the right-of-way of any City road or highway any platform, box, stand or any other temporary or permanent device or structure used, or to be used, for the purpose of receiving, vending or delivering any milk, milk cans, vegetables, fruits, merchandise, produce, or any other thing or commodity of any nature; provided, that the encroachment upon said City road or highway for business purposes shall not exceed two feet from the right-of-way line thereof. [Ord. 01-0101 § 53 (KCC 12.28.010).]


9.45.020 Required distance from right-of-way.

It is unlawful for any person to erect a structure or establishment or maintain a business, the nature of which requires the use by patrons or customers of property adjoining such structure or establishment, unless such structure or establishment be so located at a distance from the right-of-way of any City road or highway that none of the right-of-way thereof is required for the use of the patrons or customers of any such establishment except that portion thereof permitted under KMC 9.45.010. [Ord. 01-0101 § 53 (KCC 12.28.020).]


9.45.030 Nuisance declared – Authority of engineer.

Whenever there shall exist upon the right-of-way of any City road or highway, or off the right-of-way thereof in sufficiently close proximity thereto, any structure, device or natural or artificial thing which threatens or endangers the use of such City road or highway or portion thereof, or which tends to endanger persons traveling thereon, or tends to obstruct or constitutes a hazard to vehicles or persons traveling thereon, such structure, device or natural or artificial thing is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the city road engineer is empowered to take such action as may be necessary to effect the abatement of the same. Any such structure, device or natural or artificial thing considered by the city road engineer to be immediately or eminently dangerous to travel upon a City road or highway may be forthwith removed, and such removal shall in no event constitute a breach of the peace or trespass. [Ord. 01-0101 § 53 (KCC 12.28.030).]


9.45.040 Violation – Misdemeanor.

Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and be punished accordingly. [Ord. 01-0101 § 53 (KCC 12.28.040).]


Chapter 9.50 PROSTITUTION*

Sections:

9.50.010    Unlawful acts.

9.50.020    Known prostitute or panderer defined.

9.50.030    Prostitution defined – Sexual conduct defined.

9.50.040    Public nuisance.

9.50.050    Evidence.

9.50.060    Additional evidence.

*Code reviser’s note: For additional provisions, see KMC 9.05.490.


9.50.010 Unlawful acts.

It is unlawful for anyone to:

A. Commit or offer or agree to commit an act of prostitution; or

B. Secure or offer to secure another for the purpose of committing an act of prostitution; or

C. Knowingly transport a person into or within the City with purpose to promote that person’s engaging in prostitution, or procuring or paying for transportation with that purpose; or

D. Knowingly receive, offer or agree to receive, another into any place or building for the purpose of performing an act of prostitution, or to knowingly permit another to remain there for any such purpose; or

E. Direct another to any place for the purpose of committing an act of prostitution; or

F. Knowingly in any way aid, abet or participate in an act of prostitution; or

G. Remain in or near any street, sidewalk, alleyway or other place open to the public with the intent of committing, or inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to commit, an act of prostitution. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether the actor intends such prohibited conduct are:

1. The actor is a known prostitute or panderer; or

2. The actor repeatedly beckons to, stops or attempts to stop, or engages passersby in conversation, or repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicle operators by hailing, waving of arms or any other bodily gesture; or

3. The actor circles an area in a motor vehicle and repeatedly beckons to, contacts, or attempts to stop pedestrians; or

4. The actor inquires whether a potential patron, procurer or prostitute is a police officer, searches for articles that would identify a police officer, or requests the touching or exposing of genitals or female breasts to prove that the person is not a police officer. [Ord. 01-0101 § 54(1) (KCC 12.63.010).]


9.50.020 Known prostitute or panderer defined.

For the purpose of this chapter, a “known prostitute or panderer” is a person who, within one year previous to the date of arrest for violation of this section, has within the knowledge of the arresting officer been convicted of violating any ordinance or law of any jurisdiction within the State of Washington defining and punishing acts of soliciting, committing, or offering or agreeing to commit prostitution. [Ord. 01-0101 § 54(1) (KCC 12.63.020).]


9.50.030 Prostitution defined – Sexual conduct defined.

For the purpose of this chapter, the terms “prostitution” and “sexual conduct” shall have the same meanings as provided in RCW 9A.88.030 and 9A.44.010, which are adopted by reference. [Ord. 11-0320 § 1; Ord. 01-0101 § 54(1) (KCC 12.63.030).]


9.50.040 Public nuisance.

Any building, structure or place used for the purpose of prostitution as defined in KMC 9.50.030 or RCW 9A.88.030 is declared to be a public nuisance. [Ord. 01-0101 § 54(1) (KCC 12.63.070).]


9.50.050 Evidence.

A. Two or more criminal convictions of persons for acts of prostitution in a building, structure or place, within the one-year period preceding the commencement of an action under this chapter, shall give rise to a rebuttable presumption that the building, structure or place has been used for the purposes of prostitution and is a public nuisance. In any action under this chapter, evidence of the common fame and general reputation of the building or place, of the inmates or occupants thereof, or of those resorting thereto, shall be admissible as evidence to prove the existence of the public nuisance but must be supported by additional evidence. Evidence of the general reputation of the building or place, or of the inmates or occupants thereof that is sufficient to establish the existence of the public nuisance, shall be prima facie evidence of knowledge thereof and acquiescence and participation therein and responsibility for the nuisance by persons or legal entities having an interest in the property. Responsibility for the nuisance shall extend to the owners, lessors, lessees and all those in possession of or having charge of, as agent or otherwise, or having any interest in any form in the property, real or personal, used in conducting or maintaining the public nuisance.

B. Evidence of cooperation by owners, agents or managers of a building or place with police investigations or operations to control prostitution may be used to rebut the presumptions created in this section. [Ord. 01-0101 § 54(1) (KCC 12.63.080).]


9.50.060 Additional evidence.

Any conviction of any owner, manager, operator, agent or employee for promoting prostitution (as defined in RCW 9A.88.060) or permitting prostitution (as defined in RCW 9A.88.090), when such offense was related to any business or commercial enterprise, shall be prima facie evidence that the building, structure or place upon or in which business or commercial enterprise is or was conducted was used for prostitution. [Ord. 01-0101 § 54(1) (KCC 12.63.090).]


Chapter 9.55 FIREARMS*

Sections:

9.55.010    Written consent required to supply airgun or slingshot to minor.

9.55.020    Written consent to be kept as evidence.

9.55.030    Unlawful use of air guns – Penalty.

9.55.040    Violation – Misdemeanor.

*Code reviser’s note: For additional provisions see KMC 9.05.500.


9.55.010 Written consent required to supply airgun or slingshot to minor.

It is unlawful for any person outside the boundaries of the City of Kenmore to sell, barter, hire, loan or give or permit to be sold, bartered, hired, loaned or given to any minor under the age of 18 years, or knowingly to permit such minor to use or have in possession, any spring gun, air gun, or any ammunition for such a gun, or any sling or slingshot, without having first obtained the written consent or permission of the parent or guardian having the custody or control of the minor. [Ord. 02-0131 § 1; Ord. 01-0101 § 55(2) (KCC 12.78.030).]


9.55.020 Written consent to be kept as evidence.

Any person required by the provisions of KMC 9.55.010 to secure the written consent or permission therein required shall keep the writing evidencing the consent or permission in his possession for a period of one year. His failure or refusal within that time to permit any peace officer, upon demand, to inspect said writing shall be prima facie evidence of his violation of the provisions of said KMC 9.55.010. [Ord. 02-0131 § 1; Ord. 01-0101 § 55(2) (KCC 12.78.040).]


9.55.030 Unlawful use of air guns – Penalty.

A. Any person who points or shoots an air gun at any person or at the property of another, or who aims or discharges such weapon in the direction of the person or residence of another, while within such range as to cause or inflict injury to the person or damage the property of another, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, in addition to any other punishment imposed, the court shall order the weapon to be confiscated and disposed of in accordance with statutes or ordinances governing the disposal of confiscated or found weapons.

B. “Air gun” shall mean any air gun, air pistol, air rifle, BB gun and toy or other guns designed or modified and used to propel, by compressed air or spring-loaded plunger, any pellet, dart, hard-tipped arrow, bean, pea, BB, rock or other hard substances a distance of more than 25 feet with sufficient force to break windows or inflict injury upon persons or animals. [Ord. 01-0101 § 62.]


9.55.040 Violation – Misdemeanor.

Any person violating or failing to comply with any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor as defined by the laws of the State of Washington and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to such punishment as is provided by the laws of the State of Washington upon conviction for a misdemeanor. [Ord. 02-0131 § 1; Ord. 01-0101 § 55(2) (KCC 12.78.050).]


Chapter 9.57 FURNISHING LIQUOR TO MINORS*

Sections:

9.57.010    Possession of liquor unlawful for minor.

9.57.020    Supplying liquor to minor unlawful.

9.57.030    Penalty for violation.

*Code reviser’s note: For additional provisions see KMC 9.05.500.


9.57.010 Possession of liquor unlawful for minor.

It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to acquire in any manner, consume, or have in his possession any intoxicating liquor as defined by RCW 66.04.200; provided, that the foregoing shall not apply in the case of liquor given or permitted to be given to a person under the age of 21 years by his parent or guardian for medicinal purposes, or administered to him by his physician or dentist for medicinal purposes. [Ord. 02-0131 § 1; Ord. 01-0101 § 55(2) (KCC 12.80.010).]


9.57.020 Supplying liquor to minor unlawful.

It is unlawful for any person to give, or otherwise supply, intoxicating liquor to any person under the age of 21 years or permit any person under that age to consume intoxicating liquor on his premises or on any premises under his control, except as provided in KMC 9.57.010. [Ord. 02-0131 § 1; Ord. 01-0101 § 55(2) (KCC 12.80.020).]


9.57.030 Penalty for violation.

Any person violating any of the provisions of KMC 9.57.010 and 9.57.020 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as defined under the laws of the State of Washington, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days. [Ord. 02-0131 § 1; Ord. 01-0101 § 55(2) (KCC 12.80.030).]


Chapter 9.60 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES*

Sections:

9.60.010    Responsibility of persons in charge of sale or display rooms containing paraphernalia evincing intent to violate Chapter 69.50 RCW.

9.60.020    Minors prohibited unless with guardian in places selling or displaying for sale certain paraphernalia.

9.60.030    Sale and display room requirements.

9.60.040    Violation – Penalty.

*Code reviser’s note: For additional provisions, see KMC 9.05.500.


9.60.010 Responsibility of persons in charge of sale or display rooms containing paraphernalia evincing intent to violate Chapter 69.50 RCW.

With respect to any owners, manager, proprietor, or other person in charge of any room or enclosure in any place of business selling, or displaying for the purpose of sale, any device, contrivance, instrument or paraphernalia for the smoking, ingestion, injection, or consumption of marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance, as defined in Chapter 69.50 RCW (Uniform Controlled Substances Act), other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, as well as roach clips, and cigarette papers and rollers designed or commonly used for the smoking of the foregoing, no such person, under circumstances evincing his or her intent that any such item or items so sold or displayed be used or employed by another in the commission of a criminal violation of Chapter 69.50 RCW, shall allow or permit any person under the age of 18 years to be, remain in, enter, or visit such room or enclosure unless such minor person is accompanied by one of his or her parents, or by his or her legal guardian. [Ord. 02-0131 § 1; Ord. 01-0101 § 55(2) (KCC 12.81.010).]


9.60.020 Minors prohibited unless with guardian in places selling or displaying for sale certain paraphernalia.

No person under the age of 18 years shall be, remain in, enter or visit any room or enclosure in any place used for the sale, or displaying for sale, of any device, contrivance, instrument or paraphernalia for the smoking, ingestion, injection, or consumption of marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance, as defined in Chapter 69.50 RCW (Uniform Controlled Substances Act), other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, as well as roach clips, and cigarette papers and rollers designed or commonly used for smoking the foregoing, under circumstances evincing the intent of the person in charge of such room or enclosure that any such item or items so sold or displayed be used or employed by another in the commission of a criminal violation of Chapter 69.50 RCW, unless such person under the age of 18 years is accompanied by one of his or her parents, or by his or her legal guardian. [Ord. 02-0131 § 1; Ord. 01-0101 § 55(2) (KCC 12.81.020).]


9.60.030 Sale and display room requirements.

No person shall maintain in any place of business to which the public is invited the display for sale, or the offering to sell, of any device, contrivance, instrument or paraphernalia for the smoking, ingestion, injection, or consumption of marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance, as defined in Chapter 69.50 RCW (Uniform Controlled Substances Act), other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs, as well as roach clips, and cigarette papers and rollers designed or commonly used for smoking the foregoing, under circumstances evincing his or her intent that any such item or items so sold or displayed be used or employed by another in the commission of criminal violation of Chapter 69.50 RCW, unless within a separate room or enclosure to which minors not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian are excluded. At each entrance to such a room or enclosure shall be a sign posted in reasonably visible and legible words to the effect that minors unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian are excluded. [Ord. 02-0131 § 1; Ord. 01-0101 § 55(2) (KCC 12.81.030).]


9.60.040 Violation – Penalty.

Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor, and the punishment shall be as provided by the laws of the State of Washington. [Ord. 02-0131 § 1; Ord. 01-0101 § 55(2) (KCC 12.81.040).]


Chapter 9.65 OBSCENE MATERIALS*

Sections:

9.65.010    Definitions.

9.65.020    Dissemination of indecent materials to minors unlawful.

9.65.030    Dissemination of indecent materials to minors defined.

9.65.040    Presumptions.

9.65.050    Defenses.

9.65.060    Violation a misdemeanor.

*Code reviser’s note: For additional provisions, see KMC 9.05.500.


9.65.010 Definitions.

As used herein, the following definitions shall apply:

A. “Harmful to minors” means that quality of any description or representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sadomasochistic abuse when it:

1. Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest of minors; and

2. Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors; and

3. Is utterly without redeeming social importance for minors.

B. “Minor” means any person less than 18 years of age.

C. “Nudity” means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernible turgid state.

D. “Sexual conduct” means acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse, or physical contact with a person’s clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such person be a female, breast.

E. “Sexual excitement” means the condition of human male or female genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.

F. “Sadomasochistic abuse” means flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed. [Ord. 02-0131 § 1; Ord. 01-0101 § 55(2) (KCC 12.84.010).]


9.65.020 Dissemination of indecent materials to minors unlawful.

It is unlawful for any person to disseminate indecent materials to minors as provided herein. [Ord. 02-0131 § 1; Ord. 01-0101 § 55(2) (KCC 12.84.020).]


9.65.030 Dissemination of indecent materials to minors defined.

Any person shall be deemed disseminating indecent material to a minor if he:

A. With knowledge of its character and content, sells or loans to a minor for monetary consideration:

1. Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film, or similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of the human body which depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors; or

2. Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter, however reproduced, or sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in this subsection, or explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which, taken as a whole, is harmful to minors; or

B. Knowing the character and content of a motion picture, show or other presentation which, in whole or in part, depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse, and which is harmful to minors:

1. Exhibits such motion picture, show or other presentation to a minor for a monetary consideration; or

2. Sells to a minor an admission ticket or pass to premises whereon there is exhibited or to be exhibited such motion picture, show or other presentation; or

3. Admits a minor for a monetary consideration to premises whereon there is exhibited or to be exhibited such motion picture, show or other presentation. [Ord. 02-0131 § 1; Ord. 01-0101 § 55(2) (KCC 12.84.030).]


9.65.040 Presumptions.

Any person who engages in the conduct prescribed herein is presumed to do so with knowledge of the character and content of the materials sold or loaned, or the motion picture, show or presentation exhibited or to be exhibited. [Ord. 02-0131 § 1; Ord. 01-0101 § 55(2) (KCC 12.84.040).]


9.65.050 Defenses.

In any prosecution for disseminating indecent material to minors, it is an affirmative defense that:

A. The defendant had reasonable cause to believe that the minor involved was 18 years old or more; and

B. Such minor exhibited to the defendant a draft card, driver’s license, birth certificate or other official or apparently official document purporting to establish that such minor was 18 years old or more. [Ord. 02-0131 § 1; Ord. 01-0101 § 55(2) (KCC 12.84.050).]


9.65.060 Violation a misdemeanor.

Any person violating the terms of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. [Ord. 02-0131 § 1; Ord. 01-0101 § 55(2) (KCC 12.84.070).]


Chapter 9.70 VIOLATION OF COURT- ORDERED PROBATION

Sections:

9.70.010    Definitions.

9.70.020    Arrest without warrant.


9.70.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, “probationer” means any person who after conviction of violation of an ordinance of the City or a law of the State has been placed on probation in connection with the suspension or deferral of sentence by either a district court of this county or the King County superior court. [Ord. 01-0101 § 66 (KCC 12.150.010).]


9.70.020 Arrest without warrant.

Whenever a police officer shall have probable cause to believe that a probationer, prior to the termination of the period of his or her probation, is, in such officer’s presence, violating or failing to comply with any requirement or restriction imposed by the court as a condition of such probation, such officer may cause the probationer to be brought before the court wherein sentence was deferred or suspended, and for such purpose such police officer may arrest such probationer without warrant or other process. [Ord. 01-0101 § 66 (KCC 12.150.020).]

 


Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

Chapters:

10.05    Model Traffic Ordinance

10.10    Traffic Offenses

10.15    Speed Limits

10.20    Parking Regulations

10.25    Traffic Engineer

10.30    Fire Lanes

10.35    Impoundment and Redemption of Certain Vehicles


Chapter 10.05 MODEL TRAFFIC ORDINANCE

Sections:

10.05.010    Adopted.


10.05.010 Adopted.

A. The “Washington Model Traffic Ordinance,” Chapter 308-330 WAC, except as specifically excluded, is hereby adopted by reference as the traffic ordinance of the City of Kenmore as if set forth in full. Also adopted by reference are Sections 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12 and 23 of Chapter 275, Laws of 1994, and RCW 46.20.730 as amended by Section 23 of Chapter 275, Laws of 1994.

B. The following specific provisions of the Washington Model Traffic Ordinance, and all future amendments thereto, are adopted by reference:

RCW

10.31.100    Arrest without warrant.

46.90.005    Purpose.

46.90.010    Adoption of model traffic ordinance – Amendments.

C. The following sections of the Washington Model Traffic Ordinance are not adopted by reference and are expressly deleted:

WAC

308-330-250    Police department to administer bicycle licenses.

308-330-275    Traffic safety commission – Powers and duties.

308-330-500    Bicycle license required.

308-330-505    Bicycle license application.

308-330-510    Issuance of bicycle license.

308-330-515    Attachment of bicycle license plate or decal.

308-330-520    Inspection of bicycles.

308-330-525    Renewal of bicycle licenses.

308-330-530    Bicycle transfer of ownership.

308-330-535    Bicycle rental agencies.

308-330-540    Bicycle dealers.

308-330-560    Bicycle penalties.

[Ord. 01-0101 § 43.]


Chapter 10.10 TRAFFIC OFFENSES

Sections:

10.10.010    Avoidance of intersection.

10.10.020    Inattentive driving.

10.10.030    Violation – Penalty.


10.10.010 Avoidance of intersection.

It is unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle on City streets or highways to make a left or right-hand turn upon approaching or leaving an intersection and to proceed across any private property for the purpose of avoiding the intersection, or any traffic control device controlling the intersection, unless so directed by lawful authority. [Ord. 98-0040 § 2.]


10.10.020 Inattentive driving.

It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle within the City in an inattentive manner. For the purposes of this section, “inattentive manner” means the operation of a motor vehicle in a manner which evidences a lack of degree of attentiveness required to safely operate the vehicle under the prevailing conditions, including but not limited to the nature and condition of the roadway, presence of other traffic, presence of pedestrians, and weather conditions. The offense of operating a motor vehicle in an inattentive manner shall be considered to be a lesser offense than, but included in, the offense of operating a motor vehicle in a negligent manner. [Ord. 98-0040 § 4.]


10.10.030 Violation – Penalty.

Unless otherwise set out in applicable law or court rule, any person who violates the provisions of any section of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. The maximum penalty for any violation of any section of this chapter shall be a fine of not more than $350.00. [Ord. 98-0040 § 6.]


Chapter 10.15 SPEED LIMITS

Sections:

10.15.010    State speed laws applicable – Exceptions.

10.15.020    Increasing State speed limit.

10.15.030    Decreasing State speed limit.

10.15.040    Former speed limits retained.


10.15.010 State speed laws applicable – Exceptions.

The State traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles at 25 miles per hour shall be applicable upon all streets within the City, except that the legislative authority of the City, as authorized by State law, may declare and determine by order, rule or regulation, properly adopted, that certain increased or decreased speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it is unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle at a speed in excess of the speed so established when proper signs are in place giving notice thereof. [Ord. 98-0033 § 1.]


10.15.020 Increasing State speed limit.

Whenever conditions are found to exist upon an arterial street or highway which warrant an increase in the speed permitted by State law, the legislative authority of this City, subject to the approval of the State Highway Commission in cases involving State highways, shall determine and declare a reasonable and safe maximum speed limit for such arterial street or highway, or portion thereof, not to exceed 55 miles per hour. [Ord. 98-0033 § 2.]


10.15.030 Decreasing State speed limit.

Whenever it is deemed inadvisable for vehicles to operate at the maximum speed allowed by State law at 25 miles per hour on any portion of a street or public highway on account of a sharp curvation, highway construction or repairs, excessive traffic, any dangerous condition, or other temporary or permanent cause, the legislative authority of the City, subject to the approval of the State Highway Commission in cases involving State highways, shall determine and fix a lower maximum speed or otherwise regulate a lesser speed; provided, that in no case shall the maximum speed be reduced to less than 20 miles per hour. [Ord. 98-0033 § 3.]


10.15.040 Former speed limits retained.

A. Except as set forth in subsection B of this section, the maximum speed limits for certain streets established by King County pursuant to KCC 46.04.040 and 46.04.050* and as otherwise established by King County ordinance and for which speed limit signs have been duly posted by King County are hereby adopted as the speed limits on those said streets in the city of Kenmore, unless the city manager, or designee, or the city council shall establish otherwise pursuant to this chapter or other law.

B. It is determined on the basis of engineering and traffic investigations that the maximum speed limits originally established under King County (see subsection A of this section) are more than is deemed necessary for the safe operation of vehicles on certain streets. The city council determines and declares that the reasonable and safe maximum speed limits of the streets identified below shall be as follows: 

1. Bothell Way N.E. (also known as State Route 522) between Milepost 6.21 and Milepost 8.23 shall have the maximum speed limit of 40 miles per hour. 

2. 80th Avenue N.E. between N.E. 205th Street and Bothell Way N.E. (also known as State Route 522) shall have the maximum speed limit of 35 miles per hour.

3. N.E. 175th Street between 61st Avenue N.E. and 73rd Avenue N.E. shall have the maximum speed limit of 30 miles per hour. 

C. Violators of speed restrictions shall be subject to the fines, penalties and forfeitures as established by the City’s Model Traffic Ordinance (see Chapter 10.05 KMC) and the Uniform Bail Schedule adopted by the State of Washington and in effect as of the date of the violation. [Ord. 15-0405 § 1; Ord. 13-0364 § 1; Ord. 98-0033 § 4.]

*Code reviser’s note: These King County Code sections are on file in the office of the city clerk.


Chapter 10.20 PARKING REGULATIONS

Sections:

10.20.010    Parking prohibited.

10.20.015    Parking and standing prohibited in bicycle lanes and travel portion of streets.

10.20.020    Overnight parking prohibited in residential areas.

10.20.030    Parking next to mail boxes.

10.20.035    Overnight parking prohibited along N.E. 175th Street from 65th Avenue N.E. to 68th Avenue N.E.

10.20.040    Limited period parking zones.

10.20.050    Permit exemption from maximum parking period.

10.20.060    Violation – Penalty.


10.20.010 Parking prohibited.

A. Parking is hereby prohibited at all times on the paved pedestrian walkway which extends approximately 465 feet on the south side of N.E. 155th Place, from Juanita Drive to 70th Avenue N.E.

B. Parking is hereby prohibited at all times on the paved pedestrian walkway which extends approximately 3,696 feet on the east side of 81st Avenue N.E., from N.E. 145th Street to N.E. 158th Street.

C. Parking is hereby prohibited at all times on the paved pedestrian walkway which extends approximately 1,056 feet on the south side of N.E. 182nd Street, from 68th Avenue N.E. to 73rd Avenue N.E.

D. Parking is hereby prohibited at all times on the paved pedestrian walkway on the west side of 71st Avenue N.E., from N.E. 185th Street, north to the end of the road, for approximately 1,580 feet.

E. Notwithstanding the adoption of the Model Traffic Ordinance pursuant to Chapter 10.05 KMC, the following State statutes, RCW 46.61.570 (Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specified places – Reserving portion of highway prohibited) and 46.61.575 (Additional parking regulations), as may be amended, are hereby adopted as part of this chapter. The penalty set forth in KMC 10.20.060 shall apply to any violations of RCW 46.61.570 and 46.61.575. [Ord. 19-0494 § 1; Ord. 99-0076 § 1; Ord. 99-0064 § 1.]


10.20.015 Parking and standing prohibited in bicycle lanes and travel portion of streets.

A. No person shall stop, stand, or park any portion of a vehicle in, on, or straddling any marked bicycle lane, marked shared bicycle and pedestrian lane, or marked bicycle lane buffer zone, or the marked travel portion of any street, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other moving traffic, or at the direction of a police officer or traffic control device. The travel portion of a street, for the purposes of this section, shall be defined as follows:

1. Any street-median or pavement-marking delineated travel lane, including but not limited to center lanes, merge lanes, and turn lanes.

2. In cases where the street has no pavement-marking delineated travel lane, the area between the edges of the street will constitute the travel portion of the street. Parking on said streets shall conform to RCW 46.61.575.

B. Regulations in subsection A of this section do not apply to:

1. The driver of any vehicle which is disabled in such a manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the vehicle in such a position. The driver shall nonetheless arrange for the prompt removal of the vehicle.

2. The driver of any vehicle that is following the direction of a police officer, traffic control flagger, traffic control sign, traffic control signal, or other official traffic control device.

3. The driver of a public transit vehicle who temporarily stops the vehicle upon the street for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers at a marked transit vehicle stop zone, or to the driver of a vehicle when actually engaged in the collection of solid waste, recyclables, or yard waste under authority of the City, so long as the vehicle is not parked or left for a longer time than reasonably necessary.

4. The driver of a City-owned or approved vehicle or public utility vehicle that is being used to provide a service for the public.

5. The driver of an emergency vehicle.

C. Any vehicle in violation of these restrictions is subject to impoundment. [Ord. 19-0494 § 2; Ord. 17-0444 § 1.]


10.20.020 Overnight parking prohibited in residential areas.

A. It is unlawful to park or otherwise leave between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any street or highway in the City of Kenmore, within or abutting an area classified as residential in the City’s zoning ordinances (zones R-1 through R-48), the following types of trailers and/or vehicles:

1. Trailers designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle, except recreational trailers; and

2. Buses and trucks used for business purposes, excluding pickup or panel trucks of one ton or less rated capacity.

B. It is not necessary that restricted parking or other traffic signs be erected for the purpose of enforcing this section. [Ord. 98-0040 § 1.]


10.20.030 Parking next to mail boxes.

No person shall park directly adjacent to a curbside, next to any clearly visible residential mail box between 10:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on any day of scheduled mail delivery by the United States Postal Service. [Ord. 98-0040 § 3.]


10.20.035 Overnight parking prohibited along N.E. 175th Street from 65th Avenue N.E. to 68th Avenue N.E.

A. No person shall park any vehicle or trailer along N.E. 175th Street between 65th Avenue N.E. and 68th Avenue N.E., Kenmore, Washington, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of any day.

B. This ordinance shall not apply to law enforcement or fire-aid vehicles responding to emergency calls.

C. One or more signs referencing “No Overnight Parking” shall be erected prior to the enforcement of this section. [Ord. 04-0203 § 1.]


10.20.040 Limited period parking zones.

The city manager or designee is authorized to establish maximum periods for parking of motor vehicles in City-owned parking lots and on City streets that are not State highways. Except for motor vehicles displaying a permit issued under KMC 10.20.050, it shall be illegal to park a motor vehicle in excess of the maximum time period. The city manager or designee shall place at conspicuous places appropriate signs stating the maximum time periods of parking at the established locations. [Ord. 16-0419 § 1.]


10.20.050 Permit exemption from maximum parking period.

To achieve City business purposes, the city manager or designee may issue parking permits in order to exempt motor vehicles from the maximum time period restrictions of KMC 10.20.040. The permits shall be valid for the time period in which they are issued and may be renewed. When properly displayed according to instructions provided by the city manager or designee, the permit shall entitle the motor vehicle to be parked without complying with the maximum time period. All other parking regulations shall continue to apply to the motor vehicle displaying the permit. [Ord. 16-0419 § 2.]


10.20.060 Violation – Penalty.

A. Unless otherwise set out in applicable law or court rule, any person who violates the provisions of KMC 10.20.010, 10.20.015, 10.20.020, 10.20.030 or 10.20.040 shall be guilty of an infraction. The maximum penalty for any violation of KMC 10.20.010, 10.20.015, 10.20.020 or 10.20.030 shall be a fine of not more than $350.00, and the maximum penalty for any violation of KMC 10.20.040 shall be a fine of not more than $50.00.

B. Unless otherwise set forth in applicable law or court rule, any person who violates the provisions of KMC 10.20.035 shall be guilty of a civil infraction. The maximum penalty for a violation of KMC 10.20.035 shall be a fine of not more than $350.00. [Ord. 17-0444 § 2; Ord. 16-0419 § 3; Ord. 04-0203 § 2; Ord. 98-0040 § 6. Formerly 10.20.040.]


Chapter 10.25 TRAFFIC ENGINEER

Sections:

10.25.010    Adoption of WAC sections.

10.25.020    Designated by city manager.


10.25.010 Adoption of WAC sections.

The following sections of the WAC are hereby adopted as presently constituted or hereinafter amended:

WAC

308-330-260    Traffic engineer.

308-330-265    Traffic engineer – Authority.

[Ord. 98-0038 § 1.]


10.25.020 Designated by city manager.

The city council of the City of Kenmore hereby designates the city manager or his or her designee as the appointing authority for purposes of obtaining the services of a traffic engineer as defined in WAC 308-330-260. [Ord. 98-0038 § 2.]


Chapter 10.30 FIRE LANES

Sections:

10.30.010    Fire lanes established.

10.30.020    Definition of designated fire lanes.

10.30.030    Marking of fire lanes.

10.30.040    Alternate materials and methods.

10.30.050    Exemption to sign requirements/existing fire lane signs and markings.

10.30.060    Maintenance.

10.30.070    Property owner responsibility.

10.30.080    Violation – Infraction – Penalty.

10.30.090    Impoundment.


10.30.010 Fire lanes established.

The building official or fire chief shall establish fire lanes in conformance with this chapter or other applicable City regulations. [Ord. 98-0043 § 1.]


10.30.020 Definition of designated fire lanes.

“Designated fire lanes” shall mean areas within any public right-of-way, easement, or private property designated for fire trucks or other emergency equipment, and marked as set forth in this chapter. [Ord. 98-0043 § 2.]


10.30.030 Marking of fire lanes.

All designated fire lanes to be marked from this date forward shall be clearly marked in one or more of the following manners:

A. Vertical curbs six inches in height shall be painted yellow on the top and side, extending the length of the designated fire lane. The pavement adjacent to the painted curbs shall be marked with block lettering a minimum of 18 inches in height and with a three-inch brush stroke reading: “NO PARKING – FIRE LANE.” Lettering shall be yellow and spaced at no more than 50-foot intervals; or

B. Rolled curbs or surfaces without curbs shall have a yellow six-inch wide painted stripe extending the length of the designated fire lane. The surface adjacent to the stripe shall be marked with block lettering a minimum of 18 inches in height and with a minimum three-inch brush stroke reading: “NO PARKING – FIRE LANE.” Lettering shall be in yellow and spaced at no more than 50-foot intervals; or

C. Fire lane signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Be reflective in nature;

2. Have red letters on white background;

3. Have three-inch lettering, reading “No Parking – Fire Lane”;

4. Be a minimum of 12 inches wide by 18 inches tall;

5. Spaced no more than 50 feet apart and posted on or immediately next to the curb or side of the road;

6. Top of signs shall not be less than four feet nor more than six feet from the ground;

7. May be placed on a building when approved by the building official in coordination with the fire chief;

8. When posts are required for signs, they shall be a minimum of two-inch galvanized steel or four-inch by four-inch pressure treated wood; and

9. Placed so they face the direction of vehicular travel. [Ord. 98-0043 § 3.]


10.30.040 Alternate materials and methods.

The building official, in coordination with the fire chief, may modify any of the provisions herein where practical difficulties may exist. Any particular modification shall be determined by the building official and shall be entered into the records of the fire department, local police agency and the building department. [Ord. 98-0043 § 4.]


10.30.050 Exemption to sign requirements/existing fire lane signs and markings.

A. Previously existing signs posted prior to this date may remain until there is a need for replacement. When replaced, any new signs shall meet the requirements set forth in this chapter.

B. Previously existing markings may remain until there is a need for repainting. When repainted, any new markings shall meet the requirements set forth in this chapter. [Ord. 98-0043 § 5.]


10.30.060 Maintenance.

Fire lanes shall be maintained at the expense of the property owner(s) as often as is deemed necessary by the building official or fire chief to clearly identify the designated fire lane. [Ord. 98-0043 § 6.]


10.30.070 Property owner responsibility.

The owner, manager, or person in charge of any property upon which designated fire lanes have been established shall be responsible for and not allow vehicles to park in, or other objects to obstruct, such designated fire lanes. [Ord. 98-0043 § 7.]


10.30.080 Violation – Infraction – Penalty.

Any person who fails to mark or maintain the marking of a designated fire lane as prescribed in this chapter, or who parks a vehicle in, allows the parking of a vehicle in, obstructs, or allows the obstruction of a designated fire lane, is guilty of an infraction. The maximum penalty for any violation of this chapter shall be a fine of not more than $350.00. [Ord. 98-0043 § 8.]


10.30.090 Impoundment.

Any vehicle or object obstructing a designated fire lane is hereby declared a traffic and fire hazard and may be immediately impounded pursuant to applicable State law, and the owner may be held responsible for all impound fees. [Ord. 98-0043 § 9.]


Chapter 10.35 IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION  OF CERTAIN VEHICLES

Sections:

10.35.010    Definitions.

10.35.020    When a vehicle may be impounded without prior notice.

10.35.030    When a vehicle may be impounded after notice.

10.35.040    Impound procedure.

10.35.050    Owner of impounded vehicle to be notified.

10.35.060    Redemption of impounded vehicles and hearing request.

10.35.070    Post impoundment hearing procedure.

10.35.080    Unclaimed vehicles.

10.35.090    Police department record of impounded vehicles.

10.35.100    Contracts for towing and storage.

10.35.110    Additional towing contractor duties and records.

10.35.120    Towing contractor standards.

10.35.130    Severability.


10.35.010 Definitions.

The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:

A. “Impoundment” means the removal of a vehicle to a storage facility either by an officer or authorized agent of the City of Kenmore police department or by a towing contractor in response to a request from an officer or authorized agent of the City of Kenmore police department.

B. “Towing contractor” means any firm, partnership, tow operator, association, or corporation duly licensed by the State of Washington to perform towing and storage services that enters into a contract with the City of Kenmore police department to perform towing and storage services under the provisions of this chapter.

C. “Vehicle” shall have the definition set forth in RCW 46.04.670, and, in addition, shall include any junk vehicle as defined in RCW 46.55.010(4) as they currently exist or may thereafter be amended.

D. “Workday” means Monday through Friday, not including Saturday and Sunday or legal holidays as defined in RCW 1.16.050. [Ord. 02-0131 § 3 (KCC 46.08.010).]


10.35.020 When a vehicle may be impounded without prior notice.

A vehicle may be impounded with or without citation and without giving prior notice to its owner as required in KMC 10.35.030 under the following circumstances:

A. The vehicle is impeding or is likely to impede the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic;

B. The vehicle is illegally parked in a conspicuously posted restricted zone where parking is limited to designated classes of vehicles or is prohibited during certain hours, on designated days or at any time when the vehicle is interfering or likely to interfere with the intended use of such a zone;

C. The vehicle poses an immediate danger to the public safety;

D. A police officer has information sufficient to form a reasonable belief that the vehicle is stolen;

E. A police officer has information sufficient to form a reasonable belief that the vehicle constitutes evidence of a crime or contains evidence of a crime, if impoundment is reasonably necessary to obtain or preserve such evidence;

F. Whenever a police officer finds an unattended vehicle at the scene of an accident or when the driver of a vehicle involved in an accident is physically or mentally incapable, or too intoxicated, to decide upon steps to be taken to protect his or her property;

G. Whenever the driver of a vehicle is arrested and taken into custody by a police officer, and the driver, because of intoxication or otherwise, is mentally incapable of deciding upon steps to be taken to safeguard his or her property;

H. Whenever a vehicle without a special license plate, card, or decal indicating that the vehicle is being used to transport a disabled person under RCW 46.16.381 is parked in a stall or space clearly and conspicuously marked under RCW 46.62.581 which space is provided on private property without charge or on public property;

I. Whenever a mobile home is subject to removal from a mobile home park pursuant to a writ of restitution, provided such writ is attached to a police department impound report. 

Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize seizure of a vehicle without a warrant where a warrant would otherwise be required. Nothing in this section may derogate from the powers of police officers under the common law or other statute or ordinance. [Ord. 02-0131 § 3 (KCC 46.08.040).]


10.35.030 When a vehicle may be impounded after notice.

A vehicle not subject to impoundment under KMC 10.35.020 may be impounded after notice of such proposed impoundment has been securely attached to and conspicuously displayed on the vehicle for a period of 24 hours prior to such impoundment if such vehicle is parked and/or used in violation of any law, ordinance or regulation; provided, that if the vehicle has current Washington registration plates the officer or the City of Kenmore police department shall check the records to learn the identity of the last owner of record and shall make a reasonable effort to contact the owner by telephone in order to give the owner the information on the notice of proposed impoundment. [Ord. 02-0131 § 3 (KCC 46.08.050).]


10.35.040 Impound procedure.

When impoundment is authorized by this chapter, a vehicle may be impounded by a towing contractor acting at the request of an officer or authorized agent of the City of Kenmore police department. Such officer or authorized agent shall provide to the towing contractor a signed authorization for the tow and the impound before the towing contractor may proceed with the impound. [Ord. 02-0131 § 3 (KCC 46.08.060).]


10.35.050 Owner of impounded vehicle to be notified.

A. When a vehicle is impounded, the impounding towing contractor shall notify the legal and registered owner(s) of the impoundment of the vehicle. The notification shall be sent by first-class mail within 24 hours after the impoundment to the last known registered and legal owner(s) of the vehicle, as identified by the City of Kenmore police department, and shall inform the owners of the identity of the person or agency authorizing the impound. The notification shall include the name of the impounding tow firm, its address, and telephone number, the location and time of the impound, and by whose authority the vehicle was impounded. The notice shall also include the written notice of the right of redemption and opportunity for a hearing to contest the validity of the impoundment pursuant to KMC 10.35.070, as set forth on a form to be provided by the City of Kenmore police department.

B. In the case of an abandoned vehicle, as defined in RCW 46.55.010(1), within 24 hours after receiving information on the vehicle owner(s) from the Department of Licensing through the abandoned vehicle report, the towing contractor shall send by certified mail, with return receipt requested, a notice of custody and sale to the legal and registered owner(s).

C. No notices need be sent to the legal or registered owner(s) of an impounded vehicle if the vehicle has been redeemed.

D. When a person seeks to redeem an impounded vehicle, the towing contractor shall give said person a copy of the towing and storage receipt as well as written notice of the right of redemption and opportunity for a hearing, as set forth on a form provided by the City of Kenmore police department. The towing contractor shall maintain a record evidenced by the redeeming person’s signature that such notification was provided.

E. Similar written notice and record of notification for redemption and opportunity for a hearing, as set forth on a form provided by the City of Kenmore police department, shall be given by the towing contractor at the time of releasing a vehicle impounded for investigatory purposes pursuant to KMC 10.35.020(E), following authorization by the City of Kenmore police department to release such vehicle. [Ord. 02-0131 § 3 (KCC 46.08.070).]


10.35.060 Redemption of impounded vehicles and hearing request.

Vehicles impounded by the City shall be redeemed under the following circumstances:

A. Only the registered owner, a person authorized in writing by the registered owner, or one who has purchased a vehicle from the registered owner and who produces proof of ownership or written authorization and signs a receipt therefor, may redeem an impounded vehicle.

B. Any person so redeeming a vehicle impounded by the City must pay the towing contractor for costs of impoundment (towing and storage) before the vehicle will be released from impound. Such towing contractor shall accept only cash, major bank credit cards, certified bank drafts, money orders, and personal checks drawn on in-state banks in payment for such costs; provided, however, that if such a personal check is offered in payment for such costs, the person so offering the same may be required to show evidence of his or her identity by two pieces of identification which may include a driver’s license, Washington State Identification Card issued by the Washington State Department of Motor Vehicles, other credit cards or similar forms of identification; provided further, however, that if the contractor has reasonable cause to believe the tendered check is uncollectable, acceptance of such check may be refused in accordance with such standards as may be promulgated in accordance with KMC 10.35.120 or as may be set forth in a contract entered into pursuant to KMC 10.35.100.

C. Any person who stops payment on a personal check or credit card, or does not make restitution within 10 days from the date a check becomes insufficient due to lack of funds, or in any other manner defrauds the towing contractor in connection with services rendered pursuant to this section shall be liable to the towing contractor for damages in the amount of twice the towing and storage fees, plus costs and reasonable attorney’s fees.

D. Any person seeking to redeem an impounded vehicle has a right to a hearing pursuant to KMC 10.35.070 before an administrative hearing officer to contest the validity of the impoundment or the amount of towing and storage charges. Any request for a hearing shall be made in writing on a form provided for that purpose by the City of Kenmore police department signed by such person and must be received by the City of Kenmore police department within 10 days (including Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) of the later of the date the notice of right of redemption and opportunity for hearing was mailed to such person pursuant to KMC 10.35.050(A), or the date such notice was given to such person by the towing contractor pursuant to KMC 10.35.050(D). If the hearing request is not received by the City of Kenmore police department within the 10-day period, the right to a hearing is waived and the registered owner is liable for any towing, storage, or other impoundment charges permitted under this chapter.

E. If a hearing as provided for in KMC 10.35.070 is requested, such hearing shall be held within two working days of the receipt of the written request for the hearing by the City of Kenmore police department. [Ord. 02-0131 § 3 (KCC 46.08.080).]


10.35.070 Post impoundment hearing procedure.

A. In accordance with RCW 46.55.240(1)(d), the City of Kenmore police department shall appoint one or more administrative hearing officers to conduct the post impound hearings requested pursuant to KMC 10.35.060. Such hearing officer shall determine whether the impoundment was proper and whether the towing and/or storage fees charged in connection with the impound were proper.

B. At the hearing, the City of Kenmore police department may produce any relevant evidence to show that the impound and/or fees were proper. The officer’s impound report and the towing contractor’s impound receipts may be received in evidence. In determining whether the fees charged were proper, the hearing officer may take notice of the towing contractor’s rates.

C. At the hearing, the person who requested the hearing may produce any relevant evidence to show that the impound and/or fees were not proper.

D. If the impoundment is found to be proper, the hearings officer shall enter an order so stating. If the costs of impoundment have not been paid, the hearing officer’s order shall also provide that the impounded vehicle shall be released only after payment of the costs of impoundment to the towing contractor.

E. If the impoundment is found to be improper, the hearing officer shall enter an order so stating and shall order the immediate release of the vehicle. If the costs of impoundment have already been paid, the hearing officer shall enter an order against the City and in favor of the person who has paid the costs of impoundment in the amount of the costs of the impoundment plus interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the date that person paid such costs, and the City shall comply with such order. If the costs of impoundment have not been paid, the hearing officer shall enter an order directing the City to pay such costs to the towing contractor, and the City shall comply with such order.

F. If the hearing officer finds that the impoundment was proper, but that the towing and/or storage fees were improper, the hearing officer shall determine the correct fees to be charged. If the costs of impoundment have not been paid, the hearing officer shall order the release of the vehicle upon payment of the correct impoundment fees as determined by the hearing officer. If the costs of impoundment have been paid, the hearing officer shall enter an order against the City and in favor of the person who has paid the costs of impoundment for the amount of the overpayment plus interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum on the overpayment from the date that person paid such costs, and the City shall comply with such order. The towing contractor shall be liable to the City for the amount of such overpayment and interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum. The towing contractor shall make such payment to the City no later than 60 days after it receives notice of such requirement to pay. The City may bring an action in the King County district court against the towing contractor to recover such overpayment plus interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum.

G. In accordance with RCW 46.55.240(1)(d), a decision made by an administrative hearing officer may be appealed to the King County district court for final judgment. [Ord. 02-0131 § 3 (KCC 46.08.100).]


10.35.080 Unclaimed vehicles.

A. Any impounded vehicle not redeemed within 15 days of mailing of the notice required by KMC 10.35.050 and not listed as a stolen vehicle, shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be sold at a public auction in accordance with the provisions and subject to all conditions of RCW 46.55.130; provided, that in the case of a vehicle impounded and held pursuant to order of a City police officer, the 15 days shall not begin until 48 hours after the City of Kenmore police department shall have notified both the owner and the towing company that it has authorized the release of the vehicle; provided further, that when a timely request for a post impound hearing has been made pursuant to KMC 10.35.060, the sale of the vehicle at public auction shall not take place until after the hearing has been conducted and the hearing officer has entered an order. Prior to sale at public auction, the towing contractor shall confirm with the City of Kenmore police department that no hearing is pending.

B. When an unclaimed vehicle is sold at public auction pursuant to subsection (A) of this section, the towing contractor may recover its towing and storage charges from the proceeds of the sale. Such towing and storage charges shall be limited to the contract rates established pursuant to KMC 10.35.100. [Ord. 02-0131 § 3 (KCC 46.08.110).]


10.35.090 Police department record of impounded vehicles.

The City of Kenmore police department shall keep, and make available for inspection, a record of all vehicles impounded under the provisions of this chapter. The record shall include at least the following information:

A. Vehicle make, year, and model;

B. Vehicle license number and state of registration;

C. Vehicle identification number, if ascertainable;

D. Such other descriptive information as the City of Kenmore police department deems useful for purposes of vehicle identification;

E. Name of impounding officer and serial number;

F. Reason for impoundment, and the time, date and location the approved towing company took custody. [Ord. 02-0131 § 3 (KCC 46.08.120).]


10.35.100 Contracts for towing and storage.

The city manager, or his designee, may enter into contracts with towing contractors to provide towing and storage services on request of the City of Kenmore police department pursuant to this chapter. Such contracts shall be at no cost to the City and shall provide that the towing contractor may recover the costs of towing and storage only from the person seeking to redeem the impounded vehicle, or from the proceeds of sale of an unclaimed vehicle pursuant to KMC 10.35.080, and that the City shall not be responsible for payment of such costs except upon order of the administration hearing officer pursuant to KMC 10.35.070. The sheriff may specify that towing services obtained by the City of Kenmore police department will be on a rotational or other basis in specific geographic areas in the City. The sheriff may specify the rates towing contractors may charge persons seeking to redeem impounded vehicles for towing and storage services provided pursuant to this chapter. [Ord. 02-0131 § 3 (KCC 46.08.130).]


10.35.110 Additional towing contractor duties and records.

Each towing contractor, in addition to fully complying with the standards set by the City of Kenmore police department must:

A. File its towing and storage rates with the City of Kenmore police department;

B. Maintain all vehicle transaction files for three years. [Ord. 02-0131 § 3 (KCC 46.08.132).]


10.35.120 Towing contractor standards.

The City of Kenmore police department is authorized and directed to adopt standards that carry out the provisions and intent of this chapter. Towing contractors are required to comply with such standards. [Ord. 02-0131 § 3 (KCC 46.08.134).]


10.35.130 Severability.

Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. [Ord. 02-0131 § 3 (KCC 46.08.140).] 


Title 11 (Reserved)

 


Title 12 STREETS AND BRIDGES

Chapters:

12.05    General Provisions

12.10    Official Street System

12.15    Load Restrictions on Streets

12.20    Load Limits on Bridges

12.25    Repealed

12.30    Repealed

12.35    Rights-of-Way

12.40    Permit System for City Property

12.45    Complete Streets Policy

12.50    Street Standards

12.55    Utilities on City Rights-of-Way

12.58    Wireless Communication Facilities within City Rights-of-Way

12.60    Public and Private Utilities on Real Property

12.65    Snow Emergency Routes

12.70    Sidewalks, Planting Strips and Street Trees

12.75    Repealed

12.80    Integrated Transportation Program

12.85    State Route 522 Access Management Program

12.90    Transportation Benefit District


Chapter 12.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

12.05.010    Repealed.

12.05.015    Construction – Intent.

12.05.020    Financial guarantees authorized.

12.05.030    Definitions.

12.05.040    Removal of facilities/equipment in City rights-of-way.

12.05.050    Violation – Enforcement – Penalty.


12.05.010 Relationship to comprehensive plan and Growth Management Act.

Repealed by Ord. 11-0330. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.02.010).]


12.05.015 Construction – Intent.

A. This code is enacted to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare. Its provisions shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of these purposes. It also the purpose of this code to regulate activities within the rights-of-way in the interest of public health, safety and welfare; and to provide for the fees, charges, enforcement, and procedures required to administer such regulations.

B. It is expressly the purpose of this code and any procedures adopted hereunder to provide for and promote the health, safety and welfare of the general public, and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this code or any procedures adopted hereunder.

C. It is the specific intent of this code and any procedures adopted hereunder to place the obligation of complying with the requirements of this code upon the person, franchisee or permittee seeking to use the rights-of-way, and no provision is intended to impose any duty upon the City of Kenmore, or any of its officers, employees or agents. Nothing contained in this code or any procedures adopted hereunder is intended to be or shall be construed to create or form the basis for liability on the part of the City of Kenmore, or its officers, employees or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of the person, franchisee or permittee to comply with the provisions hereof, or by reason or in consequence of any act or omission in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this code or any procedures adopted hereunder by the City of Kenmore, its officers, employees or agents. [Ord. 18-0458 § 1 (Att. A).]


12.05.020 Financial guarantees authorized.

The department is authorized to require all applicants issued permits or approvals under the provisions of this title to post financial guarantees consistent with the provisions of KMC Title 21. [Ord. 18-0458 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.02.020).]


12.05.030 Definitions.

This section contains definitions of terms used throughout this title.

A. “Applicant” means a property owner or a public agency or public or private utility which owns a right-of-way or other easement or has been adjudicated the right to such an easement pursuant to RCW 8.12.090, or any person or entity designated or named in writing by the property or easement owner to be the applicant, in an application for a development proposal, permit or approval.

B. “City manager” means the City of Kenmore city manager or his or her designee(s).

C. “City property” means all City real property, including but not limited to recreational trails, parks and dedicated open space.

D. “Department” means the City department or outside agency assigned by the city manager to administer a portion of the City code.

E. “Development” means any activity that requires a permit or approval, including, but not limited to, a building permit, grading permit, shoreline substantial development permit, conditional use permit, special use permit, zoning variance or reclassification, subdivision, short subdivision, urban planned development, binding site plan, site development permit or right-of-way use permit.

F. “Encroachment” means any structures permanent in nature, including, but not limited to, building extension, marquee, fence, stairway, railing, retaining wall, artwork, or any other building or structure constructed, erected or maintained in, over or under any public place, right-of-way, easement, roadway, parking strip and/or sidewalk, including the airspace above them.

G. “Right-of-way use permit, limited” means a permit authorizing the use or improvement of the City right-of-way for a designated purpose, typically for a period of time limited to one year or less.

H. “Right-of-way use permit, access” means a permit authorizing the use of unopened City right-of-way for a subdivision or property access, typically for a period of time exceeding one year in duration.

I. “Right-of-way use permit, encroachment” means a permit authorizing the use of the City right-of-way for an encroachment, typically for a period of time exceeding one year in duration.

J. “Special use permit” means a permit for the use of City property issued pursuant to this title.

K. “Utilities” means private and public providers of utilities, including water, wastewater, electric, telephone, telecommunications, personal wireless services, cable television, natural gas lines, and solid waste. [Ord. 18-0458 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A).]


12.05.040 Removal of facilities/equipment in City rights-of-way.

Except as may be required by Chapter 35.99 RCW, any utility that locates any facilities/equipment in the rights-of-way shall relocate, remove or reroute said facilities/equipment, as ordered and in the time frame required by the City to accommodate a City project, at no expense or liability to the City. If a utility fails to timely perform such work, then the city manager may, but is not required to, order and complete all work necessary to remove the facilities/equipment from the rights-of-way to accommodate a City project. The utility shall reimburse the City for the reasonable actual costs of the work, including City overhead (provided that in no event shall such overhead exceed 10 percent of the total costs, fees and expenses of third parties), within 30 days of the City’s invoice for such work. In addition, the utility shall indemnify, protect and hold harmless the City from any third-party claims for service interruption or other losses in connection with any such change or removal of the facilities/equipment, other than the City’s negligence or willful misconduct. [Ord. 18-0458 § 1 (Att. A).]


12.05.050 Violation – Enforcement – Penalty.

A. The violation of or failure to comply with any provision of this title is declared to be unlawful. The city manager shall have the authority to enforce this title and to adopt procedures for the purpose of implementing or carrying out other responsibilities required by this title.

B. Any violation or failure to comply with any provision of this title is a civil violation as provided for in Chapter 1.20 KMC, for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required as provided herein. The city manager may, but is not required to, seek voluntary correction pursuant to KMC 1.20.070, prior to the assessment of monetary penalties for violation of this title. [Ord. 18-0458 § 1 (Att. A).]


Chapter 12.10 OFFICIAL STREET SYSTEM

Sections:

12.10.010    Official street system.

12.10.020    Maps are exhibits.

12.10.030    Streets included.

12.10.040    Revision of street exhibits.

12.10.050    Additions and deletions made by ordinance.

12.10.060    Repealed.

12.10.070    Inclusion of streets which have reverted to City.

12.10.080    Inaccuracies corrected.


12.10.010 Official street system.

To provide for the administration, maintenance, and dedication of rights-of-way and improvement of the City’s streets, the City needs to identify the official City street system. This system will be shown on maps and/or exhibits which will also show the streets for which the City has maintenance responsibility. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.04.010).]


12.10.020 Maps are exhibits.

The aforementioned maps will also be known as exhibits to be indicated by the sheet designation. Computer sheets contained in a loose-leaf binder shall be used as reference exhibits in conjunction with the map exhibits. These computer sheets must be revised periodically to correspond with revisions made on the map exhibits. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.04.030).]


12.10.030 Streets included.

Only those streets within the City shall be considered part of the City street system. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.04.040).]


12.10.040 Revision of street exhibits.

It shall be the responsibility of the city manager to maintain and revise the City street exhibits upon direction by the city council. Revisions shall be made as soon as practicable after any change occurs. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.04.050).]


12.10.050 Additions and deletions made by ordinance.

Authority for additions to, deletions from, or characteristic changes in the streets on the exhibit sheets shall be by ordinance, consistent with RCW 35.78.010. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.04.060).]


12.10.060 Streets constructed by Highway Department included.

Repealed by Ord. 11-0330. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.04.070).]


12.10.070 Inclusion of streets which have reverted to City.

The City street system shall include all streets which reverted to King County prior to incorporation by virtue of prescriptive rights as set forth in RCW 36.75.070 and 36.75.080. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.04.080).]


12.10.080 Inaccuracies corrected.

If any inaccuracies appear on the exhibits in conflict with records on file, the inaccuracies shall be corrected on the exhibits and in no case shall affect the provisions of this chapter or the status of the exhibits as official designators of the official City street system. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.04.100).]


Chapter 12.15 LOAD RESTRICTIONS ON STREETS

Sections:

12.15.010    Street closure policy.

12.15.020    Winter and emergency load restrictions.


12.15.010 Street closure policy.

The following policy is approved and adopted, and henceforth all street closure and load limit restrictions will be disseminated in accordance with this policy insofar as it is possible to do so:

A. A list of streets which will remain open and available for school bus use during thawing conditions will be supplied to each and every school district operating on City streets within the City.

B. In the event street closures are required, the school district will be notified prior to 1:00 p.m. of the day preceding the street closures on school bus routes, to be effective the following day. If the morning pickup of children is accomplished, the school district will be permitted to use these routes for the returning of the children to their normal bus stops.

C. School buses will be permitted to turn around at the intersection of a school bus route which is closed, and the open route with the minimum maneuvering possible on the closed street in the intersection area.

D. The City will establish the necessary communications with the school districts to provide the proper notification. The city manager will initiate street closures and, unless specified otherwise, closures shall be City-wide. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.12.010).]


12.15.020 Winter and emergency load restrictions.

The following emergency restrictions shall be in effect on City streets during such periods of freezing and thawing conditions as determined by the city manager:

 

	REGULAR WINTER LOAD RESTRICTIONS

	Conventional	 	Tubeless or Special with 0.5 Marking

	Tire Size	Gross Load Each Tire	 	Tire Size	Gross Load Each Tire

	7.00	 	1,800 lbs.	 	8-22.5    	 	2,250 lbs.

	7.50	 	2,250 lbs.	 	9-22.5    	 	2,800 lbs.

	8.25	 	2,800 lbs.	 	10-22.5    	 	3,400 lbs.

	9.00	 	3,400 lbs.	 	11-22.5    	 	4,000 lbs.

	10.00	 	4,000 lbs.	 	11-24.5    	 	4,000 lbs.

	11.00	 	4,500 lbs.	 	12-22.5    	 	4,500 lbs.

	12.00 	or over	4,500 lbs.	 	12-24.5     	or over	4,500 lbs.

	EMERGENCY LOAD RESTRICTIONS

	Conventional Tires	 	Tubeless or Special with 0.5 Marking

	Tire Size	Gross Load Each Tire	 	Tire Size	Gross Load Each Tire

	7.00	 	1,800 lbs.	 	8-22.5    	 	1,800 lbs.

	7.50	 	1,800 lbs.	 	9-22.5    	 	1,900 lbs.

	8.25	 	1,900 lbs.	 	10-22.5    	 	2,250 lbs.

	9.00	 	2,250 lbs.	 	11-22.5    	 	2,750 lbs.

	10.00	 	2,750 lbs.	 	11-24.5    	 	2,750 lbs.

	11.00	or over	3,000 lbs.	 	12-22.5    	or over	3,000 lbs.

A further load restriction of five tons gross on any vehicle may be placed on streets under severe conditions. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.12.020).]


Chapter 12.20 LOAD LIMITS ON BRIDGES

Sections:

12.20.010    Gross weight allowed and notification.

12.20.020    Limited special permits.

12.20.030    Maximum gross vehicle weight.

12.20.040    Enforcement and penalty.

12.20.050    West Sammamish River Bridge (1071AW).


12.20.010 Gross weight allowed and notification.

A. It is unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle over any City bridge when such vehicle has a gross weight that is greater than the posted maximum weight for that bridge, unless the driver is in possession of a limited special permit issued by the city manager.

B. Notice of closing of individual bridges to certain classes or weights of vehicles shall be:

1. Published in a local newspaper of general circulation; and

2. Posted on signs at each end of subject bridge, on or prior to the date of publication. All signs shall be erected and maintained in accordance with RCW 46.61.450 and 47.36.030.

C. Maximum gross weights for vehicles operating over City bridges shall be established by ordinance in accordance with RCW 46.44.080.

D. The city manager shall have the authority by administrative determination to immediately impose temporary gross weight limits on bridges based on the results of an engineering and traffic investigation. The city manager shall have the authority to immediately erect and maintain official traffic control devices for temporary gross weight limits on bridges in accordance with Chapter 46.90 RCW, WAC 308-330-265 and Chapter 10.05 KMC. The temporary gross weight limits on bridges shall be in effect for not longer than one year from the date of posting or until the weight limits are established by ordinance. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.16.010).]


12.20.020 Limited special permits.

The city manager is authorized to issue limited special permits for the safe use of load limited bridges by emergency vehicles and other vehicles exceeding the posted maximum weight. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.16.015).]


12.20.030 Maximum gross vehicle weight.

Those City bridges that are posted are done so pursuant to definitions and standards for maximum gross vehicle weight contained in Chapter 46.44 RCW, particularly the vehicle weight table of RCW 46.44.041. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.16.020).]


12.20.040 Enforcement and penalty.

Any violation of this chapter is a traffic infraction and subject to a penalty of $250.00. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.16.170).]


12.20.050 West Sammamish River Bridge (1071AW).

The use of Bridge 1071AW shall be prohibited to weight/loads in excess of sixteen (16) tons for three-axle vehicles (Type 3), twenty-five (25) tons for five-axle vehicles (Type 3S2), and twenty-seven (27) tons for six-axle vehicles (Type 3-3) until further notice. Violators of weight restrictions shall be subject to the fines, penalties and forfeitures as established by KMC 12.20.040. By general rule as allowed by RCW 46.44.080, emergency vehicles are allowed on the bridge, regardless of weight. [Ord. 14-0374 § 1.]


Chapter 12.25 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR STREET AND BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION

(Repealed by Ord. 05-0231)


Chapter 12.30 STREET CONSTRUCTION RULES ADOPTED

(Repealed by Ord. 05-0231)


Chapter 12.35 RIGHTS-OF-WAY

Sections:

12.35.010    Repealed.

12.35.015    Repealed.

12.35.020    Permit required for improvement or use – Application processing.

12.35.025    Time limitation of application.

12.35.030    Permit – Additional requirements.

12.35.035    Application – Fees.

12.35.037    Permit – Fees.

12.35.040    Permit – Limited.

12.35.050    Permit – Access.

12.35.055    Permit – Encroachment.

12.35.060    Permit – Application.

12.35.065    Obligation – Revocation.

12.35.070    Conformance.

12.35.075    Covenant.

12.35.077    Permit – Interpretation.

12.35.080    Enforcement.

12.35.090    Retroactivity.

12.35.100    Repealed.


12.35.010 Definitions.

Repealed by Ord. 11-0330. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.28.010).]


12.35.015 Fee exemptions – Beautification permit.

Repealed by Ord. 11-0330. [Ord. 04-0206 § 1.]


12.35.020 Permit required for improvement or use – Application processing.

A. Permits Required. City street right-of-way shall not be privately improved or used for access or other purposes and no development approval shall be issued which requires use of privately maintained City right-of-way unless a permit has been issued pursuant to this chapter, except for utility construction work authorized pursuant to Chapter 12.55 KMC or special event permits approved and permitted in accordance with Chapter 8.40 KMC. 

B. General Procedures.

1. Upon receipt of an application for right-of-way use permit, limited, access, or encroachment, the city manager shall determine whether the proposed activity is within City-owned right-of-way.

2. The City shall be the lead agency for the compliance with the State Environmental Policy Act. In addition, the city manager shall review applications for compliance with applicable City plans, policies, regulations and standards. Prior to issuing a right-of-way use permit, the city manager may determine and secure an appropriate financial guarantee consistent with the provisions of KMC Title 21.

3. The city manager shall, when feasible, consolidate right-of-way use permits with other development approvals to prevent duplication and increase efficiency. The fee for a consolidated approval shall be reduced to the extent separate fees would be duplicative. [Ord. 12-0335 § 4; Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.28.020).]


12.35.025 Time limitation of application.

A. Applications for which no permit is issued within 18 months following the date of application shall expire by limitation and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed in accordance with State law.

B. Applications may be canceled for inactivity, if an applicant fails to respond to the department’s written request for revisions, corrections, actions or additional information within 90 days of the date of request. The city manager may extend the response period beyond 90 days if within the original 90-day time period the applicant provides and subsequently adheres to an approved schedule with specific target dates for submitting the full revisions, corrections or other information needed by the department. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A).]


12.35.030 Permit – Additional requirements.

A. Plans. Detailed engineering and restoration plans and/or drainage plan may be required when considered necessary by the city manager. Costs for the development of such plan and conduct of required studies shall be borne by the applicant and, if the plan is returned, it shall be returned to the applicant.

B. Survey. When considered necessary by the city manager to adequately define the limits of right-of-way, the applicant shall cause the right-of-way to be surveyed by a licensed land surveyor. Such survey shall be recorded in accordance with the Survey Recording Act.

C. Dedication. An applicant may be required to deed additional right-of-way across property under his ownership when necessary to fulfill the minimum street right-of-way width prescribed in RCW 36.86.010.

D. Illegal Subdivision. A permit shall not be issued to provide access to a lot or parcel created in violation of State and City subdivision regulations.

E. Every permit granted under this chapter shall also condition approval consistent with the requirements of Chapter 12.05 KMC, General Provisions. [Ord. 18-0458 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.28.030).]


12.35.035 Application – Fees.

A. Each application requires a fee, imposed by city council by resolution, payable to the City for the administrative costs and expenses of processing the application.

B. The purpose of this subsection B is to foster the public benefit by encouraging citizens to beautify publicly owned rights-of-way, without compromising the public’s safety. For purposes of maintaining a record of all beautification projects, a beautification permit shall be required prior to commencement of a beautification activity. A beautification permit shall be issued without charge for projects that satisfy the following criteria:

1. The project involves the planting of flowers or other vegetation that does not hinder the safe use of the right-of-way by drivers or others within 10 feet of the fog line or the edge of the pavement, if there is no fog line;

2. The project involves planting adjacent to the applicant’s residence; and 

3. No shrubs or trees are installed within three feet of a curb line or, where no curb exists, within 10 feet of the fog line or edge of pavement. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A).]


12.35.037 Permit – Fees.

A. The permittee shall pay a fee at a rate imposed by the city council by resolution per hour for inspection.

B. The permittee shall also pay a fee for use of the right-of-way based on a policy approved by the city council by resolution.

C. The fees shall be collected in accordance with administrative procedures developed by the department. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A).]


12.35.040 Permit – Limited.

A. Upon filing of a complete application, payment of the fee and posting of the financial guarantee for construction, maintenance, and restoration of the right-of-way consistent with the provisions of KMC Title 21, the city manager may issue a permit authorizing the limited use of City street right-of-way, for use by designated private parties for a specific use.

B. The permit may require construction and restoration of the right-of-way to adopted City standards based on the nature and duration of the specific use, and subject to inspection. In addition, conditions may be set to assure the compliance with City plans, policies, standards and regulations. Such conditions may require performance in excess of adopted street standards.

C. The applicant shall assume sole responsibility for the safe and adequate operation and maintenance of any improvements to the City right-of-way during the period of time the permit is in effect.

D. The applicant may apply for an extension to the permit – upon written application for an extension, payment of the fees, and being found to be in compliance with the conditions and requirements of the original permit. 

E. Types of Right-of-Way Permits, Limited.

1. Type A. Activity which will alter the surface or subsurface of the right-of-way. Examples are:

a. Paving operations;

b. Driveway installations;

c. Sidewalk installations;

d. Open-cut trenching;

e. Above-ground pedestal or utility box installations;

f. Culvert installation;

g. Shoulder improvements; and

h. Beautification.

2. Type B. Temporary use of the right-of-way (24 hours or less) which does not change the right-of-way surface or subsurface. Examples are:

a. Temporary storage of a dumpster/storage container;

b. Block party; and

c. Temporary parking.

3. Type C. Temporary use of the right-of-way (more than 24 hours) which does not change the surface or subsurface. Also activities that will require traffic plan and traffic plan review. Examples are:

a. Street closures (fair or carnival);

b. Commercial activities in the right-of-way; and

c. Extended storage in right-of-way. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 00-0088 (Exh. B); Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.28.050).]


12.35.050 Permit – Access.

A. Upon filing of a complete application and payment of the fee, the city manager may issue a permit authorizing the use of unopened City right-of-way for property access for a period exceeding one year in duration.

B. The applicant may be required to construct street improvements to the adopted City street standards, and may be required to post financial guarantees consistent with the provisions of KMC Title 21 for construction, restoration and maintenance. Construction work and all restoration work required by the permit shall be completed within one year of the permit’s issuance. In addition, the city manager may set conditions to assure compliance of the permit with other adopted plans, City policies, and regulations.

C. The city manager shall place and maintain permanent sign(s) denoting the end of the City-maintained street.

D. The applicant shall have sole responsibility for the safe construction, operation and maintenance of any improvements to the City right-of-way pursuant to the permit, until such time as the improvements are officially accepted for maintenance by the City.

E. Unless earlier revoked by the city manager, any permit shall be valid for a term of one year and shall be automatically renewable for successive one-year terms. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 00-0085 §§ 1, 3; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.28.060).]


12.35.055 Permit – Encroachment.

A. Upon filing of a complete application and payment of the fee, the city manager may issue a permit authorizing the use of the City right-of-way for an encroachment for a period exceeding one year in duration.

B. An encroachment permit may be issued to authorize private construction in public rights-of-way when it is unlikely in the judgment of the city manager that such public right-of-way will be substantially improved by the City or other public agency within the foreseeable future.

In exercising such judgment, the city manager may consider existing traffic data in and around the site of the permit application, the City’s adopted transportation improvement plan, and any other studies, data, or other information that he deems relevant to his determination.

C. The applicant shall have sole responsibility for the safe construction, operation and maintenance of any improvements within the City right-of-way pursuant to the permit.

D. Unless earlier revoked by the city manager, any such encroachment permit issued shall be valid for a term of one year and shall be automatically renewable for successive one-year terms. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A).]


12.35.060 Permit – Application.

An applicant for a right-of-way use permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall complete an application in a form prescribed by the city manager. The city manager may reject incomplete application forms. Such application form shall require an applicant to identify the right-of-way to be used, the nature of the related development on the adjacent private property, and such other information as the city manager reasonably determines to be necessary, in relation to the specific project proposed. Such other information may include geotechnical studies, proof of liability insurance, performance bonding, and other measures designed to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.28.070).]


12.35.065 Obligation – Revocation.

This chapter authorizes the city manager to engage in discretionary acts and does not create any obligation on the part of the City to issue any such right-of-way use permit, nor does it create any right on the part of an applicant to initially obtain or subsequently retain any such right-of-way permit. Any such permit actually issued shall be revocable at any time after 90 days’ written notice from the city manager to the permit holder. The city manager’s revocation notice shall include a date by which the private use of the right-of-way must be discontinued and removed, all at the sole expense of the permit holder. Any private use of the right-of-way remaining after such date shall constitute a public nuisance and shall be abated as such. The cost of abatement, including the City’s attorney fees, shall be borne by the permit holder. There shall be no administrative appeal from any such decision by the city manager to revoke any such permit. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A).]


12.35.070 Conformance.

Any requirement imposed by this chapter shall be in addition to any other requirement imposed by any other ordinance or other law regulating or controlling the use and development of private or public property. Such additional requirements include but are not limited to any necessary setback variances. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter may not authorize any use or development otherwise not allowed or permitted under any other ordinance. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.28.080).]


12.35.075 Covenant.

The applicant for a right-of-way use permit, limited, access or encroachment, may be required to record a covenant running with the land and for the benefit of the City, which contains:

A. A legal description of the lot or parcel benefiting from the right-of-way use permit;

B. If the permit is for access, a statement indicating the following: 

1. Access to such parcel is across an unmaintained City right-of-way; the City is not responsible for maintenance of the right-of-way; and responsibility for maintenance of the street rests jointly and equitably upon all permit holders;

2. The owner(s) of the parcel will not oppose participation in a City street improvement district, if formation of such a district is deemed necessary by the City; and

3. Subdivision of such parcel is prohibited without obtaining either plat or short plat approval;

C. If the permit is for an encroachment, a statement indicating the following:

1. Maintenance of the encroachment is the responsibility of the property owner; and

2. Acknowledgement that the encroachment must be removed by the property owner within 90 days at the request of the city manager;

D. A statement that any right-of-way use permit covenant is binding on the successors and assigns of the owner(s);

E. The acknowledged signature(s) of the owner(s) of such parcel; and

F. The right-of-way use permit may be revocable with 90 days’ written notice. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A).]


12.35.077 Permit – Interpretation.

Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be construed to convey any vested right or ownership interest in any City right-of-way. Every right-of-way use permit shall state on its face that any City right-of-way opened pursuant to this chapter shall be open to use by the general public except in those cases where specific conditions in a right-of-way use permit restrict the use of the right-of-way for safety reasons. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A).]


12.35.080 Enforcement.

The city manager is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, pursuant to Chapter 1.20 KMC. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.28.090).]


12.35.090 Retroactivity.

All right-of-way use permits issued by the City prior to the effective date of this chapter shall not be affected by the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.28.100).]


12.35.100 Effective date.

Repealed by Ord. 11-0330. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.28.110).]


Chapter 12.40 PERMIT SYSTEM FOR CITY PROPERTY

Sections:

12.40.010    Repealed.

12.40.020    Permit requirement.

12.40.040    Permit issuance.

12.40.050    Liability.

12.40.060    Additional requirements.

12.40.080    Interpretation.

12.40.090    Enforcement.

12.40.100    Repealed.


12.40.010 Definitions.

Repealed by Ord. 11-0330. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.30.010).]


12.40.020 Permit requirement.

A. Special use permits shall be required for any use of City property, except uses regulated pursuant to Chapter 12.55 KMC relating to utility permits, Chapter 12.35 KMC relating to City street system right-of-way use permits, or special event permits approved and permitted in accordance with Chapter 8.40 KMC.

B. Upon receipt of an application for a “special use” permit upon City property, the city manager shall determine whether the proposed use is upon City-owned property.

C. The city manager shall forward the application to the department(s) for review.

D. The department(s) shall review the application and forward to the city manager its recommendation whether the permit shall be issued.

E. The department(s) shall evaluate the feasibility of the proposed use, its impact on other uses of the City property and its impact on public health and safety. Based on this evaluation, the department(s) shall recommend whether the permit should be issued.

F. In all cases, the department(s) shall be responsible for assuring that any application meets the requirements of the critical areas code set out in Chapter 18.55 KMC and the administrative rules promulgated thereunder before the permit is issued. [Ord. 12-0335 § 5; Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.30.020).]


12.40.040 Permit issuance.

A. Upon filing of a complete application, necessary approval of the application, payment of the administrative fee and posting of any required bond, the city manager may issue a permit authorizing the designated use of City property by the permittee.

B. The permit may require restoration of the City property to certain standards in view of the nature and duration of the special use. In addition, conditions may be set to assure compliance of the permit with City policies, ordinances and other applicable laws and regulations.

C. The permit applicant may be required to post a performance bond in an amount which will:

1. Guarantee the use will be in compliance with standards and conditions prescribed by the City; and

2. Guarantee restoration of the City property to a condition consistent with the special use permit and the City’s own use of its property. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.30.030).]


12.40.050 Liability.

The permit applicant shall be solely responsible for the adequate operation and maintenance of any improvements constructed by the permittee to the City property and shall assume liability for all injuries to persons or property as the result of activities pursuant to a special use permit. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.30.040).]


12.40.060 Additional requirements.

A. Survey. When considered necessary by the city manager to adequately determine the limits of the City property, the permit applicant shall cause the City property to be surveyed by a licensed land surveyor. Such survey shall be recorded in accordance with the Survey Recording Act. The cost of such survey shall be paid by the permit applicant. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.30.050).]


12.40.080 Interpretation.

Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be construed to convey any vested right of ownership interest in any City property. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.30.070).]


12.40.090 Enforcement.

The city manager is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter, pursuant to Chapter 1.20 KMC. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.30.080).]


12.40.100 Severability.

Repealed by Ord. 11-0330. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.30.090).]




Chapter 12.45 COMPLETE STREETS POLICY

Sections:

12.45.010    Vision.

12.45.020    Policy.

12.45.030    Design guidance.

12.45.040    Exceptions.

12.45.050    Implementation.

12.45.060    Performance measures.


12.45.010 Vision.

The City of Kenmore’s vision is to provide a safe, balanced, and efficient multi-modal transportation system that serves local and regional circulation needs and safely accommodates all users. To meet this vision, the City shall provide a future transportation system that allows users of all ages, abilities and financial resources to safely and efficiently use the public right-of-way to drive, access public transit, bicycle, walk or use any other chosen mode of travel. The City recognizes the public health and environmental quality benefits of encouraging active transportation modes through a safe, welcoming, connected network of modal choices. The City’s target zero goal (City Resolution No. 14-235) (target zero resolution) is a core component of this vision, seeking to have zero pedestrian or cyclist deaths or serious injuries as the result of a collision with a motorized vehicle by the year 2025. [Ord. 16-0427 § 1.]


12.45.020 Policy.

The term “complete streets” is a guiding principle for the consideration of all modes of travel within the public right-of-way. This chapter constitutes the City’s “complete streets” policy. Through the adoption of a layered network approach (as described in the comprehensive plan transportation element) to complete streets, the City recognizes that it can be a challenge for a single roadway to meet the demands of all modes at one time. Safety is a primary concern for the City, and the target zero resolution guides the pursuit of increased safety for pedestrians and cyclists, which can require the separation of some uses on certain roads. A City-wide network (as described in the comprehensive plan transportation element) which accommodates users of all modes of transportation (including air/seaplane and freight) and users of all abilities on appropriate networks of roads, paths and trails balances the principles of complete streets with the realities of promoting a transportation system that is fiscally, economically and environmentally sustainable within existing and future constraints.

Using a toolbox of diverse techniques, the City will plan for, design, construct, operate and maintain a transportation network that meets these goals. Recently developed projects, and those in future years, will incorporate traditional and modern tools such as:

	Traditional	Modern

	Sidewalks	Shared use paths

	Paved shoulders	Bike lanes (buffered) and sharrows

	Street trees and planting strips	Narrow vehicle lanes

	Curbs with ramps	Transit priority lanes

	Crosswalks	Enhanced pavement markings and symbols

	Pedestrian signals	Countdown and lead pedestrian signals

	Signage	Bulb-outs and refuge islands

	Transit stops and facilities	Rectangular rapid-flash beacon enhanced crosswalks

	Speed bumps	Bike parking

	Raised medians	Street furniture and temporary installations

	Street lighting	Textured and colored pavements

	 	Focused LED street lighting and pedestrian-level lighting

	 	Traffic circles and roundabouts

	 	Chicanes

The City will emphasize the layered network approach to complete streets in the review of private development plans, transportation system improvements and the City’s six-year transportation improvement plan (TIP). This approach shall include new construction, reconstruction and rehabilitation/overlay projects, except as noted in KMC 12.45.040, Exceptions. A context-sensitive approach to each project will consider neighborhood character, underserved modal choices and school transportation routes (including busing, walking and vehicle circulation around schools), in addition to safety and fiscal considerations. Projects must meet the requirements of the current system and the needs of the updated future network (as described in the comprehensive plan) specifically as it applies to nonmotorized modal choices. Consideration will be given to accommodation of future transportation technologies, such as driverless cars, and the impact these may have on other modes of travel in the layered network. [Ord. 16-0427 § 2.]


12.45.030 Design guidance.

The city public works department maintains design criteria, standards and guidelines based upon recognized best practices in street design, construction and operation. These criteria, standards and guidelines include, but are not limited to, the latest editions of the American Association of State Highway Transportation Offices (AASHTO) policies for vehicular and bicycle facilities, National Association of City Transportation Officials (NACTO) Urban Bikeway and Street Design Guides, publications and recommended practices from the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), the Washington State Department of Transportation (WSDOT) Design Manual and the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). Public works department employees have taken and will continue to take advantage of local training opportunities to become more familiar with these standards and their associated updates.

The City has adopted road standards (2016) and a street planning toolkit (Transportation Element, Figure 12), which include a number of complete streets principles, to guide all public and private transportation projects in the City. These documents emphasize consideration of multiple modes of travel, especially pedestrian and bicyclists, through the use of a number of the techniques described in KMC 12.45.020, Policy. The road standards include provisions for flexibility and the adoption of new techniques and tools with the approval of the city manager. New techniques and future developments in design which enhance the safety of all transportation users may be incorporated into future versions of the road standards. [Ord. 16-0427 § 3.]


12.45.040 Exceptions.

Exceptions to the policies of this chapter must be submitted to the public works director and approved by the city manager. The circumstances under which the city manager may consider exceptions to a complete streets approach to enhancement of the layered network are as follows:

A. Street projects may exclude those elements of the policies of this chapter that would require the accommodation of street uses prohibited by law, grants, or other agencies;

B. Maintenance activities, such as mowing, snowplowing, sweeping, spot repair, joint or crack sealing, surface treatments or pothole filling, do not require that elements of the policies of this chapter be applied beyond the scope of that maintenance activity;

C. Street construction, reconstruction and maintenance projects may exclude elements of the policies of this chapter when the accommodation of a specific use or mode is expected to:

1. Require more space than is physically available (topographic or right-of-way, where acquisition of additional right-of-way would significantly increase project costs), or

2. Be located where both current and future demand is demonstrated as being absent, including a lack of current or planned transit routes, or

3. Significantly increase project costs and equivalent alternatives for those travel modes that are documented to exist within close proximity, or

4. Be incompatible with the layered network (comprehensive plan transportation element), or

5. Be incompatible with neighborhood character, or

6. Have adverse impacts on environmental resources such as streams, wetlands, ditches, floodplains or historic structures or sites above and beyond the impacts of currently existing infrastructure. [Ord. 16-0427 § 4.]


12.45.050 Implementation.

The City recognizes that many other agencies have a direct or regional interest in the City’s transportation network. Because transportation frequently crosses city borders, ensuring compatibility for all modes with neighboring cities is crucial to an effective network. The City fosters partnerships with local transit providers, King and Snohomish Counties, Washington State Department of Transportation (WSDOT) and Northshore School District to implement complete streets principles in projects involving these entities. WSDOT owns a regionally significant facility passing through the City and shares in the City’s dedication to complete streets and a layered network approach.

The City has developed and continues to update a six-year TIP based on the comprehensive plan. The comprehensive plan identifies both pedestrian and bicycle priority networks, in addition to vehicular transportation network improvements. The TIP and comprehensive plan shall guide the development of projects. Projects will be constructed with a combination of City funds and grant funding. The City will stay informed of, and will apply for, grant funding programs, especially those with a focus on complete streets and nonmotorized travel improvements. Funding agency partnerships, such as those mentioned above, are key to implementation of complete streets projects within the layered network. Low-cost projects which can be achieved within existing pavement widths using temporary installations, signing and striping are continually identified and implemented by the City. [Ord. 16-0427 § 5.]


12.45.060 Performance measures.

The public works director and/or designee(s) shall report annually to the city council on projects that were completed in the last year, that are planned for the coming year, and that further the vision of this complete streets ordinance. The report shall identify yearly progress in advancing the lineal feet of bicycle and pedestrian network facilities and the connectivity of those networks. [Ord. 16-0427 § 6.]


Chapter 12.50 STREET STANDARDS

Sections:

12.50.010    Adoption.

12.50.020    Terms.

12.50.030    Applicability.

12.50.040    Developments.

12.50.050    References.

12.50.060    Variances.

12.50.070    Appeals from decisions on variances.

12.50.150    Interpretation.

12.50.160    Penalties.

12.50.170    Severability.


12.50.010 Adoption.

A. The City of Kenmore 2016 road standards (the standards), along with all companion documents referenced in Section 1.02 of the standards, are hereby approved, adopted and incorporated herein as the City of Kenmore standards for street design and construction.*

B. Consistent with the council’s direction and intent in adopting the standards, the department of public works is hereby authorized to develop public rules and make minor changes to the standards, or the referenced companion documents, in order to better implement the standards and as needed to stay current with changing design, environmental, and construction technology and methods. [Ord. 16-0428 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 15-0410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.42.010).]

*Code reviser’s note: The standards and the companion documents are on file in the office of the city clerk.


12.50.020 Terms.

A. “Standards” means the City of Kenmore 2016 road standards.

B. “Engineer” means the public works director, having authorities specified in RCW 36.75.050 and Chapter 36.80 RCW, or his/her authorized representatives. 

C. “City manager” means the city manager or designee.

D. Additional terms are defined in Section 1.01 of the standards. [Ord. 15-0410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.42.020).]


12.50.030 Applicability.

A. The standards shall apply to all newly constructed street and right-of-way facilities, both public and private, within the City. 

B. The standards shall apply to modifications of roadway features or existing facilities, roadway widening, pedestrian facility improvements or alterations, bicycle facility improvements or alterations, road improvements for land developments, and capital improvement projects. 

C. The standards shall apply to every new placement and every planned, nonemergency replacement or repair of existing utility poles and other utility structures within the City right-of-way. Every effort shall be made to meet the standards during emergency replacement of existing utility poles and other structures.

D. Design detail, construction workmanship, and materials shall be in accordance with the standards and the latest edition of the companion documents referenced in Section 1.02 of the standards. Design and construction shall meet the applicable standards, policies and codes, including the standards, this code, the City comprehensive or master plans, as well as project specific City approved geotechnical reports, traffic impact studies, and/or drainage reports, as determined by the city manager. [Ord. 15-0410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.42.030).]


12.50.040 Developments.

Any land development which is required by operation of any City ordinance or adopted standard to improve streets within, abutting, or serving the development shall do so in accordance with these standards. [Ord. 15-0410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.42.040).]


12.50.050 References.

The standards implement and are intended to be consistent with the references listed in Section 1.02 of the standards. [Ord. 15-0410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.42.050).]


12.50.060 Variances.

A. A variance is required for any design or construction deviation from the standards and shall be a Type 1 decision per Chapter 19.25 KMC. 

B. A variance from these standards may be granted upon evidence that the variance is in the public interest and that the requirements for safety, function, fire protection, transit needs, appearance and maintainability are fully met. The need for a variance is not assumed by the City to be evidence of an impractical or undesirable design, and variances that meet these requirements are encouraged to keep the City at the forefront of innovative design and construction.

C. Variance requests for subdivisions shall be proposed at preliminary plat stage and prior to any public hearing. All known variance requests must be reviewed by the City prior to approval of the engineering plans for construction. Variances from these standards which do not meet the International Fire Code, as adopted by the City, will require concurrence by the City’s fire marshal. 

D. Applications for Road Variances: 

1. Applications for proposed variances shall be written, including graphics and drawings as needed to support the request, and shall include a specific description of the proposed alternative along with supporting documentation. Documentation may include, but is not limited to, a record of successful use by other agencies, or evidence of meeting criteria for quality/safety such as AASHTO and WSDOT standards. 

2. The applicant shall indicate those sections of the standards or this code which are proposed for deviation. 

3. Variance requests shall be on forms prescribed by the City and shall be accompanied by the variance review fee as specified in the City of Kenmore fee schedule. 

E. Variances to these standards may also be granted by the city council through a development agreement per Chapter 18.110 KMC.

F. Capital improvement projects performed by the City or its representatives need not file for a formal variance request; provided, that all deviations from the standards are documented during design. [Ord. 15-0410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.42.060).]


12.50.070 Appeals from decisions on variances.

The department of public works by rule shall establish procedures governing the administrative appeal of the city manager’s decision on a request for variance made in accordance with KMC 12.50.060. The department’s decision on such appeals shall be final. [Ord. 15-0410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.42.062).]


12.50.150 Interpretation.

The city manager is authorized to interpret the standards, provide guidelines for their implementation, promulgate rules, and to resolve conflicts or inconsistencies that may arise in their interpretation or application. [Ord. 15-0410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 00-0096 § 8.]


12.50.160 Penalties.

Failure to comply with the standards may result in denial of plan or development permit approval, revocation of prior approvals, legal action for forfeiture of financial guarantee, code enforcement, and/or other penalties as provided by law. [Ord. 15-0410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.42.070).]


12.50.170 Severability.

If any part of the standards is found invalid, all other parts shall remain in effect. [Ord. 15-0410 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.42.080).]


Chapter 12.55 UTILITIES ON CITY RIGHTS-OF-WAY

Sections:

12.55.010    Purpose.

12.55.020    Construction permit – Required.

12.55.030    Construction permit – Application – Generally.

12.55.040    Construction permit – Application – Fees.

12.55.050    Inspection fee.

12.55.060    Construction permit – Application – Review.

12.55.070    Emergency construction permits – Unfranchised utilities.

12.55.080    Policy on accommodation of utilities.

12.55.090    Coordination of right-of-way construction.

12.55.100    Performance guarantee required.

12.55.110    Construction permit – Form.

12.55.120    Notification by permittee of construction commenced.

12.55.130    Enforcement.

12.55.135    Repealed.

12.55.140    Repealed.


12.55.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the granting of right-of-way construction permits and to ensure that utility construction work undertaken pursuant to such permits is consistent with the applicant’s right-of-way franchise from the City, the applicable district comprehensive plan, the critical areas code, the City comprehensive plan, sound engineering and design standards, health and sanitation regulations, and City standards for water mains and fire hydrants. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.44.010).]


12.55.020 Construction permit – Required.

A. All construction work performed by franchised utilities, telephone and telegraph companies and within City right-of-way shall require a right-of-way construction permit to be issued by the City; provided, that construction work undertaken by the City or under contract to the City or requested by the City due to new construction shall be exempted from this requirement. Construction work shall include but not be limited to the construction and maintenance of waterlines, gas pipes, sewer lines, petroleum pipelines, telephone, telegraph and electric lines, cable TV and petroleum products and any other such public and private utilities.

B. The City, during the construction of capital improvement projects, shall install vacant conduit reserved for the future installation of fiber optic cable in accordance with the City’s I-net and wide area network plans; all capital improvement projects not requiring trenching or modification to the subgrade, such as overlays and shoulder widening, shall be exempted from this requirement. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.44.020).]


12.55.030 Construction permit – Application – Generally.

Applications for all right-of-way construction permits shall be submitted, in writing, to the City. The application shall contain whatever information, including plans and specifications, which the City shall require. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.44.030).]


12.55.040 Construction permit – Application – Fees.

Each application requires a fee, imposed by the city council by resolution, payable to the City for the administrative costs and expenses of processing the application. These fees shall be equal to the administrative costs of approving the permit, including but not limited to preparing the permit, review, processing, coordinating review with other departments, preparing environmental documents, etc. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.44.040).]


12.55.050 Inspection fee.

A. The permittee shall pay to the department an inspection fee at the rate imposed by the city council by resolution per hour of utility inspection. The fee is in addition to any other City fees and is nonrefundable.

B. The fee shall be collected in accordance with administrative procedures developed by the department. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.44.045).]


12.55.060 Construction permit – Application – Review.

A. The department shall coordinate the review by all departments of right-of-way construction permit applications and shall determine whether the proposed construction is consistent with the applicant’s right-of-way franchise from the City.

B. The department shall review and evaluate applications in respect to the hazard and risk of the proposed construction, location of the proposed construction in relation to other utilities in the right-of-way and the adequacy of the engineering and design of the proposed construction.

C. The department shall review and evaluate all applications for right-of-way construction permits for sewer and water main extensions to determine whether the proposed construction is consistent with the sewer or water comprehensive plan approved by the city council. If the facility is not consistent with an approved comprehensive plan, then the construction permit shall not be issued. Applications for those water utilities with Group A nonexpanding public water systems that are not required to prepare comprehensive plans for approval by the city council shall be approved if all other conditions of this chapter are met. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.44.050).]


12.55.070 Emergency construction permits – Unfranchised utilities.

The City may issue right-of-way construction permits to unfranchised utilities under the following circumstances:

A. When the Seattle-King County department of public health has determined that the proposed work is necessary to address a public health hazard; or

B. When the city manager has determined that the proposed work is necessary to address actual or imminent damage to City right-of-way or to address hazards to users of City right-of-way. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.44.055).]


12.55.080 Policy on accommodation of utilities.

A. Adoption. “King County Regulations for Accommodation of Utilities on County Road Rights-of-Way, 1997,” or as later amended, is hereby approved and adopted as the City policy for utility installation and maintenance operations within the City of Kenmore street rights-of-way. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.44.060).]


12.55.090 Coordination of right-of-way construction.

A. The applicant, at the time of submitting an application for a right-of-way construction permit, shall notify all other public and private utility entities known to be using or proposing to use the same right-of-way of the applicant’s proposed construction and the proposed timing of such construction. Any such entity notified may, within seven days of such notification, request a delay in the commencement of such proposed construction for the purpose of coordinating other right-of-way construction with that proposed by the applicant.

B. The City shall also coordinate the approval of right-of-way construction permits with City street improvements and maintenance and may delay the commencement date for the applicant’s right-of-way construction for 90 days or less, except in the case of emergencies, if it finds that such delay will reduce the inconvenience to City street users from construction activities, if it finds that such delay will not create undue economic hardship on the applicant, or if it finds that such delay will allow the City to install conduit for future installation of fiber optic cable.

C. The City shall inform the Washington State Department of Transportation of all right-of-way construction permits issued within the SR 522 right-of-way or within one City block.

D. The City shall review all right-of-way construction permit applications for projects 1,000 feet or longer to determine, within 15 working days, whether the installation of conduit may be needed for the future installation of fiber optic cable to connect City or other public facilities. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.44.070).]


12.55.100 Performance guarantee required.

Prior to final approval of all right-of-way construction permits, the department shall determine the amount of the performance guarantee necessary to assure compliance with the approved construction plans, applicable State and local health and sanitation regulations, and City standards and to assure proper restoration of the street and the health and safety of the users of the street. If required, the applicant shall submit the financial guarantee consistent with the provisions of KMC Title 21. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.44.080).]


12.55.110 Construction permit – Form.

The right-of-way construction permit granted shall be in a form approved by and be made subject to all reasonable and necessary terms and conditions imposed by the department, and shall also include conditions of approval consistent with the requirements of Chapter 12.05 KMC, General Provisions. [Ord. 18-0458 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.44.090).]


12.55.120 Notification by permittee of construction commenced.

The permittee shall give oral or written notice of the date of commencement of construction to the following agencies: department for all right-of-way construction, Seattle-King County department of public health for construction of waterworks (except for domestic service connections), and city fire marshal for waterworks. Failure to give such notice is grounds for the revocation or suspension of the construction permit. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.44.100).]


12.55.130 Enforcement.

The city manager and the director of the Seattle-King County department of public health are authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the ordinances codified in it, and any rules and regulations adopted hereunder pursuant to the enforcement and penalty provisions of Chapter 1.20 KMC. [Ord. 11-0330 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.44.110).]


12.55.135 Productivity and customer service report.

Repealed by Ord. 11-0330. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.44.115).]


12.55.140 Severability.

Repealed by Ord. 11-0330. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.44.120).]


Chapter 12.58 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES WITHIN CITY RIGHTS-OF-WAY

Sections:

12.58.010    Purpose.

12.58.020    Definitions.

12.58.030    Exemptions.

12.58.040    Grant of authority – Right-of-way use agreement required.

12.58.050    Grant of authority – Effective period.

12.58.060    Application – Contents.

12.58.070    Application review.

12.58.080    Application review and inspection fees.

12.58.090    Annual compensation for use of right-of-way.

12.58.100    Insurance requirements.

12.58.110    Liquidated damages.

12.58.120    Liability and indemnification.

12.58.130    Repealed.


12.58.010 Purpose. 

The purpose of this chapter is to grant, through right-of-way use agreements, authority for the placement of wireless communication facilities within the City rights-of-way, and to establish standards for right-of-way use agreements which:

A. Compensate the City for the value of the use of the City right-of-way by wireless communication providers; and

B. Reimburse the City for ongoing costs associated with those uses of the City right-of-way; and

C. Encourage competition by establishing consistent terms and conditions under which wireless communication providers may use valuable public property to serve the public; and

D. Fully protect the public and the City from any harm that may flow from such private use of City right-of-way; and

E. Protect and carry out the authority of the City over activities in the City right-of-way, while recovering costs; and

F. Allow the City to exercise its stewardship responsibilities with regard to City right-of-way in a manner consistent with all applicable City policies and codes, including but not limited to the zoning code, the City comprehensive plan, City street standards; and

G. Otherwise protect the public interests in the development and use of the City right-of-way infrastructure and in preserving and improving the aesthetics of the community. [Ord. 16-0426 § 9 (Att. G); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; (KCC 14.45.010).]


12.58.020 Definitions.

The following terms shall be applicable to this chapter:

A. “City manager” means the City of Kenmore city manager or his or her designee(s).

B. “Right-of-way” is land, property or property interest, such as an easement, usually in a strip, as well as bridges, trestles, or other structures, dedicated to, or otherwise acquired by the City for public motor vehicle transportation purposes, including, but not limited to, streets, avenues, and alleys, whether or not opened, improved or maintained for public motor vehicle transportation purposes.

C. “Right-of-way use agreement” is an agreement between the City and a wireless communication provider through which is granted a site-specific and revocable privilege to use city right-of-way at a location identified in the agreement for wireless communication facilities, and through which are set forth the terms and conditions for exercising the granted privilege to use the City right-of-way.

D. “Wireless communication facility” is the capital, equipment and property, including but not limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, pedestals, and electronic equipment within the right-of-way used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving, distributing, providing, or offering wireless communications.

E. “Wireless communication provider” is every person that owns, controls, operates or manages a wireless communication facility within the City right-of-way for the purpose of offering wireless communication services (i.e., transmission for hire of information in electronic or optical form, including, but not limited to, voice, video, or data).

F. “Wireless” means transmissions through the airwaves including, but not limited to, infrared line of sight, cellular, microwave, or satellite. [Ord. 16-0426 § 9 (Att. G); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; (KCC 14.45.020).]


12.58.030 Exemptions.

The following wireless communication facilities are not subject to the provisions of this chapter:

A. Facilities located or constructed by the City of Kenmore; and

B. Facilities located or constructed by emergency services within the City of Kenmore. [Ord. 16-0426 § 9 (Att. G); Ord. 05-0228 § 2; Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; (KCC 14.45.030).]


12.58.040 Grant of authority – Right-of-way use agreement required.

Wireless communication facilities shall only be located or constructed within City of Kenmore rights-of-way after a right-of-way use agreement is approved by the city manager. Prior to approving the agreement, the City shall ensure that the proposed facility is located, designed and proposed to be constructed in a manner that complies with all applicable City policies and codes, including but not limited to the provisions of KMC Title 18, Zoning, the City comprehensive plan, City street standards, and the regulation for accommodations of utilities on City street rights-of-way adopted by KMC 12.55.080. Furthermore, the right-of-way use agreement shall only allow placement of wireless communication facilities on improved and maintained City street rights-of-way. [Ord. 16-0426 § 9 (Att. G); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; (KCC 14.45.040).]


12.58.050 Grant of authority – Effective period.

The right-of-way use agreement constitutes authorization for the applicant to use the City right-of-way at the location specified in the agreement for no more than 10 years. Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the right-of-way agreement, including payment of required annual compensation, is cause for revoking of the use agreement. The agreement holder shall remove facilities authorized by the agreement from the City right-of-way upon expiration of the agreement, unless renewed, or upon revocation of the agreement for cause. [Ord. 16-0426 § 9 (Att. G); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; (KCC 14.45.050).]


12.58.060 Application – Contents.

A. The City shall not commence review of any application set forth in this chapter until the applicant has submitted the following:

1. An application form provided by the City and completed by the applicant;

2. The name of the applicant and a designated contact person;

3. Plans and specifications for any structures, antenna or other equipment to be placed in the right-of-way or, if applicable, on abutting private property;

4. A vicinity map showing the specific location of right-of-way subject to the application;

5. When structures and equipment are to be located on abutting properties:

a. A site plan illustrating the relationship to property lines and other structures on the site;

b. Legal description of the site abutting property; and

c. Proof that the abutting property is a legally recognized lot pursuant to KMC Title 17; 

6. A critical areas affidavit if required by Chapter 18.55 KMC;

7. A completed environmental checklist, if required by Chapter 19.35 KMC; and

8. Payment of any review fees established by KMC Title 21;

B. The applicant shall attest by written oath to the accuracy of all information submitted for an application. [Ord. 16-0426 § 9 (Att. G); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; (KCC 14.45.060).]


12.58.070 Application review.

The department of engineering and environmental services and the development services department shall coordinate review and inspection of the application for a right-of-way use agreement and, to the extent required, any zoning approvals, building permits and environmental review under the State Environmental Policy Act, as follows:

A. The department of development services shall coordinate the review by all departments of right-of-way use agreement applications.

B. The department of engineering and environmental services shall review and evaluate applications with respect to the hazard and risk of the proposed construction and location of the proposed construction in relation to other utilities in the right-of-way.

C. The department of development services shall review and evaluate all applications to determine consistency with respect to the standards and requirements of Chapter 18.60 KMC and KMC Title 21. The department shall also be the lead agency for purposes of any environmental review required under Chapter 19.35 KMC. [Ord. 16-0426 § 9 (Att. G); Ord. 11-0329 § 6; Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; (KCC 14.45.070).]


12.58.080 Application review and inspection fees. 

The following fees shall be required for the administrative costs and expenses of processing and inspecting a right-of-way use agreement application. 

	Review Agency	Fee

	Development services department (application processing)	Imposed by the city council by resolution

	Development services department (zoning review)

	Engineering and environmental services department (inspection)

[Ord. 16-0426 § 9 (Att. G); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0139 § 1; (KCC 14.45.080).]


12.58.090 Annual compensation for use of right-of-way.

A. In consideration for continuing use of the City rights-of-way, an agreement holder shall commit to provide an annual use payment. The amount of the use payment shall be as follows:

	Type of Equipment/Facility  within the Right-of-Way	Use Payment

	Separate support structure (such as a monopole or lattice) used solely for wireless antenna, with antenna/ receiver transmitter and/or equipment cabinet	Imposed by the city council by resolution

	Antenna/receiver transmitter (on an existing or replacement pole) and equipment cabinet

	Antenna/receiver transmitter (on an existing or replacement pole) or  equipment cabinet, but not both

B. For the purpose of this section, “replacement pole” means a new utility pole replacing an existing utility pole in the City right-of-way with no increase in the total number of utility poles in the right-of-way. Replacement poles provide extra capacity to support attached wireless communication facilities.

C. Use payments shall be paid to the City and are due upon the signing of the agreement, prorated to the end of the year, and the first of January every year thereafter.

D. All use payments prescribed by subsection A of this section shall be automatically escalated annually, beginning January 1, 2001, and every year thereafter, for the change in the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (“CPI-U”) for the Seattle Tacoma-Bremerton Statistical Metropolitan Area for the preceding calendar year. In the event the CPI-U (or a successor or substitute index) is no longer published, a reliable government or other non-partisan index of inflation selected by the county shall be used to calculate the adjusted amounts. [Ord. 16-0426 § 9 (Att. G); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0139 § 1; (KCC 14.45.090).]


12.58.100 Insurance requirements.

A. For any right-of-way use agreement, the agreement holder must carry commercial general liability, automobile liability and stop gap or employers liability coverage, each in minimum limits of not less than $1,000,000, in an amount approved by the City of Kenmore. All policies must name the City of Kenmore as an additional named insured.

B. All policies shall be placed with insurers having a Bests’ rating of no less than A:VIII or, if not rated by Bests, with surpluses equivalent to or greater than Bests’ A:VIII rating. The agreement holder shall send copies of certificates, endorsements or other adequate evidence of compliance with this section to the office so designated in the application prior to the City’s execution of the agreement. [Ord. 16-0426 § 9 (Att. G); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; (KCC 14.45.100).]


12.58.110 Liquidated damages.

All right-of-way use agreements may provide for liquidated damages to compensate the City for harm caused by violation of an agreement or this chapter, or any applicable law in an amount which is a reasonable forecast of just compensation for the harm caused by the violation. [Ord. 16-0426 § 9 (Att. G); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; (KCC 14.45.110).]


12.58.120 Liability and indemnification. 

A. All right-of-way use agreements shall contain the following provision: the holder of agreement shall have no recourse whatsoever against the county or its officials, boards, commissions, agents, or employees for any loss, costs, expenses, or damages arising out of any provision or requirement of the agreement, or KMC Title 21 because of the enforcement of the agreement, or KMC Title 21 except if such loss, costs, expenses or damages are the result of the sole negligence or misconduct on the part of the City or its agents.

B. All right-of-way use agreements shall contain the following provision: to the extent permitted by law, the holder of the agreement shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the City and its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, against any and all claims, including but not limited to third-party claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings and judgments for damages or equitable relief arising out of the construction, repair, maintenance or operation of its wireless communication facilities, or in any way arising out of the agreement holder’s enjoyment or exercise of the right-of-way use agreement granted pursuant, or otherwise subject to KMC Title 21, regardless of whether the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by KMC Title 21 or an agreement. This provision includes, but is not limited to, expenses for reasonable legal fees and for disbursements and liabilities assumed by the City as follows:

1. To persons or property, in any way arising out of or through the acts or omissions of the agreement, its officers, employees, or agents or to which the agreement holder’s negligence shall in any way contribute;

2. Arising out of an agreement holder’s failure to comply with the provisions of any federal, State or local statute, ordinance, rule, or regulation applicable to the agreement holder.

C. The City shall give the agreement holder timely written notice of the making of any claim or the commencement of any action, suit or other proceeding covered by KMC Title 21. In the event any such claim arises, the City or any other indemnified party shall tender the defense thereof to the permit and the agreement holder shall have the right to defend, settle, or compromise any claims arising hereunder and the City shall cooperate fully therein. [Ord. 16-0426 § 9 (Att. G); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; (KCC 14.45.120).]


12.58.130 Antenna and equipment cabinets/buildings abutting residential zones.

Repealed by Ord. 16-0426. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; (KCC 14.45.130).]


Chapter 12.60 PUBLIC AND PRIVATE UTILITIES ON REAL PROPERTY

Sections:

12.60.010    Purpose.

12.60.020    Permit – Required – Exceptions.

12.60.030    Permit – Issuance authority – Use.

12.60.040    Permit – Privilege limitations.

12.60.050    Permit – Compliance with applicable provisions.

12.60.060    Permit – Terms and conditions.

12.60.070    Permit – Application – Required information.

12.60.090    Review and certification by agencies.

12.60.100    Financial guarantee requirements.

12.60.110    Notice of proposed use and commencement – Departmental coordination of permit approval.

12.60.120    Notice to agencies of construction date.

12.60.130    Permit revocation.

12.60.140    Termination of privileges – Assessment.

12.60.150    Enforcement.

12.60.160    Rights reserved to City – Conformance and payment of cost required.

12.60.170    Rule and regulation promulgation.

12.60.180    Severability.


12.60.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter shall be to authorize and regulate the issuance of permits for the accommodation of public and private utility facilities, and other uses upon the City-owned real property which is not dedicated as right-of-way and to ensure that privileges authorized by the permits are consistent with public ownership of the property, the City comprehensive plan, the critical areas code, sound engineering and design standards, and health and sanitation regulations. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.46.010).]


12.60.020 Permit – Required – Exceptions.

All utility construction work and other uses performed upon, along, over, under or across any public place in the City of Kenmore shall require a permit to be issued by the City of Kenmore; provided, that construction work undertaken by the City of Kenmore or under contract to the City of Kenmore or requested by the City of Kenmore due to new construction shall be exempted from this requirement. Utility construction work includes, but is not limited to, construction and maintenance of waterworks, gas pipes, telephone, telegraph and electric lines, sewers, cable television and petroleum products and any other such public and private utilities. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.46.020).]


12.60.030 Permit – Issuance authority – Use.

The City of Kenmore is authorized to issue revocable permits for all utility construction work and installation, and other uses upon, along, over, under or across any public place in the City of Kenmore. The permits shall be used to authorize an act or series of acts on City-owned real property which is not dedicated as right-of-way. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.46.030).]


12.60.040 Permit – Privilege limitations.

The permits shall not be construed to convey any vested right in the property. The permits grant only a personal and revocable privilege and license to do one or more acts on the property without possessing any interest in the property. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.46.040).]


12.60.050 Permit – Compliance with applicable provisions.

The issuance of permits authorized in this chapter does not relieve or release the permittee from complying with other applicable statutes, ordinances, restrictions, regulations, rules or obligations in connection with the permittee’s proposed use of the property. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.46.050).]


12.60.060 Permit – Terms and conditions.

The permits shall be subject to all terms, conditions and restrictions, imposed by the department responsible for the management of the property to be affected, deemed necessary to preserve all characteristics consistent with public ownership; consequently, the general and specific terms, conditions and restrictions of the permits will vary according to, but not limited to, the following:

A. The property interest owned by the City of Kenmore;

B. All federal, State or local restrictions placed on the use of the property;

C. The purpose for acquiring the property;

D. Plans for the future development of the property;

E. The applicant’s proposed use of the property; and

F. The individual characteristics of the property. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.46.060).]


12.60.070 Permit – Application – Required information.

Applications for all permits shall be submitted, in writing, to the City of Kenmore. The application shall contain whatever information, including plans and specifications, the City of Kenmore shall require. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.46.070).]


12.60.090 Review and certification by agencies.

A. The City of Kenmore shall coordinate the review by all departments of permit applications.

B. The department responsible for the management of the property to be affected shall review and evaluate applications with respect to the hazard and risk of the proposed construction or use, location of the proposed construction or use in relation to other facilities using the property, the adequacy of the engineering and design of the proposed construction or use, and applicable federal, State, county and local laws and regulations.

C. The Seattle-King County department of public health shall review and evaluate applications for the construction of waterworks (except for domestic service connections) to determine consistency with State and local health and sanitation regulations.

D. The City of Kenmore fire marshal shall review and evaluate applications for the construction of waterworks to determine consistency with City standards for water mains and fire hydrants.

E. All applications for the construction of sewer or water facilities must be certified by the department of community development as consistent with a sewer or water comprehensive plan approved by the city council.

F. In any case, the City of Kenmore shall forward the application to the department for recommendations on critical area issues and the City of Kenmore shall be responsible for assuring that any application meets the requirements of the critical areas code set out in Chapter 18.55 KMC and the administrative rules promulgated thereunder before the permit is issued. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.46.090).]


12.60.100 Financial guarantee requirements.

Prior to final approval of all permits, the department responsible for the management of the property to be affected shall determine the amount of the performance guarantee necessary to assure compliance with approved construction plans, applicable State and local health and sanitation regulations, City standards for water mains and fire hydrants, and to assure proper restoration of the property and the health and safety of the users of the property. The applicant shall submit the financial guarantee consistent with the provisions of KMC Title 21. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.46.100).]


12.60.110 Notice of proposed use and commencement – Departmental coordination of permit approval.

A. The applicant, at the time of submitting an application for a permit, shall notify all public and private utility entities known to be using or proposing to use the same public place of the applicant’s proposed use and the proposed timing of any construction. Any such entity notified may, within seven days of such notification, request a delay in the commencement of any proposed construction for the purpose of coordinating other construction work on the property with that proposed by the applicant. The City of Kenmore may delay the commencement date for the applicant’s construction work on the property for 90 days or less if it finds that such delay will reduce the inconvenience to the public from construction activities, and it finds that such delay will not create undue economic hardship on the applicant.

B. The City of Kenmore shall also coordinate the approval of permits with the department responsible for the management of the property to be affected and may delay the commencement date for the applicant’s construction work for 90 days or less upon making the findings described in subsection (A) of this section.

C. The City of Kenmore shall inform the Seattle-King County department of public health of permits for construction of waterworks (except domestic service connections), and the City of Kenmore fire marshal of permits for waterworks. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.46.110).]


12.60.120 Notice to agencies of construction date.

The permittee is required to give written notice of the date construction will begin to the following agencies: the department responsible for the management of the property to be affected; Seattle-King County department of public health for construction of waterworks (except for domestic service connections); the City of Kenmore fire marshal for construction of waterworks. Failure to give such notice is grounds for the revocation or suspension of the permit. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.46.120).]


12.60.130 Permit revocation.

Any permit issued by the authority of this chapter shall be revocable at any time that the department responsible for the management of the property affected shall determine that the public health, safety, general welfare, or public use requires such revocation, and the right to revoke is expressly reserved to the City of Kenmore. At a reasonable time prior to action upon such revocation or proposed revocation, opportunity shall be afforded to the permittee to present for consideration action or actions alternative to the revocation of such permit. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.46.130).]


12.60.140 Termination of privileges – Assessment.

All privileges granted by the permits shall automatically terminate at such time as the permittee ceases to use the property and any facilities authorized by the permit. The permittee may terminate the agreement by written notice to the city manager. Upon revocation, termination or abandonment of any permit, the permittee shall remove at his expense all facilities placed on such property by the permittee and restore the premises to a condition which is equivalent in all respects to the condition existing prior to installation of the facilities or to a condition which is satisfactory to the City. If the permittee has not accomplished removal and restoration at the end of a 90-day period following the effective date of revocation, termination or abandonment, the City may accomplish all of the necessary work and charge all of the costs to the permittee. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.46.140).]


12.60.150 Enforcement.

In addition to other enforcement powers and not in limitation thereto, the city manager is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and any rules and regulations adopted thereunder pursuant to the enforcement and penalty provisions of Chapter 1.20 KMC. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.46.150).]


12.60.160 Rights reserved to City – Conformance and payment of cost required.

The City reserves the right to use, occupy and enjoy its property for such purposes as it shall desire including but not limited to constructing or installing structures and facilities on the property, or developing, improving, repairing or altering the property. The permittee upon written notice will at his own cost and expense remove, repair, relocate, change or reconstruct such installations to conform with the plans of work contemplated or ordered by the City according to a time schedule contained in the written notice. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.46.160).]


12.60.170 Rule and regulation promulgation.

The city manager may promulgate any rules and regulations necessary for the operation of this chapter. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.46.170).]


12.60.180 Severability.

If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstances is declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this chapter. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.46.180).]


Chapter 12.65 SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES

Sections:

12.65.010    Designation.

12.65.020    Publication.

12.65.030    Snow emergency – Declaration authority – News bulletin.

12.65.040    Coordination of snow removal activities with other jurisdictions.


12.65.010 Designation.

Certain arterial highways and school bus routes in the City of Kenmore, to be identified and so designated by the director of public works, are declared snow emergency routes. Such snow emergency routes shall be the first streets to be sanded and/or cleared of snow. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.48.010).]


12.65.020 Publication.

The director of public works shall issue a news bulletin to all newspapers of general circulation serving the City of Kenmore, a listing of all such snow emergency routes. Such listing of snow emergency routes shall be prepared and a news bulletin issued within two weeks of January 29, 1973, and thereafter annually, prior to the second Monday in November. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.48.020).]


12.65.030 Snow emergency – Declaration authority – News bulletin.

A. The director of public works or his authorized representative is empowered to declare a snow emergency. The director shall establish guidelines for conditions which will warrant the declaring of a snow emergency.

B. When a snow emergency is declared, the director shall issue an emergency news bulletin to all radio and television stations and newspapers serving the City of Kenmore, and to the chief of the police department, so that there may be coordination for the deployment of personnel and equipment. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.48.030).]


12.65.040 Coordination of snow removal activities with other jurisdictions.

The director of public works shall coordinate City of Kenmore snow removal activities with federal, State, county and local jurisdictions located within or adjacent to the City of Kenmore for the purpose of continuity in clearing snow emergency routes. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.48.040).]


Chapter 12.70 SIDEWALKS, PLANTING STRIPS AND STREET TREES

Sections:

12.70.010    Definitions.

12.70.020    Sidewalk – Repair determination – Responsibility and costs.

12.70.030    Sidewalk – Notice to repair – Cost assessment.

12.70.040    Planting strip maintenance.

12.70.050    Sidewalk – Snow, ice and trash removal required when.

12.70.060    Sidewalk – Violation of KMC 12.70.050 deemed misdemeanor.

12.70.070    Exemption from KMC 12.70.040 and 12.70.050 permitted when.

12.70.080    Street trees and plantings – Trimming limitations – Removal prohibited.


12.70.010 Definitions.

Terms used in this chapter with relation to sidewalks, planting strips and curbs will have the meanings as set forth in this section:

A. “Abutting property” means property having a frontage upon the sides or margins of any street or right-of-way.

B. “Curb” means a cement, concrete or asphaltic concrete raised structure designed to delineate the edge of the pavement and to separate the vehicular portion from that provided for pedestrians and surface drainage control.

C. “Planting strip” means that portion of the right-of-way which lies:

1. Behind the curb line and between the curb line and the sidewalk; or

2. Between the sidewalk and the right-of-way line; or

3. Between the edge of pavement and the right-of-way line where sidewalks and/or curb are not present.

D. “Public works director” means the public works director, or designee.

E. “Sidewalk” means that property between the curb line and the abutting property, set aside and intended for the use of pedestrians, improved by paving with cement concrete or asphaltic concrete. [Ord. 17-0445 § 1; Ord. 16-0428 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.52.010).]


12.70.020 Sidewalk – Repair determination – Responsibility and costs.

A. Whenever a portion of any public street, including any boulevard, avenue, lane or place, is improved by a sidewalk thereon, and the sidewalk has become unfit or unsafe for public travel, the city manager may determine that the reconstruction or repair of that portion of sidewalk is necessary for the public safety and convenience. If the city manager makes such a determination, the city manager will also determine the cause of the damage to such sidewalk.

B. If the city manager finds that damage to the sidewalk results from activities on or use of the abutting privately owned property or actions or omissions of the abutting private property owner (examples include roots from trees not planted by any public entity, private vehicle traffic at driveways, etc.), the duty, burden and expense of reconstruction or repair will be the responsibility of the owner; provided, that the owner will not be responsible for any construction or repair in excess of 25 percent of the valuation of the abutting property, exclusive of improvements.

C. If the city manager does so find the cause of damage to the sidewalk lies on public property, within the right-of-way, or can be identified as placed by a public entity, the duty, burden and expense of repair will be the responsibility of the City.

D. The city manager will prepare a written order of the city manager’s determinations under this section. This chapter and the city manager’s determinations will constitute the “resolution” identified in Chapters 35.68, 35.69 and 35.70 RCW. [Ord. 17-0445 § 2; Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.52.020).]


12.70.030 Sidewalk – Notice to repair – Cost assessment.

A. Whenever the city manager has determined that a portion of a sidewalk has become unfit or unsafe for public travel, that reconstruction or repair is necessary for public safety and convenience, and that the abutting property owner is responsible for reconstruction or repair pursuant to KMC 12.70.020(B), the public works director will give written notice of the determination to the owner of the abutting property. The notice will:

1. Instruct the owner to reconstruct or repair the sidewalk in accordance with standard plans and specifications which will be attached to the notice;

2. Specify a reasonable time for the reconstruction or repair;

3. Require the owner to provide an estimate of the cost of the reconstruction or repair before commencement of the reconstruction or repair;

4. Advise the owner that the public works director must approve plans for reconstruction or repair before the owner commences reconstruction or repair, so that the City can determine whether the 25 percent limit of KMC 12.70.020(B) is met;

5. Advise the owner that the City may require the owner to revise the plans for reconstruction or repair to comply with the 25 percent limit of KMC 12.70.020(B);

6. State that if the owner fails to reconstruct or repair within the time period specified, the public works director will complete the reconstruction or repair at the owners’ expense;

7. State that if the public works director completes the reconstruction or repair, the public works director will determine the cost to be charged to the owner; and

8. State that the city manager will hear protests to the determination of the owner’s responsibility for reconstruction or repair, and the public works director will hear protests to the cost to be charged to the owner, at a time and place and in a manner established by the city manager or public works director, as applicable.

The notice will be delivered to the owner or to the resident of the property, or delivered by mail to the recorded tax address. If the owner is unknown, a copy of the notice will be posted in a conspicuous place on the portion of the street where the reconstruction or repair is to occur. Before commencing reconstruction or repair, the owner must provide to the public works director the plans for the reconstruction or repair, together with an estimate of the cost of the reconstruction or repair and information from which the public works director may determine the valuation of the abutting property, exclusive of improvements. The public works director may require the owner to provide additional information to determine such valuation, at the cost of the owner. If the public works director determines that the cost of the reconstruction or repair will exceed 25 percent of such valuation, the owner must modify the plans for the reconstruction or repair so that the cost of the work does not exceed 25 percent of such valuation. The owner will not commence the reconstruction or repair until the public works director has approved the modified plans.

B. If the owner fails to perform the approved reconstruction or repair within the time period stated in the notice, or a different time period approved by the public works director, the City will complete the reconstruction or repair. After completion, the public works director will determine the cost to be charged to the owner, and the time and manner of payment thereof; provided, that the cost will not exceed 25 percent of the valuation of the abutting property, exclusive of improvements. The public works director will give notice of the cost to the owner. The notice will:

1. State the cost to be charged to the owner, and the time and manner of payment thereof;

2. Include supporting documentation for the cost;

3. Advise the owner that the cost cannot exceed 25 percent of the valuation of the property, exclusive of improvements;

4. State that the public works director will hear protests to the determination of cost, at a time and place and in a manner established by the public works director.

The approved cost will become a lien upon the property. The lien will be collected in the manner as provided by law for collection of local improvements assessments.

The owner may appeal the city manager’s determination of responsibility for the reconstruction or repair, and may appeal the public works director’s determination of cost, by filing a notice of appeal with the city manager or the public works director, as applicable, within 10 calendar days after entry of the city manager’s or public works director’s determination. The city manager or public works director will consider the owner’s protests at a time and place and in a manner determined by the city manager or public works director. The city manager or public works director will give notice of the date, time, place and manner of consideration of the protests to the owner at the owner’s recorded tax address. After the protest consideration, the city manager or public works director will issue a decision, which will be the City’s final decision on the owner’s responsibility for reconstruction or repair or the cost. [Ord. 17-0445 § 3; Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.52.030).]


12.70.040 Planting strip maintenance.

Maintenance of planting strips, including trees, tree limbs that protrude over the road and sidewalk, shrubbery, weeds, grass or other ground cover, will be the responsibility of the abutting property owner. Vegetation in planting strips will be kept in a condition that does not impair the use by the traveling public of the right-of-way. The use of the right-of-way includes, but is not limited to:

A. Motor vehicles on paved roadways;

B. Bicycles on paved surfaces or designated trails; and

C. Pedestrians on sidewalks, designated paved walkways or other pedestrian paths as determined by the city manager.

Vegetation will not overhang sidewalks, walkways or bike lanes within eight feet, measured vertically from any point on the traveled way. Vegetation will not overhang vehicle lanes within 11 feet, measured vertically from any point on the traveled way.

D. The traveled way (facing private property) for sidewalks, paved walkways or bike lanes will be defined by the edge of paved surfaces. Other pedestrian paths, as determined by the city manager, will be a minimum of four feet wide.

E. The traveled way for vehicles will be defined by the edge stripe or edge of pavement where no stripe is present.

Drainage ditches will be kept free of debris and maintained in a condition that allows the free flow of water. Aesthetic maintenance of drainage ditch vegetation, assuming free flow of water is maintained, is at the discretion and responsibility of the abutting property owner.


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


Should the city manager find that such property is not being properly maintained, the city manager will send a notice as provided in KMC 12.70.030 specifying a reasonable time within which such maintenance will be accomplished. If the owner fails to proceed, the department will have the maintenance performed, and the cost may, at the discretion of the city manager, be assessed against the property owner as provided in KMC 12.70.030.

Nothing in this chapter will preclude the City, at city manager’s discretion, from maintaining vegetation in the City right-of-way. [Ord. 17-0445 § 4, 2017; Ord. 16-0428 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.52.040).]


12.70.050 Sidewalk – Snow, ice and trash removal required when.

It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning real property within the City of Kenmore to permit the accumulation of snow, ice, trash or any other matter on an existing sidewalk which impedes the normal flow of pedestrian traffic. In the event the property is owned by a person not a resident of the City of Kenmore, a reasonable period of time shall be provided for the owner or his agent to remove the material. If such removal is not accomplished within a reasonable period of time, the director of public works may have the sidewalk cleaned and the cost thereof shall be a lien on the property. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.52.050).]


12.70.060 Sidewalk – Violation of KMC 12.70.050 deemed misdemeanor.

Each day any sidewalk, or driveway portion thereof, is permitted to remain in a hazardous condition as specified in KMC 12.70.050 shall be considered and shall constitute a separate violation. Violation of KMC 12.70.050 shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided by law. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.52.060).]


12.70.070 Exemption from KMC 12.70.040 and 12.70.050 permitted when.

Residents whose property is substantially higher or lower in elevation than the street who do not have street access from one or more sides of their property may apply for an exemption from the provisions of KMC 12.70.040 and 12.70.050. Exemptions may be granted by the city engineer based upon standards which shall be established by the department. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.52.070).]


12.70.080 Street trees and plantings – Trimming limitations – Removal prohibited.

A. Notwithstanding any provision of franchise agreements, street trees planted within the public right-of-way along streets under the jurisdiction of the City of Kenmore shall not be removed or cut back so as to generally damage the aesthetic quality of the tree. Such trimming, when required by power or telephone companies to safeguard their wires, shall be done in a manner that preserves the general appearance of the tree. The same provisions shall be applicable to others in that trees, shrubs and other plantings shall not be removed or otherwise trimmed so as to damage the general appearance of the planting areas.

B. Judicious trimming is permitted in such areas that will provide proper sight distance for intersections and such traffic warning or regulatory signs that are in place. [Ord. 03-0180 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 02-0141 § 1; Ord. 98-0024 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 14.52.080).]


Chapter 12.75 INTEGRATED TRANSPORTATION PROGRAM

(Repealed by Ord. 16-0420)


Chapter 12.80 INTEGRATED TRANSPORTATION PROGRAM

Sections:

12.80.010    Definitions.

12.80.020    Components of the integrated transportation program.

12.80.030    Level of service standards.

12.80.040    Concurrency requirements.

12.80.050    Transportation impact fees.

12.80.060    Safe site access.

12.80.070    Procedures for development review.

12.80.080    Administrative rules.

12.80.090    Appeals.

12.80.100    Relation to other permit authority.

12.80.110    Exceptions.


12.80.010 Definitions.

A. “Concurrency” means transportation improvements or strategies to accommodate the impacts of development are made concurrent with the development, so that the level of service on a city transportation facility does not decline below the levels of service adopted in this chapter. “Concurrent with development” means that improvements or strategies are in place at the time of development, or that a financial commitment is in place to complete the improvements or strategies within six years. 

B. “Mobility unit” means one PM peak hour person trip end. Each person trip has two trip ends, one each at the origin and destination. 

C. “Transportation improvement program” means the annual program of capital transportation projects programmed by the City to be implemented during a six-year period. 

D. “City manager” means the City of Kenmore city manager or his or her designee(s). [Ord. 16-0420 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


12.80.020 Components of the integrated transportation program.

There are four components of the City’s integrated transportation program, the goal of which is to operate the program safely and efficiently for all modes of travel. These components are as follows:

A. Level of service (LOS) standards to evaluate the performance of the city’s multimodal transportation system and to ensure that the system is built over time to maintain LOS standards (KMC 12.80.030).

B. Concurrency requirements defining an adequate transportation system (KMC 12.80.040).

C. Transportation impact fees to require new growth and development to pay a proportionate share of the cost of new multimodal transportation improvements to serve the new growth and costs (Chapter 20.47 KMC).

D. Safe site access to facilitate safe and efficient operation of the transportation system through site-access improvements (KMC 12.80.060). [Ord. 16-0420 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


12.80.030 Level of service standards.

Level of service standards are established for different modes of travel within the City:

A. Roadway Level of Service Standards.

1. The level of service for roadways shall be as described in the most recent Transportation Research Board Highway Capacity Manual. The LOS shall be amended on a date selected by the city manager whenever the LOS in the Highway Capacity Manual is amended by the Transportation Research Board. The city manager may select and apply alternative LOSs, to be effective on a date selected by the city manager. 

2. Roadway LOS shall be by functional classification of roadway:

a. Boulevards (primary arterials) – LOS “E” or better;

b. Urban avenues and neighborhood connections (minor arterials) – LOS “D” or better; and

c. Local streets (collectors) – LOS “C” or better (see transportation element of the comprehensive plan).

3. Roadway LOS shall be measured at intersections of classified roadways, except as provided in subsection (A)(4) of this section.

4. Roadway LOS shall be measured at the corridor level on SR 522 and 68th Avenue/Juanita Drive/Simonds Road. 

5. When a lower classification of roadway intersects with a higher classification of roadway (for example, when a local street connects with an urban avenue), the LOS for the higher classification shall apply.

B. Pedestrian Level of Service Standards. 

1. The City has designated a yellow LOS for pedestrian facilities where indicated in the pedestrian priority network (all as defined in the transportation element of the comprehensive plan) as the minimum standard to achieve. 

2. Outside of the pedestrian priority network, the City has not established an LOS for pedestrian facilities.

C. Bicycle Level of Service Standards.

1. The City has designated a yellow LOS for bicycle facilities where indicated in the bicycle priority network (all as defined in the transportation element of the comprehensive plan) as the minimum standard to achieve.

2. Outside of the bicycle priority network, the City has not established an LOS for bicycle facilities.

D. Transit Level of Service Standards.

1. The transportation element of the comprehensive plan contains guidance for providing quality transit service, amenities, and access to an identified transit priority network. While the City does not control transit service, it has established the following level of service standards for transit stop amenities and pedestrian access to transit:

a. The City has designated a yellow LOS for transit stop amenities and pedestrian access to transit (as defined in the transportation element of the comprehensive plan) as the minimum standard to achieve. 

b. Outside of the transportation priority network, the City has not established an LOS for transit stop facilities. [Ord. 16-0420 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


12.80.040 Concurrency requirements.

A. Transportation concurrency shall be determined using the City owned and maintained mobility unit spreadsheet. This spreadsheet compares the amount of transportation capital facilities constructed or programmed in the next six years (mobility unit capacity) to the amount of mobility units that would be generated by new development (mobility unit demand). If the City’s mobility unit capacity is larger than the mobility units that would be generated by new development, then the transportation system will be deemed to be concurrent.

1. Mobility unit capacity shall be determined annually in coordination with the City’s transportation improvement program.

B. The city manager may approve a reduction in estimated mobility units based on the types of land uses that are to be developed or expected travel characteristics of the development. 

1. The calculation of mobility unit reductions as described in this section shall be based upon sound and recognized technical information and analytical processes that represent current engineering practice. In all cases, the city manager shall have final approval of all such data, information and technical procedures used to calculate mobility unit reductions. [Ord. 16-0420 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


12.80.050 Transportation impact fees.

A. Transportation impact fees shall be assessed and collected as described in Chapter 20.47 KMC. 

B. Mobility units calculated for concurrency requirements (KMC 12.80.040) shall also be used to calculate transportation impact fees. [Ord. 16-0420 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


12.80.060 Safe site access.

A. Developments shall provide for safe site access to facilitate safe and efficient operation of the multimodal transportation system, in accordance with the City road standards adopted in Chapter 12.50 KMC. 

B. For the purposes of this chapter, the developer shall achieve “safe site access” by mitigating either or both of the following when the development is complete and able to generate traffic:

1. A roadway intersection that provides access to a proposed development and that will function at a level of service worse than specified in KMC 12.80.030; or

2. A roadway intersection or approach lane where the city manager determines that a hazard to safety could reasonably result. 

C. The developer shall provide improvements which bring the site access into compliance with the level of service and within a time schedule as may be required by the city manager. Approval to construct the development shall not be granted until the developer has satisfied the concurrency definition and its elements, as set forth in KMC 12.80.010(A). [Ord. 16-0420 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


12.80.070 Procedures for development review.

Following the submission of a development application, the city manager shall calculate the transportation impact fee to be paid under Chapter 20.47 KMC, and shall determine whether necessary transportation improvements are provided for as set forth in KMC 12.80.010(A) and that any required site access improvements are provided. [Ord. 16-0420 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


12.80.080 Administrative rules.

For transportation impact fees, transportation concurrency, and safe site access, the city manager may adopt such administrative rules and procedures as are necessary to implement this chapter. [Ord. 16-0420 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


12.80.090 Appeals.

A. The city manager’s final decision on impact fees and/or transportation concurrency may be appealed to the hearing examiner using the procedures set forth in Chapter 19.30 KMC. The appeal shall be submitted within 21 calendar days of the date of issuance of the City’s written decision.

B. Along with the information required by KMC 19.30.080(B), the applicant must show that either:

1. The City committed a technical error; or

2. Alternative data or a mitigation plan submitted to the City was inadequately considered. [Ord. 16-0420 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


12.80.100 Relation to other permit authority.

The procedures set forth in this chapter do not limit the authority of the City to deny or to approve with conditions the following:

A. Any zone reclassification request, based on its expected impacts on the multimodal transportation system;

B. Any proposed development or zone reclassification, if the City determines that a hazard to safety would result from direct traffic impacts of the development or reclassification, without roadway or intersection improvements, regardless of level of service standards; or

C. Any proposed development subject to review under the Washington State Environmental Policy Act. [Ord. 16-0420 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


12.80.110 Exceptions.

The city manager may grant an exception to or deviation from the requirements of this chapter. Any exception or deviation shall be in writing and supported by a finding that extraordinary conditions exist which make full compliance infeasible or would be an unreasonable hardship. [Ord. 16-0420 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 12.85 STATE ROUTE 522 ACCESS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM

Sections:

12.85.010    Purpose.

12.85.020    Applicability.

12.85.030    Definitions.

12.85.040    Application process and procedures.

12.85.050    Permit application submittal process.

12.85.060    Fees and surety bond.

12.85.070    Permit application – Review and conditions.

12.85.080    Construction requirements.

12.85.090    Changes in property site use.

12.85.100    Permit modification and revocation – Closure of permitted connections.

12.85.110    Access control classification.


12.85.010 Purpose.

SR 522 is a State route in the City, with a functional classification of principal arterial street. The purpose of this chapter is to implement an access management program consistent with Chapter 47.50 RCW and Chapters 468-51 and 468-52 WAC; to protect and preserve the functional integrity of SR 522 by providing for adequate safety and transportation capacity; to protect the public health, safety, and welfare; and to promote the safe and efficient movement of people and goods.

The access management program, which coordinates land use planning and building permit decisions by the City and investments in the State highway system, will control the proliferation of connections and other access approaches to and from SR 522. Without such a program, the health, safety, and welfare of City residents and users of SR 522 are at risk due to the fact that uncontrolled access is a significant contributing factor to the congestion and functional deterioration of an arterial street. The access management program further will enhance the development of an effective transportation system and increase the traffic-carrying capacity of SR 522, thereby reducing traffic accidents, personal injury, and property damage or loss; mitigating environmental degradation; promoting sound economic growth and the growth management goals of the State; reducing highway maintenance costs and the necessity for costly traffic operations measures; lengthening the effective life of the transportation facility, thus preserving the public investment in such facilities; and shortening response time for emergency vehicles. [Ord. 06-0247 § 1.]


12.85.020 Applicability.

A. Connections. New connections or alterations to existing connections to SR 522 require a connection permit. The use of a new connection at the location specified in the permit is not authorized until the applicant constructs or modifies the connection in accordance with permit requirements.

B. Change in Use. Where a parcel of property is already developed, but where the type of use for that development is changed, and where such change in use shall cause an increase of 10 peak hour trips generated from that property onto SR 522, then such change in use shall require a connection permit for its continued use of existing SR 522 street connection(s). The connection permit may require modifications to the existing connection(s).

C. Permit Modification. If a property owner or applicant holding a valid connection permit wishes to alter the permit conditions, the permit holder must apply for a permit modification. The city engineer shall have authority to approve or deny the modification application.

D. Construction Cost. The cost of construction or alteration of a connection shall be borne by the permittee.

E. Unpermitted Connection. An unpermitted connection to SR 522 that occurs after approval of the ordinance codified in this chapter by the city council is subject to closure by the City. The City may install barriers across the connection or remove the connection. The city engineer will provide reasonable notice of the City’s impending action to the owner of property served by the connection. Cost of removal shall be paid for by the property owner.

F. Permit Fee. The City in this chapter has established a schedule of fees for connection permits. The fee shall be nonrefundable.

G. Joint-Use Connection. The city engineer may issue a permit subject to any conditions necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, requiring the use of a joint-use connection.

H. Nonconforming Access Permit. The city engineer may issue a nonconforming access permit after finding that to deny an access permit would leave the property without a reasonable means of access to the public streets. Every nonconforming access permit shall specify limits on the maximum vehicular use of the connection and shall be conditioned on the availability of future alternative means of access for which access permits can be obtained. [Ord. 06-0247 § 1.]


12.85.030 Definitions.

The following definitions shall apply to this chapter unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

A. “Application” means an application form supplied by the City and completed by the applicant, a certified check or money order for the required application fee, and related property site, driveway, roadway, and traffic information.

B. “Average daily traffic (ADT)” means the volume of traffic passing a point or segment of SR 522, in both directions, during a period of time, divided by the number of days in the period and factored to represent an estimate of traffic volume for an average day of the year.

C. “Average weekday vehicle trip ends (AWDVTE)” means the estimated total of all trips entering plus all trips leaving the applicant’s site, based on the final stage of proposed development.

D. “Conforming connection” means a connection that meets current City criteria pertaining to location, spacing, and design.

E. “Connection” means approaches, driveways, turnouts, or other means of providing for the right of access to or from a controlled access street.

F. “Connection category” means a permit category of all State highway connections, in accordance with the type of property served and the estimated traffic generated by the applicant’s site, based on rates accepted by the City.

G. “Connection permit” means a written authorization of the City for a specifically designed connection, at a specific location, for a specific type and intensity of property use, and specific volume of traffic for the proposed connection, based on the final stage of proposed development of the applicant’s property.

H. “Controlled access facility” means a transportation facility to which access is regulated by the City. Owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have a right of reasonable access to and from such facility at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the City.

I. “Development approval” means an official action by the City authorizing the developer or land owner to begin construction of any permanent improvements on the property.

J. “Joint use connection” means a single connection point that serves as a connection to more than one property or development, including those in different ownerships or in which access rights are provided in the legal descriptions.

K. “Limited access facility” means a highway or street especially designed or designated for through traffic, and over, from, or to which owners or occupants of abutting land or other persons have no right or easement, or only a limited right or easement of access, light, view, or air by reason of the fact that their property abuts upon such limited access facility, or for any other reason to accomplish the purpose of a limited access facility.

L. “Median” means the portion of a divided highway or divided connection separating vehicular traffic traveling in opposite directions; not including speed change lanes, storage lanes for left turning or U-turning vehicles, or two-way left-turn lanes.

M. “Median opening” means either a full opening in a continuous median for the specific purpose of allowing vehicles to make a left turn maneuver into or out of a property abutting the highway, to facilitate U-turns, or to allow for a vehicle to totally cross the road, or a directional opening allowing for left turn maneuvers into the property and U-turn maneuvers, but not allowing for left turns or cross movements out of the property.

N. “Nonconforming connection” means a connection not meeting current City criteria pertaining to location, spacing, or design.

O. “Permit” means written approval issued by the City, subject to conditions stated therein, authorizing construction, reconstruction, maintenance, or reclassification of a connection and associated traffic control devices on or to the City’s right-of-way.

P. “Permitting authority” means the City.

Q. “Reasonable access” means an access connection that is suitable for the existing and/or proposed property use and does not adversely affect the safety, operations, or maintenance of the street.

R. “Right-of-way (R/W)” is a general term denoting land or interest therein, acquired for or designated for transportation purposes. More specifically, the term means land in which the State of Washington, a county, or the City owns the fee simple title, has an easement devoted to or required for use as a public road and appurtenant facilities, or has established ownership by prescriptive right, or lands that have been dedicated for public transportation purposes.

S. “Shoulder” means the portion of the street or highway contiguous with the traveled lanes for the accommodation of stopped vehicles for emergency use, for lateral support of base and surface courses, and for other uses as allowed by law.

T. “State highway system” means all roads, streets, and highways designated as State routes in compliance with Chapter 47.17 RCW.

U. “Temporary connection” means a permitted connection for a specific property use, conditioned to be open for a specific purpose and traffic volume for a specific period of time with the right-of-way to be restored by the permit holder to its original condition upon connection closure.

V. “Variance permit” means a special nonconforming or additional connection permit, issued for a location not normally permitted by current City standards, after an engineering study demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the City, that the connection will not adversely affect the safety, maintenance, or operation of the street or highway in accordance with its assigned classification. This permit will remain valid until modified or revoked by the City. [Ord. 06-0247 § 1.]


12.85.040 Application process and procedures.

A. Early Consultation. In order to expedite the overall permit review process, the applicant is strongly encouraged to consult with the City prior to submitting an application pursuant to this chapter. The purpose of the consultation is to obtain a conceptual review of the development site plan and proposed access connections to SR 522 with respect to location, quantity, spacing, and design standards. Such consultation will assist the applicant in minimizing problems and delays during the permit application process and could eliminate the need for costly changes to site plans when unpermittable connection proposals are identified early in the planning phase.

B. Connection Categories. All connections, public or private, shall be determined by the City to be in one of the following categories:

1. “Category I – minimum connection” provides connection to SR 522 for up to 10 single-family residences, a duplex, or a small multifamily complex of up to 10 dwelling units, which use a common connection. The category shall also apply to permanent connections to agricultural and forest lands, including field entrances; connections for the operation, maintenance, and repair of utilities; and connections serving other low-volume traffic generators expected to have an average weekday vehicle trip ends (AWDVTE) of 100 or less.

2. “Category II – minor connection” provides connection to SR 522 for medium volume traffic generators expected to have an AWDVTE of 1,500 or less, but not included in Category I.

3. “Category III – major connection” provides connection to SR 522 for high volume traffic generators expected to have an AWDVTE exceeding 1,500.

4. “Category IV – temporary connection” provides a temporary, time limited connection to SR 522 for a specific property, for a specific use, with a specific traffic volume. Such uses include, but are not limited to, logging, forest land clearing, temporary agricultural uses, temporary construction, and temporary emergency access. The City reserves the right to remove any temporary connection at its sole discretion and at the expense of the property owner after the expiration of the permit. Further, a temporary connection permit does not bind the City, in any way, to the future issuance of a permanent connection permit at the temporary connection location.

5. “Nonconforming connection” designation may be issued for Category I through IV permits after an analysis and determination by the City that a conforming connection cannot be made and a finding that the denial of a connection would leave the property without a reasonable means of access to the public road system. In such instances, the permit shall be noted as nonconforming and contain specific restrictions and provisions, including limits on the maximum vehicular use of the connection, the future availability of alternate means of reasonable access for which a conforming connection permit could be obtained, the removal of the nonconforming connection at the time the conforming access is available, and other conditions as necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.

6. “Variance connection” means a special nonconforming or additional connection permit, issued for a location not normally permitted by City standards, after an engineering study demonstrates that the connection will not adversely affect the safety, maintenance, or operation of SR 522. This permit will remain valid until modified or revoked by the permitting authority.

7. “Median opening” includes openings requested for both new connections and existing connections. New median openings proposed as part of a new driveway connection shall be reviewed as part of the permit application review process. Request for the construction of new median openings to serve existing permitted connections shall require a reevaluation of the location, quantity, design of existing connection, and traffic at the existing connections. The property owner must file a new connection permit application, for the proper connection category, showing the new proposed median opening location and design and its relationship to the existing or modified driveway connections. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit the City from closing an existing median opening where operational or safety reasons require the action. The City shall notify affected property owners, permit holders and tenants in writing 30 days in advance of the closure of a median opening unless immediate closure is needed for safety or operational reasons. [Ord. 06-0247 § 1.]


12.85.050 Permit application submittal process.

A. Driveway Connections That Are Part of a Land Use Application. If the connection permit is being requested as part of an underlying development application, the issuance or denial of the connection permit shall be made in accordance with the type of decision applicable to the underlying land use application or applications.

B. Driveway Connections That Are Not Related to a Land Use Application. If the connection permit is being requested without relation to an underlying land use application, the applicant shall file for a connection permit with the city engineer. The issuance or denial of the connection permit shall be made administratively by the city engineer, or the city engineer’s designee, subject to appeal pursuant to subsection (E) of this section.

C. Submittal Requirements for Connection Permits. If the new development will generate more than 10 peak hour trips or is a change in use, each application for a connection permit, whether accompanying an underlying land use application or not, shall include a traffic impact study, as described below, the connection permit application, and additional information as required by the city engineer.

1. Traffic Impact Study. The traffic impact study, prepared by a professional engineer registered in the State of Washington, shall contain the following:

a. An inventory of existing traffic conditions, which shall include vehicular, pedestrian, bicycle, and transit facilities, and an evaluation thereof, plus a traffic safety and accident analysis based on the most recent three years of historical accident data.

b. An analysis of existing conditions including approved, but not yet built, development and applied for, but not yet approved, development.

c. An analysis of the changes to existing conditions that will occur with the proposed development, which includes: trip generation, modal split, distribution, assignment, and level of service analysis for intersections, adjacent to or within 250 feet of any proposed access, during peak hours and time periods as required by the city engineer.

d. An analysis of three years of background growth, unless otherwise determined by the city engineer.

e. A traffic signal warrant analysis of the projected impact of the proposed development upon the affected transportation corridor or intersection.

f. Any additional information required by subsection (C)(2)(j)(5) of this section.

The traffic impact study shall be based on traffic counts obtained within the 12 months preceding the date the development application is deemed complete. The traffic impact study levels of service and traffic operations analysis shall be consistent with the latest Highway Capacity Manual’s methodology. The city engineer reserves the right to require an applicant to provide additional data and/or analysis as part of the traffic impact study, where the city engineer determines that additional information or analysis is required to implement the standards and requirements contained in this chapter. The city engineer may waive the requirement for a traffic impact study, or limit the scope of analysis and required elements of a traffic impact study, where the city engineer determines that the potential transportation impacts on the SR 522 corridor or any of its intersections have been adequately analyzed in prior research or reports and are not projected to cause a reduction in the operating level of SR 522.

2. Connection Permit Application and Information. The applicant shall submit a connection permit application in a form approved by the city engineer and shall provide information as required by the city engineer. A complete application shall consist of the application form, application fee, plans, traffic data, and connection information specified in this section.

a. All connection and roadway design documents for Category II and III permits shall bear the seal and signature of a professional engineer, registered in accordance with Chapter 18.43 RCW.

b. The applicant shall provide the following information, unless the city engineer determines that specific information will not be necessary. Additional information required of Category II, III, and IV permit applications is specified in this chapter. In all cases it would be prudent, prior to submittal of the application, for the applicant to inquire of the city engineer whether the application needs additional information. The city engineer reserves the right to request clarification or additional information during the application review process. Failure to provide the requested information within the time limits specified in the request shall result in termination of the permit application.

c. Provide the current complete names, mailing addresses, and telephone numbers of the property owner(s), the developer(s), the applicant, and the transportation and legal consultants representing the applicant (if any). If the property owner desires to have a representative sign the application, a notarized letter of authorization from the applicant shall be provided with the application. When the owner or applicant is a company, corporation, or other public agency, the name, address, and telephone number of the responsible officer shall be furnished. The names of all individuals signing the application and their titles shall be typed or printed directly below the signature.

d. The ultimate planned property uses shall be indicated in sufficient detail to determine the appropriate permit classification. Estimated average weekday vehicle trip ends to be generated by the development, based on the planned property use, consistent with the latest trip generation information published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), Washington, D.C., shall be included as appropriate. If local or special trip generation rates are used instead of the ITE rates, the latest and best information shall be used and all documentation for the rate development shall be submitted with the application. For residential developments with 10 or fewer units, 10 trips per day per unit may be assumed.

e. The application shall include a plan to scale showing critical dimensions, location of the property, existing conditions, and character and extent of the proposal. The location of existing and proposed on-site development with respect to the existing and proposed driveway location(s) and SR 522 shall be shown. Minimum information on the plan shall include:

(1) Street names.

(2) Pavement type.

(3) Cross section.

(4) Posted speed limit.

(5) The existence and location of any existing and/or future proposed public or private roads abutting or entering the property; the horizontal and vertical curvature of the road(s), noting the location of existing and proposed connections and any other pertinent information.

f. Property Information.

(1) Show the location of all existing and proposed buildings, and other structures, such as gasoline pumps, lights, trees, etc., with respect to the existing and proposed property and right-of-way lines.

(2) Show any adjacent properties that are owned or controlled by the applicant, or in which the applicant has a financial interest, and an indication of whether the properties will be accessed by means of the proposed connection(s).

(3) Provide proof of legal ownership or legal easement.

(4) Include a boundary survey, which may be waived for Category I connections, at the discretion of the city engineer.

(5) Any existing or proposed parcels segregated from the applicant’s property for separate development shall be clearly designated on the plan.

g. Connection Location Information.

(1) Connection location by WSDOT milepost and highway engineer’s station, if available.

(2) Location of the SR 522 centerline with respect to existing and proposed property lines.

(3) Distance of proposed public or private access connection to intersecting roads, streets, and railroads.

(4) Existing or proposed median openings (crossovers) and connections on all sides of SR 522 and other roads within 660 feet of the proposed connection location.

(5) Location of existing or proposed public or private retaining walls, fences, poles, sidewalks, bike paths, drainage structures and easements, traffic control devices, fire hydrants, utilities, or other physical features, such as trees, landscaping, green belts, and wetlands that could affect driveway location.

h. Connection Design Information.

(1) Proposed connection and approach improvements, including the driveway profile approaching SR 522, and the driveway width, radii, and angle to the street.

(2) Existing and proposed grading.

(3) Drainage calculations and other pertinent data.

(4) Driveway, auxiliary lanes and crossover pavement design, including subgrade, base, surface materials, and thicknesses.

(5) Specific requirements for design information on individual Category I permit applications may be relaxed, or waived, at the discretion of the city engineer.

i. Joint Driveway Use.

(1) If the driveway is to serve more than one property, the plan shall detail information for all properties using the connection and the application shall include copies of legally enforceable agreements of concurrence for all property owners on joint driveway usage.

(2) Joint driveway use serving adjoining properties is encouraged.

j. Additional Information for Category II and Category III Permits. The city engineer may require the following additional information for each phase of the development. Prior to the submittal of the application, the applicant shall coordinate with the city engineer on the level of detail and the analysis techniques to be used.

(1) Circulation Plans. All parking, interior drives, and internal traffic circulation plans.

(2) Connection Users. All internal and external adjacent parcels which will use the requested connection. All existing and proposed connecting roadways and potential means of alternate access through the final build-out stage of development shall be shown on the plans submitted with the application.

(3) Traffic Control Devices and Illumination. Proposed traffic control devices and lighting locations.

(4) Sight Distance. Analysis of horizontal and vertical sight distance on SR 522 with respect to the proposed connection.

(5) Traffic Data and Analysis. Traffic data submitted by the applicant shall be signed and sealed by a qualified professional engineer, registered in accordance with Chapter 18.43 RCW. The city engineer may require the following traffic study information:

(a) Turning Movements. Vehicle turning movements for present and future traffic conditions.

(b) Volume and Type. Amount and type of traffic that will be generated by the proposed development including a breakdown of anticipated peak hour traffic and an analysis of the impact on the level of service on the State highway.

(c) Parking and Circulation. Analysis of off-street parking and traffic circulation, including distances to secondary access points on the connection roadway and their impact on the operation of the State highway.

(d) Traffic Signal Data. If a traffic signal is requested, the following studies may be required: traffic signal warrants; phasing and timing analysis; signal progression analysis; signalization, signing, and lighting plans in compliance with WSDOT standards. A separate WSDOT traffic signal permit is required.

(e) Off-Site Improvements. A traffic analysis to determine the need for off-site related roadway and geometric improvements and mitigation requirements.

(f) Traffic Control Plan. A traffic control plan conforming to current standards set forth in the “Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices,” documenting how the permit holder will provide for safe and efficient movement on the State highway system during the construction of the connection.

3. Additional Information for Category IV permits. Category IV permit applications shall contain the specific dates that the connection is to be open and must contain assurances acceptable to the City that the shoulder, curbing, sidewalks, bikeways, ditch, right-of-way, and any other amenities will be restored to their original condition at the permit holder’s expense upon closure of the temporary connection.

D. Variance from Access Standards. The access standards above may be modified by the city engineer on the connection permit upon a showing by the applicant of the following:

1. Topography, right-of-way, existing construction or physical conditions, or other geographic conditions make it technically infeasible to meet new construction standards and an equivalent alternative, which can accomplish the same access management purpose, is available.

2. A minor change to a standard is required to address a specific design or construction problem which, if not enacted, will result in an unusual hardship.

3. An alternative standard is proposed which is equal to or superior to these standards.

4. Application of the standards to the development would be grossly disproportional to the impacts created.

E. Appeals. The applicant may appeal the decision of the city engineer under the following conditions:

1. For driveway connections that are part of land use application review, the appeal of a conditioning or denial of a connection permit shall be in accordance with the procedures for an appeal of the underlying land use application.

2. For all other driveway connection permit applications, the appeal of a conditioning or denial of a connection permit shall be to the hearing examiner. [Ord. 06-0247 § 1.]


12.85.060 Fees and surety bond.

A. Fee Structure. The following nonrefundable fee structure is established for the processing, review and inspection of the connection permit applications. Full payment of base fees must accompany the permit application. Due to the potential complexity of Category II and Category III connection proposals, and required mitigation measures that may involve construction on SR 522, the City may require a developer agreement in addition to the connection permit. The developer agreement may include, but is not limited to: plans; specifications; maintenance requirements; bonding requirements; inspection requirements; division of costs by the parties, where applicable; and provisions for payment by the applicant of actual costs incurred by the City in the review and administration of the applicant’s proposal that exceed the required base fees in the following schedule:

1. Category I – Base fee for one connection:

a. Agricultural, forest, utility operation and maintenance: $50.00;

b. Residential dwelling units (up to 10) – single connection: $50.00 per dwelling;

c. Other, with 100 AWDVTE or less: $500.00;

d. Fee per additional connection point: $50.00.

2. Category II – Base fee for one connection:

a. Less than 1,000 AWDVTE: $1,000;

b. One thousand to 1,500 AWDVTE $1,500;

c. Fee per additional connection point: $250.00.

3. Category III – Base fee for one connection:

a. One thousand five hundred to 2,500 AWDVTE: $2,500;

b. Over 2,500 AWDVTE: $4,000;

c. Fee per additional connection point $1,000.

4. Category IV – Base fee per connection: $100.00.

B. Surety Bond. Prior to the beginning of construction of any connection, the City may require the permit holder to provide a surety bond as specified in WAC 468-34-020(3). [Ord. 06-0247 § 1.]


12.85.070 Permit application – Review and conditions.

A. Application Review, Processing, and Approval. The city engineer shall review the application. If the city engineer identifies errors in the application or needs additional information, the city engineer shall notify the applicant. The applicant shall provide such information or correct such errors within 30 days of the notification. If the applicant needs additional time to provide such information or correct errors, the applicant shall contact the city engineer in writing to request that additional time be approved. If the additional or corrected information has not been received by the city engineer within 30 days or within an approved extended time period, the application shall be terminated.

B. Review. Upon timely receipt of all required information, or upon expiration of the time period for receipt of additional or corrected information, the city engineer shall examine the location and design of the connection for consistency with current City standards pertaining to design, location, quantity, spacing and classifications. The examination shall also include an analysis of the impact of the site’s existing and projected traffic on the operation and safety of SR 522.

C. Notice of Concurrence or Denial. If the city engineer concurs in the location and design of the proposed connection, the city engineer shall send written notification of that concurrence to the applicant and to the City’s community development department. If the applicant has completed the voluntary conceptual review process, the written notice of concurrence shall indicate whether or not there have been any changes in the number, location, or design of the connection required by the City. No construction may commence on the City’s right-of-way until all necessary permits are issued in accordance with subsection (D) of this section. If the city engineer does not concur in the connection location, quantity, or design, the applicant shall be notified in writing. The notice shall state the City’s intent to deny the connection as proposed in the application, and shall further state the specific reasons for the denial, the process for submitting an amended application, and the appeal process. The applicant may submit a revised application within 30 days. The submittal of a revised application within 30 days shall not require the payment of any additional application fees.

D. Permit Issuance. Upon determining that the application and the location and design of the connection comply with City requirements, the city engineer shall issue the connection permit. Further, for permit applications connected with land use applications, the applicant shall receive development approval from the City’s community development department.

The city engineer shall provide the applicant with the connection permit for signature, and the applicant shall sign and return the permit to the city engineer within 30 days after the mailing date. If the city engineer does not receive the signed permit back from the applicant within 30 days after the mailing date or within an agreed-upon time, the permit shall be void and the application fee shall be forfeited. The permit shall not be valid and construction on the access shall not begin without a completed permit that is signed by both the city engineer and the applicant. Additionally, the applicant shall satisfy the surety bond requirements specified in the permit prior to construction.

E. Permit Conditions. Any special requirements or provisions for the connection, including off-site mitigation, shall be clearly and specifically stated in the permit. Failure by the applicant or permit holder to abide by the permit provisions and requirements shall be sufficient cause for the City to initiate action to alter the connection or to revoke the permit and close the connection at the expense of the permit holder. The permit requirements and provisions shall be binding on the permit holder, the permit holder’s successors, heirs and assigns, the permit application signatories, and all future owners and occupants of the property.

F. Nonconforming Connection Permits. The city engineer may issue a permit for a connection not meeting the City’s location and spacing criteria standards if the city engineer finds that a conforming connection is not attainable at the time of the permit application submittal and that denial would leave the property without a reasonable access to City streets or SR 522. The City may issue a connection permit requiring a legally enforceable joint-use connection when determined to be in the best interest of the City for restoring or maintaining the operational efficiency and safety of SR 522. Nonconforming connection permits shall specify conditions or limits including:

1. Traffic Volume. The permit shall specify maximum vehicular usage of the connection.

2. Future Alternate Access. The permit shall specify that a conforming connection be constructed when future alternate means of access become available, and that the nonconforming connection be removed.

3. Users. The permit shall specify the properties to be served by the connection, and any other conditions as necessary to carry out the provisions of managing the access to SR 522.

G. Variance Connection Permits. Variance permits may be issued, at the discretion of the city engineer, for certain connections that do not satisfy the access classification location and spacing, or that exceed the number of connections allowed by the standards adopted for SR 522. These permits may be allowed if conditions warrant and are demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city engineer by a traffic analysis, signed and sealed by a qualified professional engineer who is registered in accordance with Chapter 18.43 RCW, which is included with the connection permit application. The variance permit will remain in effect unless a new permit is required due to changes in property site use or unless permit modification, revocation, or closure of the variance-permitted connection is required. The city engineer may issue a connection permit requiring a legally enforceable joint-use connection when the city engineer determines that such a permit is in the best interest of the City for restoring or maintaining the operational efficiency and safety of SR 522. Variance connection permits shall specify conditions or limits including, but not limited to:

1. Traffic Volume. The permit shall specify the maximum vehicular usage of the connection.

2. Users. The permit shall specify the properties to be served by the connection and any other conditions as necessary to carry out the provisions of managing the access to SR 522.

H. Appeals. In the event of a denial of a connection permit as proposed in the application, the applicant may appeal in accordance with the appeal rights of KMC 12.85.050(E). [Ord. 06-0247 § 1.]


12.85.080 Construction requirements.

A. Preconstruction Conference. The city engineer may require a preconstruction conference prior to any work being performed on the public right-of-way. When required by provisions in the permit, the city engineer will schedule a preconstruction conference. The preconstruction conference should be attended by the necessary personnel to assure compliance with the terms and provisions of the permit.

B. Time Limit. Substantial construction of the connection shall begin within 90 days of the effective date of the permit, unless the city engineer approves a longer time. Construction shall be completed within 120 days of the date of issuance of the permit, unless the city engineer approves a time extension. As a condition of the permit, the city engineer may further limit construction time, if the city engineer determines that such limitation is warranted. Failure to comply with the time limits specified in the permit shall result in an automatic expiration of the permit following written notification to the permit holder. For any permit which expires for failure to begin construction or to complete construction within the specified time limits, the city engineer may require a new application, including the payment of the required application fee prior to the initiation of any construction.

C. Posting of Permit. The approved connection permit shall be displayed in a prominent location, protected from the weather, within the vicinity of the connection construction.

D. Disruption of Traffic. All construction and/or maintenance within the SR 522 right-of-way shall conform to the provisions of the connection permit, the “Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD)”; WSDOT’s current “Design Manual,” and WSDOT’s “Standard Specifications for Road, Bridge, and Municipal Construction.” The City may require or restrict hours of construction to minimize disruption of traffic. If construction activity within the SR 522 right-of-way causes undue disruption of traffic or creates safety hazards, or if the construction activity is not in compliance with the traffic control specifications in the permit, the city engineer shall advise the permit holder or the permit holder’s contractor of the need for immediate corrective action, and may order immediate suspension of all or part of the work if deemed necessary. Failure to comply with this provision may result in permit modification or revocation.

E. Traffic Signals and Other Traffic Control Devices. Traffic signals and other traffic control devices installed by the permit holder shall conform to MUTCD and City design and construction standards. The permit holder shall be responsible for securing any WSDOT permits needed for traffic signalization and regulatory signing and marking.

F. Connection Construction Inspection. For Category II and Category III connections, the city engineer may require the permit holder, developer, or landowner to provide inspection of construction and certification that connection construction is in accordance with permit provisions and appropriate City standards by a professional engineer, registered in accordance with Chapter 18.43 RCW, or the city engineer may perform the inspection at the applicant’s expense, as provided in any developer agreement. [Ord. 06-0247 § 1.]


12.85.090 Changes in property site use.

The connection permit shall be issued to the permit holder for a particular type of land use generating specific projected traffic volumes at the final stage of proposed development. Any changes made in the use, intensity of development, type of traffic, or traffic flow of the property requires the permit holder, his or her assignee, or property owner to contact the city engineer to determine whether further analysis is needed to determine if the change is significant and would require a new permit and modifications to the connection. An engineering study, signed and sealed by a professional engineer, may be required to document the extent of the change. If modification of the existing connection is required, based on a significant change as determined by the city engineer, the permit holder, his or her assignee, or the property owner shall obtain a new permit prior to the initiation of any on-site construction to the connection or to the property.

A. Significant Change. A significant change is one that would cause a change in the category of the connection permit or one that causes an operational, safety, or maintenance problem on SR 522 based on objective engineering criteria or available accident data. Such data shall be provided to the property owner and/or permit holder and tenant upon written request.

B. Notification. Failure to contact the city engineer to determine the need for connection modifications or to apply for a new permit for such modifications prior to initiation of property improvements, land use changes or traffic flow alteration actions shall result in notification to the property owner and/or permit holder and tenant of intent to revoke the existing permit and closure of the connection to the property.

C. Costs. The permit holder shall be responsible for all costs associated with connection removal, relocation, or modification caused by increased or altered traffic flows necessitated by changes to facilities, use, or to the nature of the business on the property. [Ord. 06-0247 § 1.]


12.85.100 Permit modification and revocation – Closure of permitted connections.

A. Revocation Criteria. All connection permits issued by the City remain valid until revoked. The city engineer may initiate an action to revoke any permit if significant changes have occurred in the use, design, or traffic flow of the property or of SR 522, requiring the relocation, alteration, or closure of the connection; if the connection was not constructed at the location or to the design specified in the permit; if the permit provisions were not met; or if the connection causes a safety, maintenance, or operational problem on the street.

The city engineer shall give written notice by first class U.S. mail to the permit holder, the permit holder’s successors or assigns, or the property owner with a copy to the occupant, for any connection found to be in noncompliance with the conditions of the permit. The notice shall identify the deficiencies and request that they be corrected within 30 calendar days of the date of the notice. The notice shall further advise that the City’s determination of noncompliance or deficiencies shall become final and conclusive 30 calendar days following the date of the notice unless the violations are corrected or an appeal is filed by the permit holder, permit holder’s successor or assigns, or the property owner.

B. Costs. The permit holder, permit holder’s successor or assignee, or property owner shall be responsible for the costs of closure due to revocation of a connection permit, except when the closure is required by changes to SR 522.

C. Emergency Action. This chapter shall not restrict the city engineer’s right to take immediate remedial action, including the closure of a connection, if there is an immediate and serious danger to the public health, safety, and welfare. [Ord. 06-0247 § 1.]


12.85.110 Access control classification.

A. WSDOT has created an access control classification system consisting of five classes, where Class One is the least restrictive. WSDOT has designated SR 522 as Class Four. On all access classes, property access shall be located and designed to minimize interference with transit facilities and/or high occupancy vehicle (HOV) facilities on SR 522 where such facilities exist or where such facilities are proposed. In such cases, if reasonable access is available from the City street system, primary property access shall be provided from the City street system rather than from SR 522.

B. SR 522, with its Class Four designation, has the following functional characteristics and access control standards:

1. Functional Characteristics. SR 522 has the capacity for moderate travel speeds and moderate traffic volumes for medium and short travel distances providing for inter-City, intra-City, and inter-community travel needs. There is to be a reasonable balance between direct access and mobility needs. Existing level of development of the adjoining land is intensive. SR 522 is distinguished by existing or planned nonrestrictive medians. Restrictive medians may be used as operational conditions warrant to mitigate turning, weaving, and crossing conflicts. Minimum connection spacing standards should be applied if adjoining properties are redeveloped.

2. Access Control Design Standards. The public street intersection spacing and driveway connection spacing distances specified are minimums. Greater distances may be required by the city engineer to provide desirable traffic operational and safety characteristics. If greater distances are required, the city engineer will document the reasons, based on traffic engineering principles, for such greater distances. Nonconforming permits may be issued allowing for less than minimum spacing where no other reasonable access exists. A variance connection permit may be issued where it can be substantiated by a traffic analysis, to the satisfaction of the city engineer, that allowing less than the minimum spacing or more than the maximum number of connections would not adversely affect the desired function of SR 522 and would not adversely affect the safety, maintenance or operation of SR 522.

a. Public Street Intersections. SR 522 should generally be capable of achieving a posted speed limit of 40 to 45 mph. In the City, where higher volumes are present or growth that will require signalization is expected in the foreseeable future, it is imperative that the location of any public access be planned carefully to ensure adequate signal progression. Where feasible, major intersecting roadways that may ultimately require signalization shall be planned with a minimum of one-half mile spacing. Addition of all new connections, public or private, that may require signalization will require an engineering analysis signed and sealed by a qualified professional engineer.

b. Private Direct Access.

(1) No more than one access shall be provided to an individual parcel or to contiguous parcels under the same ownership, unless it can be shown that additional access points would not adversely affect the desired function, safety, or operations on SR 522.

(2) The minimum distance to another public or private access connection shall be 250 feet. Nonconforming connection permits may be issued to provide access to parcels whose highway frontage, topography, or location would otherwise preclude issuance of a conforming connection permit.

(3) Variance permits may be allowed if conditions warrant. These conditions must be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city engineer by a traffic analysis that is signed and sealed by a qualified professional engineer.

3. Corner Clearance. Corner clearances for connections shall meet or exceed the minimum connection spacing requirements. A single connection may be placed closer to the intersection in accordance with the following criteria:

a. If, due to property size, corner clearance standards cannot be met, and where joint access connections meeting or exceeding the minimum corner clearance standards cannot be obtained, or is determined by the city engineer to be not feasible because of conflicting land use or conflicting traffic volumes or operational characteristics, then the following minimum corner clearance criteria may be used:

Corner Clearance at Intersections 

	With Restrictive Median

	Position	Access Allowed	Minimum (Feet)

	Approaching intersection	Right in/right out	115

	Approaching intersection	Right in only	75

	Departing intersection	Right in/right out	230

	Departing intersection	Right out only	100

	Without Restrictive Median

	Position	Access Allowed	Minimum (Feet)

	Approaching intersection	Full access	230

	Approaching intersection	Right in only	100

	Departing intersection	Full access	230

	Departing intersection	Right out only	100

b. Additional Conditions.

(1) There shall be no more than one connection per property frontage on SR 522.

(2) When joint or alternate access meeting or exceeding the minimum corner clearance standards becomes available, the permit holder shall close the permitted connection, unless the permit holder shows to the city engineer’s satisfaction that such closure is not feasible. [Ord. 06-0247 § 1.]


Chapter 12.90 TRANSPORTATION BENEFIT DISTRICT

Sections:

12.90.010    Transportation benefit district established.

12.90.020    Governing board.

12.90.030    Authority of the district.

12.90.040    Use of funds.

12.90.050    Revenue sources.

12.90.060    Dissolution of district.


12.90.010 Transportation benefit district established.

There is created a transportation benefit district to be known as the Kenmore transportation benefit district with geographical boundaries comprised of the corporate limits of the City as they currently exist or as they may exist following future annexations. [Ord. 12-0339 § 1.]


12.90.020 Governing board.

A. The governing board of the transportation benefit district shall be the Kenmore city council, which shall have the authority to exercise the statutory powers set forth in Chapter 36.73 RCW and this chapter.

B. The treasurer of the transportation benefit district shall be the city director of finance.

C. The board shall develop a material change policy to address major plan changes that affect project delivery or the ability to finance the plan, pursuant to the requirements set forth in RCW 36.73.160(1).

D. The board shall issue an annual report, pursuant to the requirements of RCW 36.73.160(2). [Ord. 16-0424 § 3; Ord. 12-0339 § 1.]


12.90.030 Authority of the district.

The board shall have and may exercise any powers provided by law to fulfill the purpose of the Kenmore transportation benefit district. [Ord. 12-0339 § 1.]


12.90.040 Use of funds.

The funds generated by the transportation benefit district may be used for any purpose allowed by law including to operate the district and to make transportation improvements that are consistent with existing State, regional, and local transportation plans and necessitated by existing or reasonably foreseeable congestion levels pursuant to Chapter 36.73 RCW. The transportation improvements funded by the district shall be made in an effort to preserve and maintain transportation infrastructure, improve public safety, or implement projects identified in Kenmore’s transportation improvement program. [Ord. 12-0339 § 1.]


12.90.050 Revenue sources.

The board shall have the authority to establish all fees and other revenue sources authorized by Chapter 36.73 RCW, consistent with RCW 36.73.065. [Ord. 12-0339 § 1.]


12.90.060 Dissolution of district.

The transportation benefit district shall be dissolved when all indebtedness of the district has been retired and when all of the district’s anticipated responsibilities have been satisfied. [Ord. 12-0339 § 1.]


Title 13 UTILITIES AND PUBLIC WORKS

Chapters:

Division I. Water and Sewer Systems

13.05    Side Sewer Work and Connections

13.10    Design, Installation and Repair of Disposal Systems

13.15    Sewerage Cleaning and Removal

13.20    Federal Funding of Sewerage Disposal Systems

13.25    Water and Sewer System Condition Reports

Division II. Surface and Stormwater Utility

13.30    General Provisions

13.32    Technical Terms and Definitions

13.35    Surface Water Runoff Policy

13.40    Surface Water Management Program

13.45    Water Quality

Division III. Utility Lines

13.50    Utility Extensions


Chapter 13.05 SIDE SEWER WORK AND CONNECTIONS

Sections:

13.05.010    Definitions.

13.05.020    Connection with public sewer required.

13.05.030    City may connect and assess cost.

13.05.040    Opening public sewer.

13.05.050    Side sewers in public street – Bond required.

13.05.060    Restoration of public streets.

13.05.070    Traffic control at sewer excavations.

13.05.080    Opening public sewer – Permit required.

13.05.090    Side sewer permit – How obtained.

13.05.100    Fees for permits.

13.05.110    Charges for service.

13.05.120    Collection of charges.

13.05.130    Lien for delinquent charges.

13.05.140    Sewer connection charges.

13.05.150    Inspection of side sewers.

13.05.160    Work without permit to be stopped.

13.05.170    Permit fee when sewer district has agreement with City.

13.05.180    Side sewers – Requirements, materials and workmanship.

13.05.190    Use of the public sewers.

13.05.200    Protection from damage.

13.05.210    Powers and authority of inspectors.

13.05.220    Repair of broken or obstructed side sewers.

13.05.230    Planting of certain trees and shrubbery prohibited – Removal of obstructions in sewers.

13.05.240    Pumps and pressure lines.

13.05.250    Developer extensions of the public sewer.

13.05.260    Rules and regulations.

13.05.270    Collection of costs.

13.05.280    Constitutionality.

13.05.290    Enforcement.


13.05.010 Definitions.

A. Certain words and phrases in this chapter, unless otherwise clearly indicated by their context, mean as follows:

1. “Director of public health” means the director of the King County department of public health or their authorized assistants or inspectors.

2. “Director of public works” means the director of the King County department of public works or their authorized assistants or inspectors.

3. “Industrial waste” means any liquid, solid or gaseous substances, or combination thereof, resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, commercial food processing, business, trade or research, including the development, recovery or processing of natural resources.

4. “Person” means any individual, firm, association, copartnership, corporation, governmental agency or political subdivision, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee.

5. “Public sewer” means any sewer or appurtenant facility other than a side sewer, either owned or operated by or within the jurisdiction of the City of Kenmore.

6. “Sewage” means water-carried waste discharged from the sanitary facilities of buildings occupied or used by people.

7. “Side sewer” means any sewer line used or installed by any person to conduct waste from any property to a public sanitary sewer.

8. “Residence” means a building designed and/or used to house a single family. The definition of residence shall include trailers on an individual lot and condominium units.

9. “Commercial” means premises used for or housing commercial or industrial concerns. For the purposes of this chapter, multifamily dwellings of two or more units, condominiums and mobile home courts shall be included in this definition.

10. “City sewerage systems” means any sewerage system consisting of sewerage facilities owned and/or operated by the City.

11. “Residential customer equivalent (RCE)” means each 900 cubic feet of water used or metered sewage flow shall be considered as one residential customer equivalent.

B. Definition of Additional Terms. Words, terms or expressions peculiar to the art or science of sewerage not herein defined shall have the respective meanings given in Glossary, Water and Sewage Control Engineering, published in 1949, prepared by a joint committee representing American Public Health Association, American Society of Civil Engineers, American Water Works Association, and Water Pollution Control Federation. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.010).]


13.05.020 Connection with public sewer required.

A. The owner or occupant of lands or premises shall connect the sewage waste pipes located thereon with the nearest accessible public sewer whenever, in the case of platted lands, there is a public sewer within one block thereof or, in the case of unplatted lands, within 150 feet thereof. The director of public works shall prescribe the manner in which such connection shall be made. When in the opinion of the director of public works or the director of public health a sewer connection is unreasonable or impossible, another method of sewage disposal may be specified.

B. The director of public health is authorized and empowered, and it shall be his duty to prohibit the use of any privy, well, septic tank or vault upon any premises whenever the use and maintenance thereof is detrimental or dangerous to public health and safety, to order any such privy, well, septic tank or vault to be disinfected and filled with fresh earth, and to order the plumbing installed in any structure or building located thereon to be connected with a public sewer system. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.020).]


13.05.030 City may connect and assess cost.

Whenever the public health or public safety requires that any building or premises be connected with the public sewer in the manner provided in KMC 13.05.020, the director of public health shall serve upon the owner, agent or occupant of said premises a notice in writing, specifying the time within which such connection must be made, which shall not be more than 60 days from the date of service of such notice. If such owner, agent or occupant fails, neglects or refuses to connect said building or premises with the public sewer within the time specified in such notice, the City of Kenmore may make such connection, and the cost of the connection shall be assessed against the property so connected, and the amount thereof shall become a lien upon the premises so connected. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.030).]


13.05.040 Opening public sewer.

It is unlawful for any person to make any opening in any public sewer or to connect any private sewer or side sewer therewith, or to lay, repair, alter or connect any private sewer or side sewer in a public street, avenue, alley or other public place without complying with the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.040).]


13.05.050 Side sewers in public street – Bond required.

It is unlawful for any person to make any opening in any public sewer situated in a public street or to excavate for the purpose of sewer installation in any public street, avenue, alley or other public place unless such person has first obtained and filed with the director of public works a surety bond in the sum of $2,000. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.050).]


13.05.060 Restoration of public streets.

Where, in order to make a connection to a public sewer, it is necessary to excavate in any public street, avenue, alley or other public place, such excavation shall be restored promptly and expeditiously following inspection and approval of the new line. The requirements for such excavation and restoration shall be as follows:

A. Bituminous or Asphaltic Concrete Surfaces.

1. Surfacing shall be cut completely through before removal. Surfacing shall be cut a minimum of one foot wider than the subbase trench excavation. Edges of the existing surfacing shall be trimmed to a neat line. Where excavations are made for the full width of the surfaced streetway, existing surfacing shall be cut a sufficient width to permit the use of an eight-ton roller for compaction of the new asphalt concrete surfacing.

2. Backfilling shall be with select material. Native material may be used for backfill only when specifically authorized by the director of public works.

3. Backfill material shall be installed in six-inch lifts, and each lift shall be mechanically tamped and compacted to 95 percent of maximum density as measured by the modified AASHO method.

4. The top six-inch lift of backfill material shall be three-quarters-inch crushed surfacing.

5. All asphaltic concrete or bituminous surfaces shall be restored by the application of one course of two inches of compacted Class B asphaltic concrete produced by an asphalt plant approved by the director of public works.

Applicable items of Section 32 of the Washington State Department of Highways Standard Specifications shall apply. Asphalt paint shall be applied to the joints of existing surfacing prior to application of new surface material. Where excavations are made the full width of the surfaced streetway, a minimum eight-ton roller shall be used for compaction of the new asphalt surfacing. If final restoration of surfacing is delayed for weather or other reasons, a temporary repair shall be made by the installation of cold-mix asphalt.

B. Concrete Paving and Concrete Base with Asphalt Surfacing. The tunnel method or the cut-and-tunnel method shall be used in preference to the open-cut method of excavation in concrete or concrete base pavement. Where cutting is necessary, the following shall be required:

1. Line drilling with rotary drills shall be required along the trench or cut outline. Six-inch spacing center-to-center shall be required for drill holes in pavement nine inches or less in depth. Drill holes shall be perpendicular to the surface. Drill holes parallel to a longitudinal joint will not be required if the panel removed extends to the joint itself.

2. Backfilling shall be with select material. Native material shall be used for backfill only when specifically authorized by the director of public works.

3. Backfill material shall be installed in six-inch lifts, and each lift shall be mechanically tamped and compacted to 95 percent of maximum density as measured by the modified AASHO method.

4. The top four-inch lift of backfill material shall be five-eighths inch, minus crushed surfacing.

5. Concrete surfacing or concrete base shall be Class A cement concrete pavement. Applicable items of Section 33 of the Washington State Department of Highways Standard Specifications shall apply.

6. Asphaltic concrete surfacing shall be Class A asphaltic concrete.

7. If final restoration of surfacing is delayed for weather or other reasons, a temporary repair shall be made by the installation of cold-mix asphalt.

C. Unsurfaced Right-of-Way Areas. Trench backfill through right-of-way areas other than surfaced areas shall be native material except where native material shall be deemed unsuitable by the director of public works. Backfill through unsurfaced right-of-way areas shall be compacted to 90 percent of maximum theoretical density. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.060).]


13.05.070 Traffic control at sewer excavations.

A. On arterials or other streets designated by the director of public works, all traffic lanes must be open for rush hours. The use of uniformed flagmen may be required. Generally, construction on such arterials, streets will be restricted to the hours between 9:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.

B. On residential streets, avenues, alleys or other public areas where sewer excavations are made perpendicular to traffic flow, one-half of the street or alley shall be kept open for moving traffic at all times.

C. All work shall be carried on with due regard for the safety and convenience of the public. Open trenches shall be provided with barricades that can be seen at a reasonable distance, and at night shall be adequately lighted. Lighted signs for detours and construction in progress shall be provided. Traffic control devices shall be in accordance with Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices – Part V, Traffic Controls for Highway Construction and Maintenance Operations, published by the U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Public Roads, 1961. Safety instructions from the director of public works shall be strictly observed but following of such instructions shall in no way relieve the person doing construction of his responsibility or liability. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.070).]


13.05.080 Opening public sewer – Permit required.

It is unlawful for any person to make an opening in any public sewer, or to connect any private sewer or side sewer therewith, or to lay, repair, alter or construct any sewer to be connected to a public sewer unless such person has first obtained a side sewer permit from the director of public works. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.080).]


13.05.090 Side sewer permit – How obtained.

A. In order to obtain the permit provided for in KMC 13.05.080, the owner, occupant or the side sewer contractor employed to do the work shall file an application with the director of public works stating the name of the owner or occupant of the premises to be connected, giving lot, block, and addition or other legal description, the number of buildings on said premises, and the purpose for which they are, or are to be used, together with plans drawn to a satisfactory scale, and specifications showing the whole course of the line from the public sewer or other outlet, to its connections with the plumbing or drain from the building or premises and all branches to be connected. The plans and specifications shall be submitted to the director of public works for approval, and he may change or modify the same and designate the manner in which such connecting sewers shall be connected to the building plumbing, the place where such connections with the public sewer shall be made, and specify the material, size, and grade of such connecting sewer, and shall endorse his approval on such plans and specifications as originally prepared or as modified and changed.

B. Upon approval of said plans and specifications, and upon payment of all required fees and charges and upon approval of a surety bond, if required, the director of public works shall issue a permit to perform the work.

C. The director of public works shall have the right, and is authorized, to refuse to issue a permit to any person, or side sewer contractor, where a reasonable doubt exists that such person, or side sewer contractor, may refuse to or be unable to comply with the provisions of this chapter. If, in the judgment of the director of public works, the reputation or past performance of any person indicates a lack of ability to install a side sewer in accordance with the accepted standards of the trade, and the provisions of this chapter, a side sewer permit shall be denied that person. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.090).]


13.05.100 Fees for permits.

A. The fee for a permit issued as herein provided shall be imposed by the city council by resolution. Permit fee shall include the cost of the required inspection. Work shall be completed under the terms of the permit within a period of 60 calendar days. In the event that work is not completed within 60 calendar days, a new permit must be obtained and an additional fee imposed by the city council by resolution paid.

B. Low-Income Elderly Discount. The City service charge for residents of City-operated sewer systems who satisfy the criteria set forth in this section may receive a low-income elderly discount of $2.20 applied to the City service charge portion of the base sewer rate.

C. The criteria shall be that:

1. The head of household or spouse is 62 years of age or older;

2. The gross household income may not exceed $10,764 for a one-person household or $14,076 for a two-person household;

3. Water service to the dwelling is separately metered. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.100).]


13.05.110 Charges for service.

All property to which City-operated sewer service is available shall pay the service charges set forth in the following schedule:

A. The base sewer rate shall be imposed by the city council by resolution.

B. The base sewer rate shall be the minimum monthly charge per connection for the first RCE or any portion thereof.

C. Charges for water used or effluent metered beyond the initial 900 cubic feet shall be proportional to the quantity used or metered.

D. Costs not included in the City portion of base sewer rate and which are specific to a particular City-operated sewerage system shall be as set forth below:

1. Trend ULID No. 1. The monthly service for connections to the Trend ULID sewerage system shall include amounts imposed by the city council by resolution.

2. Metro. In addition to the Metro treatment and disposal charge reflected in the base sewer rate, the City shall bill each customer any additional amount which the City is billed by Metro for that customer.

E. Commercial customers served by a City-operated sewer system, who can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director of public works that a portion of the customer’s water usage does not enter the sanitary sewer system may receive a reduction in the service charge. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.110).]


13.05.120 Collection of charges.

All City-operated sewer systems shall be charged in accordance with the provisions of RCW 36.94.140. The service charge for connections to the City-operated sewer systems may be billed bimonthly with charges due and payable to the City within 30 days of the billing date. A late payment penalty of 10 percent of the amount due will be imposed if payment is not received within 50 days of the billing day. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.120).]


13.05.130 Lien for delinquent charges.

A. The City of Kenmore shall have a lien for delinquent service charges together with interest at eight percent per year from the date due until paid.

B. A lien may be filed against the property if payment is not received within 90 days of the due date. The lien shall be for all charges, interest, and penalties and shall be attached to the premises to which the services were furnished. The lien shall be superior to all other liens and encumbrances except general taxes and local and special assessments of the City.

C. Upon the expiration of 60 days after the attachment of the lien, the City may bring suit in foreclosure by civil action in the Superior Court of King County. In addition to the costs and disbursements provided by statute, the court may allow the City a reasonable attorney’s fee. The lien shall be foreclosed in the same manner as foreclosure of real property tax liens. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.130).]


13.05.140 Sewer connection charges.

A sewer connection charge shall be paid to the City before any structure not previously served by a City sewer system is connected to the system. The connection charge shall be computed according to the following schedule.

The connection charge for any structure not previously served by a City-operated sewer system, or for additional water meter connections to property previously served, shall be based upon the size of the water meter serving the property. The connection charge shall be imposed by the city council by resolution.

In cases where the water meter size is increased, an additional charge for the differential between the smaller and larger meter sizes shall be made. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.140).]


13.05.150 Inspection of side sewers.

A. It is unlawful for any person to cover or back-fill any side sewer, private sewer or lateral without having called for and received an inspection and approval by the director of public works. The director of public works or his authorized inspectors shall be given 24 hours’ notice when such construction is ready for inspection. The director of public works shall inspect and make such tests deemed necessary to ensure that the new work meets all requirements of the plans, specifications and permit and is in strict accordance with all applicable provisions of this chapter in respect to materials and workmanship.

B. The director of public works may require side sewers to be tested by means of water or air. Such tests, where required, shall be at the expense of the person installing the side sewer. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.150).]


13.05.160 Work without permit to be stopped.

It shall be the duty of the director of public health or the director of public works in case they find any person engaged in the work of breaking ground for the purpose of making connection with a public sewer, to ascertain if such person has a permit from the director of public works to make such sewer connection, and in the event that such person has no permit for making such connection it shall be the duty of the director of public works to notify the offending person to stop work immediately. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.160).]


13.05.170 Permit fee when sewer district has agreement with City.

In all sewer districts having agreements and bonds posted with the City of Kenmore guaranteeing restoration of streets after construction of sewer system the fee imposed by the city council by resolution for digging in the street for a sewer connection shall be waived on all permits issued until the street has been satisfactorily restored and accepted by the City of Kenmore, except if in the opinion of the city street engineer the contractor or sewer district are unnecessarily delaying restoration of any street they shall be notified by the City that all connections in said street from then on shall be subject to the fee. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.170).]


13.05.180 Side sewers – Requirements, materials and workmanship.

A. All side sewers installed shall conform to the following minimum requirements:

1. Minimum grade: two percent;

2. Minimum size: four inches;

3. Minimum cover at edge of surfaced area of street, avenue, alley or other public way: four feet;

4. Minimum cover at property line: one foot, six inches;

5. Minimum cover inside property line: one foot.

B. Side sewers shall be constructed of any of the following materials, or other equivalent materials when approved by the director of public works:

1. Concrete sewer pipe, ASTM C-14, with rubber gasket joints;

2. Vitrified clay pipe, nonglazed, ASTM C200-55T, with “Speed Seal” or equal joints;

3. Cement-asbestos pipe, ASTM C296 or C428 with standard gasket joints;

4. Soil pipe, ASTM A21.6 or A21.8 with mechanical joints or roll-on type rubber joints;

5. Cast iron pipe, ASTM A21.6 or A21.8 with mechanical joints or roll-on type rubber joints.

C. Cast iron pipe or soil pipe shall be used where a side sewer is constructed within 10 feet of a potable water pipe. Special pipe bedding consisting of gravel or concrete may be required where, in the judgment of the director of public works, unsuitable ground conditions exist.

D. The connection of the side sewer into the public sewer shall be made at a wye or tee if such is available at a suitable location. If no properly located wye or tee is available, a neat hole shall be cut into the public sewer to receive the side sewer. The spigot end shall be cut so as to not extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. Entry to the public sewer shall be made at an angle of not less than 45 degrees. A smooth, neat joint shall be made and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection when approved by the director of public works.

E. All side sewer pipes shall be laid in a straight line between bends. All changes in grade or line shall be made with a one-eighth bend or a wye.

F. Whenever a situation exists involving an unusual danger of backups from the public sewer, the director of public works may prescribe a minimum elevation at which the side sewer may be discharged to the public sewer. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.180).]


13.05.190 Use of the public sewers.

A. It is unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following into any public sewer or into any side sewer discharging into any public sewer: subsoil, foundation, footing, window-well, door-well, yard, or unroofed basement floor drains; unpolluted industrial process water; roof drains or downspouts from areas exposed to rainfall or other precipitation; surface or underground water from any source.

B. The director of public works is authorized and empowered and it shall be his duty to prohibit the discharge of stormwater, rainwater, roof runoff, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters or wastes directly or indirectly into any public sewer, and to prohibit the discharge of:

1. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit;

2. Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million, by weight, of fat, oil, or grease;

3. Any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable liquid, solid or gas;

4. Any garbage that is not properly shredded garbage;

5. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, manure, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewer system;

6. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewer system;

7. Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;

8. Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant;

9. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance.

C. When, in the judgment of the director of public works, the use of grease, oil and sand traps is required and necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, such traps shall be installed by the owner or occupant of any property or premises before such property or premises is connected to the public sewers. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand traps shall be maintained by the owner or occupant, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times.

D. It is unlawful to admit into the public sewers any waters or wastes having:

1. A five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts per million by weight; or

2. Containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids. Where necessary, in the opinion of the director of public works, the owner or occupant of property or premises producing waste of such objectionable characteristics shall, at his own expense, provide such preliminary treatment as is required to bring the waste into conformity with the requirements of this chapter. 

E. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation, by the owner at his expense.

F. All waste discharged to the public sewers shall be in conformity with the current requirements of the municipality of metropolitan Seattle. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.190).]


13.05.200 Protection from damage.

It is unlawful for any person to maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the public sewer system. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.200).]


13.05.210 Powers and authority of inspectors.

The director of public works and the director of public health, their inspectors and other authorized employees, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing and making connection of sanitary facilities of any structure or premises to the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.210).]


13.05.220 Repair of broken or obstructed side sewers.

When any house connection or side sewer is constructed, laid, connected or repaired and does not comply with the provisions of this chapter or where it is determined by the director of public health or the director of public works that a house connection or side sewer is obstructed, broken or inadequate and is a menace to health or is liable to cause damage to public or private property, the director of public health or the director of public works shall give notice to the owner, agent, or occupant of the property at which such condition exists and if such owner, agent, or occupant fails to repair the same after 10 days when notified to do so by the director of public health or director of public works, the City of Kenmore may perform such work as may be necessary to comply with this chapter. The reasonable cost of such work as done by the City of Kenmore shall be collected from the person responsible for such condition, or the amount thereof shall become a lien upon the said property and the prosecuting attorney is authorized, empowered and directed to collect such cost either by the foreclosure of said lien or by a suit against the owner or occupant of such property, or other person responsible for such condition, the suit shall be maintained in the name of the City of Kenmore, as plaintiff, in any court of competent jurisdiction. Such action shall be commenced within eight months. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.220).]


13.05.230 Planting of certain trees and shrubbery prohibited – Removal of obstructions in sewers.

It is unlawful to plant willow, poplar, cottonwood, soft maples, or gum, or any other tree or any shrub whose roots are likely to obstruct public or private sewers within 30 feet of any public sewer. The director of public works is authorized to remove any trees or shrubs from any public street, or the roots of any trees or shrubs which extend from any public street, when said roots or trees thereof are obstructing, or when he shall determine that they are liable to obstruct public or private sewers; provided, however, that he shall give 10 days’ notice in writing to the owner or occupant of the abutting property to remove the same. If such owner or occupant fails or refuses to do so, the reasonable cost of such removal when done by the City of Kenmore shall be a lien upon the abutting property from which such trees or shrubs are removed. The prosecuting attorney is authorized, empowered and directed to collect such charge by suit maintained in the name of the City of Kenmore as plaintiff, in any court of competent jurisdiction. Such action shall be commenced within eight months. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.230).]


13.05.240 Pumps and pressure lines.

In the event that buildings, structures, or premises are situated at an elevation which does not allow for the proper gravity flow of sewage to the public sewer, such sewage may be lifted by artificial means and discharged into the public sewer. Pumps and pressure lines shall remain the private property of the owner or occupant and he shall be responsible for their operation and maintenance. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.240).]


13.05.250 Developer extensions of the public sewer.

A. Private developers, owners, or occupants of property not serviced by public sewers may be authorized by the city manager to construct extensions to public sewers. Such extensions shall be designed by a licensed professional engineer experienced in the design of public sewers. Contracts for extensions of the public sewer shall provide: that the property to be served shall be annexed to the area of the sewer district; that the developer shall pay all costs and fees related thereto including, but not restricted to, engineering, inspection, construction, permits, fees, legal costs; that upon completion of all work and restoration and the payment of all fees and costs thereto, and upon acceptance of the work by the director of public works, a bill of sale and all easements required shall be furnished the sewerage and drainage district. A performance bond, written by a surety authorized to do business in the State of Washington, shall be provided prior to beginning of the construction work. This performance bond, written for the dollar amount of the construction contract, shall guarantee the work for a period of one year after acceptance by the director of public works.

B. The director of public works may contract with developers of such extensions to collect a latecomer’s fee for the reimbursement of such owners and their assigns, for a period not to exceed 15 years, by any owner of real estate who did not contribute to the original cost of such sewer facilities and who subsequently tap onto or use the same, of a fair pro rata share of the cost of the construction of said sewer facilities, including not only those directly connected thereto, but also users connected to laterals or branches connecting thereto. Said contract will be recorded with the City.

C. The director of public works may, by agreement with the developer, retain 20 percent of said latecomer fees for administrative costs.

D. Before construction work may commence on extensions of the public sewer, the plans and specifications of the proposed work shall be reviewed by the Washington State Department of Ecology and the Washington State Department of Social and Health Services and formal approval of said plans and specifications shall be received by the director of public works from both State agencies, in accordance with the provisions of RCW 43.21A.060, 56.020.060 and 90.48.110. Plans and specifications on proposed extensions to the public sewers shall be submitted to the municipality of metropolitan Seattle for its review and approval. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.250).]


13.05.260 Rules and regulations.

The director of public works or director of public health may make and issue such additional rules and regulations as may be expedient and necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.260).]


13.05.270 Collection of costs.

Whenever any sum of money is to be charged as a lien against a particular property upon which work is to be done by the City of Kenmore under the terms and provisions of this chapter, the manner and method of collecting said amounts shall be substantially as follows.

The owner or agent of the property shall be given a notice in writing by the City of Kenmore. Said owner or agent is required to do the particular work at the expense of the property owner. The notice shall be in substantially the following form:

To ____________________ Owner, and ____________________ Agent, of that certain property described as:

_________________________________

You are hereby notified to perform the following work upon the above described property within ten (10) days of the date of the service of this notice upon you, viz:

_________________________________

And you are further notified that if you do not perform said work within said period of ten (10) days, then the City of Kenmore will perform the same and charge the amount of said work against said property, and will proceed to collect the same according to law.

CITY OF KENMORE

By ______________________

A copy of this notice shall be posted upon the property affected and a further copy shall be mailed to the agent or owner at his last known address. In case the agent or owner fails to perform said work within 10 days after said notice has been mailed and posted, then the work shall be done by the City of Kenmore. As soon as practicable after said work is performed, the owner or agent shall be notified in the same manner as provided above, that the work has been done by the City of Kenmore and the amount of the charge for doing said work.

The owner or agent shall be required to pay to the City of Kenmore said amount within 30 days after the date of the posting and mailing of said notice to him.

The form of notice just provided for shall be substantially as follows:

TO ____________________ Owner, and __________________________ Agent, of _________________________________

You are hereby notified that pursuant to a former notice given you upon the ____ day, of _____ 20__, that the City of Kenmore has performed the work required to be done pursuant to the said former notice, and that the cost and expense of doing said work is the sum of ______ dollars. You are further notified that unless you pay said amount to the Comptroller or file objections against said amount with the director of public works within 30 days of the date of service of this notice upon you, that the same shall be a lien against the above described real property and will be collected by the City of Kenmore according to law.

CITY OF KENMORE

By ______________________

A person may appeal within 30 days charges resulting from the director of public works’ actions, as described in KMC 13.05.180 and 13.05.190, by filing written objections on forms provided by the director of public works. The director of public works shall transmit a copy of the completed form and other papers received in connection with the appeal to the City of Kenmore. The City of Kenmore shall within 60 days of the initial filing with the director of public works set a hearing date on the appeal. The City of Kenmore shall adopt such procedures and regulations that may be necessary for conducting a hearing and rendering a decision.

After said hearing, or after the expiration of the 30-day period provided for filing objection, the amount thereof shall become a lien against the property upon which said work was performed, and the prosecuting attorney is authorized to proceed to collect said amount in any lawful manner. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.270).]


13.05.280 Constitutionality.

If any provisions of this chapter shall be construed by any court to be unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.280).]


13.05.290 Enforcement.

The director of the Seattle-King County department of public health is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the ordinances and resolutions codified in it, and any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder pursuant to the enforcement and penalty provisions of Chapter 1.20 KMC. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.04.290).]


Chapter 13.10 DESIGN, INSTALLATION AND REPAIR OF DISPOSAL SYSTEMS

Sections:

13.10.010    Definitions.

13.10.020    Chapter not retroactive.

13.10.030    Designer’s certificate.

13.10.040    Installer’s certificate.

13.10.050    Permits.

13.10.060    Mobile home and recreational vehicle park inspection fee.

13.10.070    Where private sewage disposal systems required.

13.10.080    Location of systems.

13.10.090    Design of systems.

13.10.100    Installation and alteration.

13.10.110    Inspection.

13.10.120    Approval or disapproval of system – Notice.

13.10.130    Maintenance of system.

13.10.140    Sewage disposal technical advisory committee.

13.10.150    Enforcement.

13.10.160    Severability.


13.10.010 Definitions.

Certain words and phrases in this chapter, unless otherwise clearly indicated by their context, mean as follows:

A. “Approved” means approved in writing by the director of public health.

B. “Director of public health” means the director of the Seattle-King County department of public health or his authorized representative.

C. “Sanitary drainage system” means the piping which conveys sewage from plumbing fixtures to a public sewer or private sewage disposal system.

D. “Sewage” means any liquid or liquid-borne waste from the ordinary living processes, or liquid or liquid-borne waste which contains animal or vegetable matter in suspension or solution, or liquid or liquid-borne waste which may contain chemical in solution, and which may be lawfully discharged into a public sanitary sewer.

E. “Sewage disposal system” means sanitary drainage systems, septic tanks, leaching pits, surface and subsurface leaching filter beds, and appurtenances, or other approved facilities for the disposal of sewage by means other than through a public sewer.

F. “Repair” means the replacement, addition, or alteration of a septic tank, distribution box, tight line, or other appurtenances to an existing individual sewage disposal system, and including any replacement, addition, or alteration to a subsurface disposal field where at least a portion of the original subsurface disposal field is used. In those instances where no portion of the existing drainfield or septic system is to be used, it will be considered the same as a new system and will require a design.

G. “Resident owner or intended resident owner” means a person who constructs not more than one residence in any one year for his own occupancy. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.08.010).]


13.10.020 Chapter not retroactive.

This chapter shall not apply to any work on a sewage disposal system for which a permit had been issued by the director of public health, and which permit was valid and existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified herein, but any such work shall be subject to applicable resolutions existing at the time such permit was issued. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.08.020).]


13.10.030 Designer’s certificate.

A. It is unlawful to engage in business as a sewage disposal system designer without a currently valid sewage disposal system designer’s certificate of competency, as provided for in this chapter, or a currently valid State of Washington sanitary or civil engineer’s license.

B. The fee for a sewage disposal system designer’s certificate of competency shall be $50.00 per year.

C. The fee for the sewage disposal system designer’s examination shall be $25.00, payable in advance and not refundable. Separate, special examinations shall be given to those licensed designers desiring to design dosing systems and/or prepare subdivision reports. The fees for these additional examinations shall be $10.00 each, payable in advance and not refundable.

D. The director of public health may suspend or revoke any sewage disposal system designer’s certificate of competency for incompetency, negligence, misrepresentation, or failure to comply with this chapter or the rules and regulations of the director of public health adopted pursuant to this chapter. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.08.030).]


13.10.040 Installer’s certificate.

A. It is unlawful to engage in business as a sewage disposal system installer without a currently valid sewage disposal system installer’s certificate of competency.

B. The fee for a sewage disposal system installer’s certificate of competency shall be $100.00 per year.

C. Prior to the issuance of a commercial installer’s certificate of competency, the applicant must provide a surety bond approved as to form by the City of Kenmore prosecuting attorney in the sum of $1,000 running to the City of Kenmore, Washington, executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Washington. The bond shall be conditioned that the holder of the certificate of competency and his agents in performing work governed by the ordinance shall exercise all reasonable care and skill and shall fully comply with all provisions of this chapter pertaining to sewage disposal.

D. Application for a sewage disposal system installer’s certificate of competency shall be made to the director of public health, who may examine the applicant, and may deny the application if in his judgment the applicant is not qualified to install sewage disposal systems.

E. The director of public health may suspend or revoke any sewage disposal system installer’s certificate of competency for incompetency, negligence, misrepresentation, or failure to comply with this chapter or the rules and regulations of the director of public health adopted pursuant to the ordinance codified in this chapter.

F. Sewage disposal system installer’s certificates of competency shall expire December 31st of each year. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.08.040).]


13.10.050 Permits.

A. It is unlawful to construct, install, repair or alter a sewage disposal system without a sewage disposal system permit. Such permit shall be posted on the building or premises where the work permitted is being done, before the work is begun, and unless revoked shall not be removed until such work has been finally approved by the director of public health.

B. The fee for a sewage disposal system permit shall be $15.00 for such system serving a single-family residence, or $25.00 for any other such system.

C. Application for a sewage disposal system permit shall be made to the director of public health, who may deny the application if in his judgment the physical features of property on which it is proposed to locate the sewage disposal system, or the design of the proposed sewage disposal system, are not adequate for safe operation of such system.

D. Application for a sewage disposal system permit shall be supported by the following:

1. A completely dimensioned plot plan, drawn to scale, showing direction of surface drainage, approximate slope, and other topographical features relevant to the design and installation of an adequate and efficient sewage disposal system.

2. Construction plans and specifications.

3. A log of soil formation and groundwater level as determined by test holes in the proposed disposal field.

4. A statement of absorption characteristics of the soil as determined by percolation tests made in the proposed disposal field.

5. Such other information as the director of public health may require.

Provided, however, that subsection (D)(1) through (D)(4) of this section are not applicable when application is made for a sewage disposal permit for repairs to an existing system.

E. Sewage disposal system permits shall expire one year from date of issue. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.08.050).]


13.10.060 Mobile home and recreational vehicle park inspection fee.

An annual fee shall be charged by the Seattle-King County health department for inspection of mobile home parks and recreational vehicle parks, based on the following schedule:

	Spaces

 	Fee

 

	Two to 10 mobile homes or recreational vehicle spaces, inclusively	$50.00 per year

	For each additional space 

over 10	$2.50 per year

[Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.08.055).]


13.10.070 Where private sewage disposal systems required.

Every plumbing fixture and every sanitary drainage system not connected to a public sewer, or not required by law to be connected to a public sewer, shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.08.060).]


13.10.080 Location of systems.

In the urban growth area, no new on-site sewage systems shall be allowed. New on-site sewage systems may be installed as a permanent system on lots located in rural and resource areas of the City of Kenmore. On-site sewage systems shall be located on the same lot as the buildings they are designed to serve, or may be approved by the director of public health on another property if an easement is obtained and recorded. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.08.070).]


13.10.090 Design of systems.

A. Sewage disposal systems shall be designed by a sewage disposal systems designer, certificated as provided in this chapter, or by a sanitary or civil engineer licensed by the State of Washington, except that a resident owner, or intended resident owner, may personally design a system for his own single-family residence, provided he designs not more than one system in any one calendar year. The fee for plan review of the design shall be $10.00.

B. Design of sewage disposal systems shall be such as to accommodate all sewage from the buildings and premises to be served, and in accordance with this chapter and the rules and regulations of the director of public health adopted pursuant to this chapter. The type of system shall be determined by location, soil porosity, groundwater level and other relevant conditions.

C. After the plumbing stub-out has been installed and prior to the installation of the sewage disposal system, the designer shall inspect the site to determine compatibility with his original design criteria. Before an installation permit will be issued, the health department shall be notified by the designer that the preinstallation inspection is acceptable. In the event the sewage disposal system must be installed prior to construction of the building, waiver of the plumbing stub-out requirement may be made. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.08.080).]


13.10.100 Installation and alteration.

A. Sewage disposal systems shall be constructed, installed or repaired only by a sewage disposal system installer, certificated as provided in this chapter, except that a resident owner, or intended resident owner, may personally construct, install or repair a system for his own single-family residence, provided he constructs not more than one system in any one calendar year.

B. Construction, installation or repair of sewage disposal systems shall be such as to accommodate all sewage from the buildings and premises to be served, and in accordance with this chapter and the rules and regulations of the director of public health adopted pursuant to the ordinance codified herein. No down-spout or footing drain shall be directly or indirectly connected to a sewage disposal system except when on-site systems are no longer used for sewage disposal upon connection to public sewers. Down-spouts must be connected directly to the drainfield unless the septic tank is cleaned out prior to connection. Sewage disposal systems shall be so constructed and installed that surface water or groundwater will not interfere with the operation of such system. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.08.090).]


13.10.110 Inspection.

A. Any work done on a sewage disposal system, and any material used, may be inspected by the director of public health at any reasonable time, and if he shall find that any work done, or material used, is not in accordance with this chapter or with the rules and regulations of the director of public health adopted pursuant to the ordinance codified herein he may revoke the permit for the work or he may notify the owner or installer to make such changes in the work as he shall specify, and if such changes are not made within a reasonable time, the director of public health shall then revoke the permit and it shall be unlawful to use such sewage disposal system.

B. When the work of constructing or installing a sewage disposal system has been otherwise completed, it shall be left open and uncovered. The owner shall be notified, and he shall cause an inspection of such work and such system to be made by a designer. When the work of repairing a sewage disposal system has been completed under a waiver of design as provided for in KMC 13.10.050(D), it shall be left open and uncovered. The owner shall be notified, and he shall call for an inspection of such work and such system to be made by the director of public health.

C. If upon inspection by him following work on a sewage disposal system, a designer finds that such work or system is not in accordance with this chapter, he shall so notify the owner who shall cause such changes in the work as are specified by the designer, and shall then again notify a designer that such work is ready for inspection.

D. When upon inspection by him following work on a sewage disposal system, a designer finds that such work and system are in accordance with this chapter, he shall so certify to the director of public health, and shall submit to the director of public health with such certification, a detailed “as-built” drawing of such system. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.08.100).]


13.10.120 Approval or disapproval of system – Notice.

A. Within a reasonable time after receipt of certification by a designer that work done on a private sewage disposal system and such system are in accordance with this chapter, the director of public health shall approve or disapprove thereof.

B. If the director of public health disapproves such work or system, he shall so notify the owner, stating his reasons for such disapproval, and it is then unlawful to use such system.

C. If the director of public health finally approves such work and such system, he shall so notify the owner, and then such work shall be covered, and such system may be used. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.08.110).]


13.10.130 Maintenance of system.

All on-site sewage systems shall be maintained in accordance with this chapter and the rules and regulations of the director of public health adopted pursuant to the ordinance codified herein. No on-site sewage system shall be used which directly or indirectly discharges upon the surface of the ground or into any waters within the City. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.08.120).]


13.10.140 Sewage disposal technical advisory committee.

A. There is established a sewage disposal technical advisory committee, the members of which shall be the director of public health, ex officio, and 12 appointive members, one representative of each of the following:

1. Sanitary or civil engineer licensed by the State of Washington;

2. Sewage disposal system designer holding currently valid certificate of competency in the City of Kenmore;

3. Sewage disposal system installer holding currently valid certificate of competency in the City of Kenmore;

4. Civil or sanitary engineer, department of housing and urban development;

5. Washington State Department of Social and Health Services, Division of Health, Water and Waste Section;

6. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service;

7. Washington State Department of Ecology;

8. Seattle-King County board of realtors;

9. King County policy development commission;

10. Land surveyor with a designer’s certificate of competency and a subdivision report permit;

11. Consumer.

B. Members of the sewage disposal technical advisory committee, other than ex officio, shall be appointed by the city manager, subject to confirmation by the city council. Appointments shall be for a term of three years ending December 31st of the third year of such term, subject to reappointment; provided, that any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as original appointments; and provided, further, that the term of office for the first members shall be staggered so that four serve for a term ending December 31, 1973, and four serve for a term ending December 31, 1974. Members shall serve without compensation.

C. The sewage disposal technical advisory committee shall organize and elect a chairman and secretary who shall serve at the pleasure of the members. Such committee may adopt rules of procedure for its own government and shall meet at the call of the chairman subject to three days’ written notice to each member of the time and place of such meeting.

D. The sewage disposal technical advisory committee may examine sewage disposal ordinances, rules and regulations adopted by the director of public health pursuant thereto, make recommendations thereon and may review and recommend new methods and techniques of sewage disposal, but shall act in an advisory capacity only. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.08.130).]


13.10.150 Enforcement.

The director of the Seattle-King County department of public health is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the ordinances and resolutions codified in it, and any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder pursuant to the enforcement and penalty provisions of Chapter 1.20 KMC. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.08.140).]


13.10.160 Severability.

Should any part of this chapter be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the remainder. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.08.150).]


Chapter 13.15 SEWERAGE CLEANING AND REMOVAL

Sections:

13.15.010    Certificate required for cleaning disposal units.

13.15.020    Application for registration and inspection certificate.

13.15.030    Examination of applicant – Inspection of disposal site – Registration and inspection fee – Painting registration number on vehicles.

13.15.040    Approval required for alternate disposal sites.

13.15.050    Maintenance of disposal sites.

13.15.060    Enforcement.

13.15.070    Severability.


13.15.010 Certificate required for cleaning disposal units.

It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to carry on or engage in the business of cleaning of septic tanks, cesspools, grease traps or seepage pits or to transport over the highways or to dispose of the cleanings therefrom in the City of Kenmore unless he or it holds an unrevoked registration and inspection certificate issued by the King County health officer for carrying on such business. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.12.010).]


13.15.020 Application for registration and inspection certificate.

All applicants for registration under this chapter shall be filed with the King County health officer. The application shall state the name in full, if a partnership, then the names of the partners, the relation of the applicant to the firm or partnership, the name of the corporation, if a corporation, the place of business and place of residence of the applicant, and of each of the partners in the business if a partnership and the place of business of the corporation. The application shall also state the number of vehicles to be used and the type, and the legal description of the site that the applicant is planning to use to dispose of the contents of septic tanks, cesspools, grease traps and seepage pits, and the name and address of the person, firm or corporation who is responsible for the operation of the disposal site. A written statement acknowledging responsibility and signed by the person, firm or corporation responsible for the disposal site must accompany the application. The application shall be signed by the authorized officer of the corporation, if a corporation, or by the managing partner, if a partnership, or by the individual owner, if owned by an individual. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.12.020).]


13.15.030 Examination of applicant – Inspection of disposal site – Registration and inspection fee – Painting registration number on vehicles.

A. Registration shall be issued only after a satisfactory examination by the King County health officer or his authorized representative of the equipment to be used, the applicant’s knowledge of sanitary principles affecting public health and nuisances, the reliability of the applicant in observing sanitary laws, ordinances and directions, and in selecting laborers who collect and transport and dispose of the contents of septic tanks, cesspools, grease traps or seepage pits without endangering human health or comfort. An inspection shall also be made of the applicant’s disposal site to determine its suitability for the disposal of contents of septic tanks, cesspools, grease traps or seepage pits.

B. The health officer shall be required to act upon each applicant within 30 days.

C. Registration and inspection fee shall be $25.00 per year, said fee to be paid to the health department and to be used to defray expenses in issuing registration certificates, conducting inspections and otherwise administering this chapter.

D. After registration has been approved by the King County health officer, the applicant will be issued a registration number. Said numbers, preceded by the letters K.C. No., shall be painted on each applicant’s collecting vehicles in a contrasting color to that of the vehicle and in letters at least three inches high and placed in a conspicuous place designated by the health officer.

E. Applicants may be registered under such terms, conditions, orders and direction as the health officer may deem necessary for the protection of human health and comfort. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.12.030).]


13.15.040 Approval required for alternate disposal sites.

Should a holder of a certificate of registration and inspection desire to dispose of the contents of the septic tanks, cesspools, grease traps or seepage pits at a disposal site other than the site listed in his application for registration, he shall first obtain written approval of said site from the King County health officer. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.12.040).]


13.15.050 Maintenance of disposal sites.

Any person, firm or corporation responsible for the operation of a refuse site on which the contents of septic tanks, cesspools, grease traps or seepage pits are disposed of shall maintain said disposal site in a safe and sanitary condition according to the instructions of the health department. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.12.050).]


13.15.060 Enforcement.

The director of the Seattle-King County department of public health is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the ordinances and resolutions codified in it, and any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder pursuant to the enforcement and penalty provisions of Chapter 1.20 KMC. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.12.060).]


13.15.070 Severability.

Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.12.070).]


Chapter 13.20 FEDERAL FUNDING OF SEWERAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS

Sections:

13.20.010    Health officer to approve disposal systems in federal government buildings.

13.20.020    Bond or escrow fund required.

13.20.030    Charge against bond or escrow fund authorized.


13.20.010 Health officer to approve disposal systems in federal government buildings.

No individual person, firm or corporation shall cause to be constructed, built or installed any sewerage disposal system financed or insured directly or indirectly by the federal government for any house, houses or buildings, unless said sewerage system is approved by the health officer or his agent. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.16.010).]


13.20.020 Bond or escrow fund required.

The King County health officer or his agent may require either a bond executed by a reputable bonding company doing business within the State of Washington, or a cash deposit to be held in escrow for a period of one year after occupancy of the premises, or until approval by the Seattle-King County health department, whichever is the longer period of time, that the bond or cash so deposited in trust or escrow be used as a guarantee that the sewerage disposal system will work effectively and comply with all sanitary regulations. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.16.020).]


13.20.030 Charge against bond or escrow fund authorized.

In the event that repairs or changes are necessary in the sewerage disposal system during the aforementioned period, the bond or escrow funds shall be subject to any charge or expense that may be incurred in the repairing or change of the sewerage system. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.16.030).]


Chapter 13.25 WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM CONDITION REPORTS

Sections:

13.25.010    Application for information.

13.25.020    Fee for report.

13.25.030    Submittal of water samples for analysis – Fee.


13.25.010 Application for information.

Any person, agency or company desiring a report on the condition of a water supply or sewage disposal system shall make application for such information to the department of public health on a form provided by that department. [Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.20.010).]


13.25.020 Fee for report.

Application for a report on such water supply or individual sewage disposal system shall be accompanied by a fee as imposed by the city council by resolution. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.20.020).]


13.25.030 Submittal of water samples for analysis – Fee.

Any person, agency or company may submit water samples to the department of public health for analysis. The fee for each water sample is imposed by the city council by resolution. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 98-0023 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 13.20.030).]


Chapter 13.30 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

13.30.010    Surface water utility established.

13.30.020    Stormwater utility fund created.

13.30.030    Surface water master plan.

13.30.040    Penalty.


13.30.010 Surface water utility established.

Pursuant to RCW 35.67.020, the City hereby determines to conduct, maintain and operate a stormwater utility. [Ord. 98-0016 § 1.]


13.30.020 Stormwater utility fund created.

There is hereby created a stormwater utility fund, into which all rates and charges shall be placed. [Ord. 98-0016 § 4.]


13.30.030 Surface water master plan.

The City hereby adopts by reference the 2015 City of Kenmore Surface Water Master Plan, attached to the ordinance codified in this section as Exhibit A.* [Ord. 16-0428 § 3 (Att. B); Ord. 01-0105 § 1.]

*Code reviser’s note: Exhibit A is on file in the office of the city clerk.


13.30.040 Penalty.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as set forth in Chapter 1.15 KMC. [Ord. 98-0016 § 5.]


Chapter 13.32 TECHNICAL TERMS AND DEFINITIONS

Sections:

13.32.010    Scope of chapter.

13.32.020    Adjustment.

13.32.030    AKART.

13.32.040    Applicant.

13.32.050    Basin.

13.32.060    Basin plan.

13.32.070    Best management practices.

13.32.080    City.

13.32.090    City manager.

13.32.100    Clean Water Act.

13.32.110    Closed depression.

13.32.120    Construct or modify.

13.32.130    Conveyance system.

13.32.140    County.

13.32.150    Developed parcel.

13.32.160    Development.

13.32.170    Discharge.

13.32.180    Drainage.

13.32.190    Drainage easement.

13.32.200    Drainage facility.

13.32.210    Drainage review.

13.32.220    Erosion and sediment control.

13.32.230    Financial guarantee.

13.32.250    Flow control BMP.

13.32.260    Flow control BMP design and maintenance details.

13.32.270    Flow control BMP site plan (FCBMP site plan).

13.32.280    Flow control facility.

13.32.290    Full drainage review.

13.32.300    Hard surface.

13.32.310    Groundwater.

13.32.320    High-use site.

13.32.330    Hydraulically connected.

13.32.340    Impervious surface.

13.32.350    Improvement.

13.32.370    Land disturbing activity.

13.32.390    Landslide hazard drainage area.

13.32.410    Licensed civil engineer.

13.32.420    LID.

13.32.430    LID best management practices (LID BMPs).

13.32.440    LID principles.

13.32.450    Low impact development.

13.32.460    Maintenance.

13.32.480    MS4.

13.32.490    Municipal separate storm sewer system.

13.32.500    Native vegetated surface.

13.32.510    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.

13.32.520    Natural discharge location.

13.32.530    New impervious surface.

13.32.540    New pervious surface.

13.32.550    New pollution-generating impervious surface (new PGIS).

13.32.560    New pollution-generating pervious surface (new PGPS).

13.32.570    NPDES.

13.32.580    Open space.

13.32.590    Parcel.

13.32.600    Permeable pavement.

13.32.610    Permeable soils.

13.32.620    Person.

13.32.630    Pervious surface.

13.32.640    Pollution-generating impervious surface (PGIS).

13.32.650    Pollution-generating pervious surface (PGPS).

13.32.660    Project.

13.32.670    Project site.

13.32.680    Rate category.

13.32.690    Redevelopment project.

13.32.700    Replaced impervious surface.

13.32.710    Replaced pollution-generating impervious surface (replaced PGIS).

13.32.720    Residence.

13.32.730    Residential parcel.

13.32.740    Runoff.

13.32.770    Shared facility.

13.32.780    Simplified drainage review.

13.32.790    Site.

13.32.800    Stormwater.

13.32.820    Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual.

13.32.830    Subbasin.

13.32.840    Surface water.

13.32.850    Surface Water Design Manual (SWDM).

13.32.860    Surface water and stormwater management.

13.32.870    Stormwater management program.

13.32.880    Stormwater management program plan.

13.32.890    Surface water master plan.

13.32.910    Undeveloped parcel.

13.32.920    Waters of the State.

13.32.930    Water quality treatment facility.

13.32.940    Western Washington Phase II municipal stormwater permit.


13.32.010 Scope of chapter.

The definitions of this chapter shall apply to this division and shall prevail over any conflicting definition in the Surface Water Design Manual, as defined in this chapter. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.020 Adjustment.

“Adjustment” means a variation from the requirements of KMC 13.35.050 and the Surface Water Design Manual approved by the city manager for a particular project in accordance with KMC 13.35.050(C). The term “adjustment” replaces the term “variance,” which was used in prior editions of the Surface Water Design Manual. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.030 AKART.

“AKART” means “all known, available, and reasonable methods of prevention, control, and treatment.” AKART represents the most current methodology that can be reasonably required for preventing, controlling, or abating the pollutants associated with a discharge. “AKART” applies to both point and nonpoint sources of pollution. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.040 Applicant.

“Applicant” means a property owner or a public agency or public or private utility which owns a right-of-way or other easement, or has been adjudicated the right to such an easement pursuant to RCW 8.12.090, or any person or entity designated or named in writing by the property or easement owner to be the applicant, in an application for a development proposal, permit or approval. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.050 Basin.

“Basin” means a geographic area that contains or drains to a stream or river named or noted on common maps, such as Swamp Creek, or a geographic area that drains to a nonflowing water body named and noted on common maps, such as Lake Washington. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.060 Basin plan.

“Basin plan” means a plan and all implementing regulations and procedures including, but not limited to, capital projects, public education activities and land use management adopted by ordinance for managing surface water and stormwater within individual subbasins. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.070 Best management practices.

“Best management practices” or “BMPs” means the best available and reasonable physical, structural, managerial, or behavioral activities, that, when used singly or in combination, eliminate or reduce the contamination of both surface and groundwaters. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.080 City.

“City” means the City of Kenmore. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.090 City manager.

“City manager” means the City of Kenmore city manager or his or her designee(s). [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.100 Clean Water Act.

“Clean Water Act” means 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., as amended. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.110 Closed depression.

“Closed depression” means an area greater than 5,000 square feet at overflow elevation that is low-lying and that has no or such a limited surface water outlet that the area acts as a stormwater retention facility. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.120 Construct or modify.

“Construct or modify” means to install a new drainage pipe or ditch or make improvements to an existing drainage pipe or ditch, for purposes other than maintenance, that either serves to concentrate previously unconcentrated surface water and stormwater runoff, or serves to increase, decrease and/or redirect the conveyance of surface water and stormwater runoff. “Construct or modify” does not include installation or maintenance of a driveway culvert installed as part of a single-family residential building permit. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.130 Conveyance system.

“Conveyance system” means the drainage facilities and features, both natural and constructed, which collect, contain and provide for the flow of surface water and stormwater from the highest points on the land down to a receiving water. The natural elements of the conveyance system include swales and small drainage courses, streams, rivers, lakes and wetlands. The constructed elements of the conveyance system include gutters, ditches, pipes, channels and most flow control and water quality treatment facilities. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.140 County.

“County” means King County, Washington. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.150 Developed parcel.

“Developed parcel” means any parcel altered from its native state by the construction, creation or addition of impervious or pervious surfaces, including the alteration of soil conditions, ground cover, and species of vegetation (such as landscaping). [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.160 Development.

“Development” means any activity that requires a permit or approval, including, but not limited to, a building permit, grading permit, shoreline substantial development permit, conditional use permit, special use permit, zoning variance, zone reclassification, subdivision, short subdivision, binding site plan, site plan review or right-of-way use permit. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.170 Discharge.

“Discharge” means throw, drain, release, dump, spill, empty, emit, or pour forth any matter or to cause or allow matter to flow, run, or seep from land or be thrown, drained, released, dumped, spilled, emptied, emitted or poured into water. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.180 Drainage.

“Drainage” means the collection, conveyance, containment or discharge, or any combination thereof, of surface water and stormwater runoff. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.190 Drainage easement.

“Drainage easement” means a legal encumbrance that is placed against a property’s title to reserve specified privileges for the users and beneficiaries of the drainage facilities contained within the boundaries of the easement. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.200 Drainage facility.

“Drainage facility” means a constructed or engineered feature that collects, conveys, stores, treats, or otherwise manages stormwater runoff or surface water. “Drainage facility” includes, but is not limited to, a constructed or engineered stream, lake, wetland, or closed depression, or a pipe, channel, ditch, gutter, flow control facility, flow control BMP, water quality facility, erosion and sediment control facility, and any other structure and appurtenance that provides for drainage. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.210 Drainage review.

“Drainage review” means an evaluation by the City staff of a proposed project’s compliance with the drainage requirements in the Surface Water Design Manual. The types of drainage review include: simplified drainage review, targeted drainage review, directed drainage review, full drainage review and large project drainage review. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.220 Erosion and sediment control.

“Erosion and sediment control” means any temporary or permanent measures taken to reduce erosion, control siltation and sedimentation and ensure that sediment-laden water does not leave the site or enter into wetlands or aquatic areas. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.230 Financial guarantee.

“Financial guarantee” means a form of financial security posted to do one or more of the following: ensure timely and proper completion of improvements; ensure compliance with this code; or provide secured warranty of materials, workmanship of improvements and design. “Financial guarantee” includes assignments of funds, cash deposit, surety bonds or other forms of financial security acceptable to the city manager. “Performance guarantee,” “maintenance guarantee” and “defect guarantee” are considered subcategories of financial guarantee. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.250 Flow control BMP.

“Flow control BMP” means a small-scale drainage facility or feature that is part of a development site strategy to use processes such as infiltration, dispersion, storage, evaporation, transpiration, forest retention, and reduced impervious surface footprint to mimic predeveloped hydrology and minimize stormwater runoff. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.260 Flow control BMP design and maintenance details.

“Flow control BMP design and maintenance details” means the diagrams/figures, design specifications, and maintenance instructions for each flow control BMP proposed on an individual site/lot that does not contain a flow control or water quality facility. These details are intended to be recordable to facilitate attachment to the declaration of covenant and grant of easement required for implementation of flow control BMPs on individual sites/lots. The City may waive all or a portion of this component if it determines there is no need to specify design details or maintenance instructions for certain proposed BMPs. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.270 Flow control BMP site plan (FCBMP site plan).

“Flow control BMP site plan (FCBMP site plan)” means a scale drawing of an individual site/lot used to show how required flow control BMPs will be applied to the target surfaces of an individual site/lot that does not contain a flow control or water quality facility. The FCBMP site plan is intended to be a recordable document (or reducible to a recordable document) that can be attached to the declaration of covenant and grant of easement required for implementation of flow control BMPs on individual sites/lots. DPER may allow a written version of this plan if they determine there is no need to illustrate the size and location of proposed flow control BMPs. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.280 Flow control facility.

“Flow control facility” means a drainage facility designed to mitigate the impacts of increased surface water and stormwater runoff generated by site development pursuant to the drainage requirements in this division. Flow control facilities are designed either to hold water for a considerable length of time and then release it by evaporation, plant transpiration and/or infiltration into the ground or to hold runoff for a short period of time and then release it to the conveyance system. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.290 Full drainage review.

“Full drainage review” means the evaluation required by KMC 13.35.040 of a proposed project’s compliance with the full range of core and special requirements in the Surface Water Design Manual. Full drainage review is required for any proposed project, unless the project is subject to simplified drainage review, targeted drainage review, directed drainage review, or large project drainage review that (A) would result in 2,000 square feet or more of new plus replaced impervious surface; or (B) would result in 7,000 square feet or more of land disturbing activity. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.300 Hard surface.

“Hard surface” means an impervious surface, a permeable pavement, or a vegetated roof. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.310 Groundwater.

“Groundwater” means all waters that exist beneath the land surface or beneath the bed of any stream, lake, or reservoir, or other body of surface water, whatever may be the geological formation or structure in which such water stands or flows, percolates or otherwise moves. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.320 High-use site.

“High-use site” means a commercial, industrial or street intersection site that generates a higher-than-average number of vehicle turnovers or has other characteristics that generate the potential for chronic oil accumulation. High-use sites include:

A. Commercial or industrial sites subject to:

1. An expected daily traffic count greater than 100 vehicles per 1,000 square feet of gross building area;

2. Petroleum storage or transfer in excess of 1,000 gallons per year, not including routine fuel oil storage or transfer; or

3. Use, storage or maintenance of a fleet of 25 or more diesel vehicles each weighing over 10 tons; or

B. Street intersections with average daily traffic counts of 25,000 vehicles or more on the main streetway and 15,000 or more vehicles on any intersecting streetway (excluding pedestrian or bicycle use improvement projects). [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.330 Hydraulically connected.

“Hydraulically connected” means connected through surface flow or water features such as wetlands or lakes. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.340 Impervious surface.

“Impervious surface” means a hard surface area that either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil mantle as under natural conditions before development; or that causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow compared to the flow present under natural conditions prior to development (see also “new impervious surface”). Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, roofs, walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots, or storage areas, areas that are paved, graveled or made of packed or oiled earthen materials or other surfaces that similarly impede the natural infiltration of surface water or stormwater. For the purposes of applying the impervious surface thresholds and exemptions contained in the Surface Water Design Manual, permeable pavement, vegetated roofs, and pervious surfaces with underdrains designed to collect stormwater runoff are considered impervious surface while an open uncovered flow control or water quality facility is not. However, for the purposes of computing runoff, uncovered flow control or water quality facilities shall be modeled as impervious surfaces. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.350 Improvement.

“Improvement” means a permanent, human-made physical change to land or real property including, but not limited to, buildings, streets (with or without curbs or gutters), sidewalks, crosswalks, parking lots, water mains, sanitary and storm sewers, drainage facilities, and landscaping. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.370 Land disturbing activity.

“Land disturbing activity” means an activity that results in a change in the existing soil cover, both vegetative and nonvegetative, or to the existing soil topography. “Land disturbing activity” includes, but is not limited to, demolition, construction, clearing, grading, filling, excavation and compaction. “Land disturbing activity” does not include tilling conducted as part of agricultural practices, landscaping maintenance or gardening. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.390 Landslide hazard drainage area.

“Landslide hazard drainage area” means an area tributary to a landslide hazard area (KMC 18.20.1570) where the City has determined that overland flows from new projects will pose a significant threat to health and safety because of their close proximity to the landslide hazard area. A delineation of known landslide hazard areas can be found in the Kenmore Critical Areas – Geologic Hazard Areas Map (KMC 18.55.130). [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.410 Licensed civil engineer.

“Licensed civil engineer” means a person registered with the State of Washington as a professional engineer in civil engineering. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.420 LID.

“LID” means low impact development. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.430 LID best management practices (LID BMPs).

“LID best management practices” or “LID BMPs” means distributed stormwater management practices, integrated into a project design, that emphasize predisturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration, filtration, storage, evaporation and transpiration. LID BMPs are referred to as flow control BMPs in the Surface Water Design Manual and include, but are not limited to, bioretention, permeable pavements, limited infiltration systems, roof downspout controls, dispersion, soil quality and depth, and minimal excavation foundations. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.440 LID principles.

“LID principles” means land use management strategies that emphasize conservation, on-site natural features, and site planning to minimize impervious surfaces, native vegetation loss and stormwater runoff. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.450 Low impact development.

“Low impact development” or “LID” means a stormwater and land use management strategy that strives to mimic predisturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration, filtration, storage, evaporation and transpiration by emphasizing conservation, use of on-site natural features, site planning, and distributed stormwater management practices that are integrated into a project design. Other common names for “LID” are “green stormwater infrastructure” or “natural drainage systems.” [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.460 Maintenance.

“Maintenance” means those usual activities taken to prevent a decline, lapse, or cessation in the use of currently serviceable structures, facilities, BMPs, equipment, or systems if there is no expansion of any of these, and there are no significant hydrologic impacts. Maintenance includes the repair or replacement of nonfunctional facilities and BMPs, and the replacement of existing structures with different types of structures, if the repair or replacement is required to meet current engineering standards or is required by one or more environmental permits and the functioning characteristics of the original facility or structure are not changed. For the purposes of applying this definition to the thresholds and requirements of this division, the city manager will determine whether the functioning characteristics of the original facility, structure, or BMP will remain sufficiently unchanged to consider replacement as maintenance. Drainage review is not required for projects proposing only maintenance. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.480 MS4.

“MS4” means the municipal separate storm sewer system. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.490 Municipal separate storm sewer system.

“Municipal separate storm sewer system” means a conveyance, or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains):

A. Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, parish, district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to State law) having jurisdiction over disposal of wastes, stormwater, or other wastes, including special districts under State law such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or a designated and approved management agency under Section 208 of the Clean Water Act that discharges to waters of Washington State;

B. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;

C. Which is not a combined sewer;

D. Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works as defined at 40 CFR 122.2; and

E. Which is defined as “large” or “medium” or “small” or otherwise designated by the Washington State Department of Ecology pursuant to 40 CFR 122.26. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.500 Native vegetated surface.

“Native vegetated surface” means a surface in which the soil conditions, ground cover, and species of vegetation are like those of the original native condition for the site. More specifically, this means (A) the soil is either undisturbed or has been treated according to the “native vegetated landscape” specifications in SWDM Appendix C, Section C.2.1.8; (B) the ground is either naturally covered with vegetation litter or has been top-dressed between plants with four inches of mulch consistent with the native vegetated landscape specifications in SWDM Appendix C; and (C) the vegetation is either (1) comprised predominantly of plant species, other than noxious weeds, that are indigenous to the coastal region of the Pacific Northwest and that reasonably could have been expected to occur naturally on the site; or (2) comprised of plant species specified for a native vegetated landscape in SWDM Appendix C. Examples of these plant species include trees such as Douglas fir, western hemlock, western red cedar, alder, big-leaf maple and vine maple; shrubs such as willow, elderberry, salmonberry and salal; and herbaceous plants such as sword fern, foam flower, and fireweed. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.510 National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.

“National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System” means the national program for issuing, modifying, revoking, and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements, under Sections 307, 318, 402, and 405 of the Clean Water Act, for the discharge of pollutants to surface waters of the State from point sources. These permits are referred to as NPDES permits and, in Washington State, are administered by the Washington State Department of Ecology. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.520 Natural discharge location.

“Natural discharge location” means the location where surface water and stormwater runoff leaves (or would leave if not infiltrated or retained) the site or project site under existing site conditions. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.530 New impervious surface.

“New impervious surface” means the addition of a hard or compacted surface such as roofs, pavement, gravel or dirt; or the addition of a more compacted surface, like paving over preexisting dirt or gravel. Permeable pavement and vegetated roofs are considered new impervious surface for purposes of determining whether the thresholds for application of minimum requirements are exceeded in the SWDM, as are lawns, landscaping, sports fields, golf courses, and other areas that have modified runoff characteristics resulting from the addition of underdrains designed to collect stormwater runoff. Open, uncovered retention/detention facilities shall not be considered impervious surfaces for purposes of determining whether the thresholds for application of minimum requirements in the SWDM are exceeded. Open, uncovered retention/detention facilities shall be considered impervious surfaces for purposes of runoff modeling. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.540 New pervious surface.

“New pervious surface” means the conversion of native vegetated surface or other native surface to a nonnative pervious surface (e.g., conversion of forest or meadow to pasture land, grass land, cultivated land, lawn, landscaping, bare soil, etc.) or any alteration of existing nonnative pervious surface that significantly increases surface water and stormwater runoff (e.g., conversion of pasture land, grass land, or cultivated land to lawn, landscaping or bare soil; or alteration of soil characteristics). [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.550 New pollution-generating impervious surface (new PGIS).

“New PGIS” means new impervious surface that is pollution-generating impervious surface or any alteration of existing pollution-generating impervious surface that changes the type of pollutants or results in increased pollution loads and/or concentrations. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.560 New pollution-generating pervious surface (new PGPS).

“New PGPS” means new pervious surface that is pollution-generating pervious surface or any alteration of existing pollution-generating pervious surface that changes the type of pollutants or results in increased pollution loads and/or concentrations. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.570 NPDES.

“NPDES” means National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.580 Open space.

“Open space” means any parcel, property or portion thereof classified for current use taxation under Chapter 84.34 RCW, or for which the development rights have been sold to the City. This definition includes lands which have been classified as open space, agricultural or timber lands under criteria contained in Chapter 84.34 RCW. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.590 Parcel.

“Parcel” means the smallest separately segregated unit or plot of land having an identified owner, boundaries and surface area which is documented for property tax purposes and given a tax lot number by the King County assessor. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.600 Permeable pavement.

“Permeable pavement” means pervious concrete, porous asphalt, permeable pavers or other forms of pervious or porous paving material intended to allow passage of water through the pavement section. It often includes an aggregate base that provides structural support and acts as a stormwater reservoir. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.610 Permeable soils.

“Permeable soils” means soil materials with a sufficiently rapid infiltration rate so as to greatly reduce or eliminate surface water and stormwater runoff. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.620 Person.

“Person” means an individual, and his or her agent or assign, municipality, political subdivision, government agency, partnership, corporation, business, or any other entity. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.630 Pervious surface.

“Pervious surface” means any surface material that allows stormwater to infiltrate into the ground. Examples include lawn, landscape, pasture, and native vegetation areas. Note: for purposes of threshold determination and runoff volume modeling for detention and treatment in the SWDM, vegetated roofs and permeable pavements are to be considered impervious surfaces along with lawns, landscaping, sports fields, golf courses, and other areas that have modified runoff characteristics resulting from the addition of underdrains. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.640 Pollution-generating impervious surface (PGIS).

“Pollution-generating impervious surface (PGIS)” means an impervious surface considered to be a significant source of pollutants in stormwater runoff. Such surfaces include those that are subject to: vehicular use, industrial activities, or storage of erodible or leachable materials, wastes, or chemicals; and that receive direct rainfall or the run-on or blow-in of rainfall. A covered parking area would be included if runoff from uphill could regularly run through it or if rainfall could regularly blow in and wet the pavement surface. PGIS includes metal roofs unless they are coated with an inert, nonleachable material (see SWDM Reference 11-E). PGIS includes roofs that are exposed to the venting of significant amounts of dusts, mists, or fumes from manufacturing, commercial, or other indoor activities. PGIS includes vegetated roofs exposed to pesticides, fertilizers, or loss of soil. Other roofing types that may pose risk but are not currently regulated are listed in the SWDM Reference 11-E. Lawns, landscaping, sports fields, golf courses, and other areas that have modified runoff characteristics resulting from the addition of underdrains that have the pollution-generating characteristics described under the “pollution-generating pervious surface” definition are also considered PGIS. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.650 Pollution-generating pervious surface (PGPS).

“Pollution-generating pervious surface (PGPS)” means a nonimpervious surface considered to be a significant source of pollutants in surface water and stormwater runoff. Such surfaces include those that are subject to vehicular use, industrial activities, storage of erodible or leachable materials, wastes, or chemicals, and that receive direct rainfall or the run-on or blow-in of rainfall; or subject to use of pesticides and fertilizers, or loss of soil. Such surfaces include, but are not limited to, the lawn and landscaped areas of a residential, commercial, or industrial site or land use, golf courses, parks, sports fields (natural and artificial turf), cemeteries, and County-standard grassed modular grid pavement. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.660 Project.

“Project” means any proposed action to alter or develop a site which may also require drainage review. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.670 Project site.

“Project site” means the portion of a site and any off-site areas subject to proposed project activities, alterations and improvements including those required by this code. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.680 Rate category.

“Rate category” means the classification in this division given to a parcel in the City based upon the type of land use on the parcel and the percentage of impervious surface area contained on the parcel. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.690 Redevelopment project.

“Redevelopment project” means a project that proposes to add, replace or modify impervious surface for purposes other than a residential subdivision or maintenance on a site that:

A. Is already substantially developed in a manner that is consistent with its current zoning or with a legal nonconforming use; or

B. Has an existing impervious surface coverage of 35 percent or more. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.700 Replaced impervious surface.

“Replaced impervious surface” means any existing impervious surface on the project site that is proposed to be removed and reestablished as impervious surface, excluding impervious surface removed for the sole purpose of installing utilities or performing maintenance on underground infrastructure. For structures, “removed” means the removal of buildings down to the foundation. For other impervious surfaces, “removed” means the removal down to base course or bare soil. It does not include the removal of pavement material through grinding or other surface modification unless the entire layer of PCC or AC is removed. Replaced impervious surface also includes impervious surface that is moved from one location to another on the project site where the following two conditions are met: (A) the area from which the impervious surface is moved from will be restored to the same or better runoff discharge characteristics as the area being covered by the moved impervious surface, and (B) impervious surface at the new location is either designated as non-pollution-generating or the pollution-generating characteristics remain unchanged compared to that of the original location. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.710 Replaced pollution-generating impervious surface (replaced PGIS).

“Replaced PGIS” means replaced impervious surface that is pollution-generating impervious surface. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.720 Residence.

“Residence” means a building or structure or portion thereof, designed for and used to provide a place of abode for human beings. The term residence includes the term “residential” or “residential unit” as referring to the type of or intended use of a building or structure. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.730 Residential parcel.

“Residential parcel” means any parcel which contains no more than three residences or three residential units which are within a single structure and used primarily for residential purposes. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.740 Runoff.

“Runoff” means that portion of water originating from rainfall and other precipitation that flows over the surface or just below the surface from where it fell and is found in drainage facilities, rivers, streams, springs, seeps, ponds, lakes, wetlands and shallow groundwater as well as on ground surfaces. For the purposes of this definition, “groundwater” means all waters that exist beneath the land surface or beneath the bed of any stream, lake, or reservoir, or other body of surface water, whatever may be the geological formation or structure in which such water stands or flows, percolates or otherwise moves. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.770 Shared facility.

“Shared facility” means a drainage facility designed to meet one or more of the requirements of KMC 13.35.050 for two or more separate projects contained within a basin. Shared facilities usually include shared financial commitments for those drainage facilities. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.780 Simplified drainage review.

“Simplified drainage review” means the drainage review for a proposed single-family residential project or agricultural project that: results in less than 5,000 square feet of new plus replaced pollution-generating impervious surface, results in less than three-quarter acre of pollution-generating pervious surface, limits target impervious and pervious surface as specified in SWDM Section 1.1.2.1, and meets the simplified drainage requirements specified in SWDM Appendix C, including flow control best management practices, erosion and sediment control measures, and drainage plan submittal requirements. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.790 Site.

“Site” means a single parcel, or two or more contiguous parcels that are under common ownership or documented legal control, used as a single parcel for a proposed project for the purposes of applying this code to a proposed project. For projects located primarily within dedicated rights-of-way, “site” includes the entire width of right-of-way subject to improvements proposed by the project. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.800 Stormwater.

“Stormwater” means the water produced during precipitation or snowmelt, which runs off, soaks into the ground, or is dissipated through evapotranspiration. Stormwater that runs off or soaks into the ground ultimately becomes surface water or groundwater. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.820 Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual.

“Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual” means the manual (and supporting documentation referenced or incorporated in the manual) describing best management practices and procedures for existing facilities and existing and new activities not covered by the Surface Water Design Manual. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.830 Subbasin.

“Subbasin” means a geographic area that:

A. Drains to a stream or water body named and noted on common maps; and

B. Is contained within a basin of the stream or water body. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.840 Surface water.

“Surface water” means the water that exists on land surfaces before, during, and after stormwater runoff occurs and includes, but is not limited to, the water found on ground surfaces and in drainage facilities, rivers, streams, springs, seeps, ponds, lakes, wetlands, and Puget Sound. It also includes shallow groundwater. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.850 Surface Water Design Manual (SWDM).

“Surface Water Design Manual” means the King County Surface Water Design Manual, dated April 24, 2016, and supporting documentation referenced or incorporated in the Manual, describing surface water and stormwater design and analysis requirements, procedures and guidance adopted pursuant to KMC 13.35.030. A link to obtain an electronic version of the Surface Water Design Manual is available on King County’s webpage. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.860 Surface water and stormwater management.

“Surface water and stormwater management” means the services provided by the surface water management program, including but not limited to planning, maintenance and operations, regulation, financial administration, public involvement, outreach and education, drainage investigation and enforcement, aquatic resource restoration, surface water and stormwater quality and environmental monitoring, intergovernmental relations and facility design and construction. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.870 Stormwater management program.

“Stormwater management program” means the set of actions and activities designed to reduce the discharge of pollutants from the MS4 to the maximum extent practicable and to protect water quality, and comprising the components listed in the City’s Western Washington Phase II municipal stormwater permit. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.880 Stormwater management program plan.

“Stormwater management program plan” means the documentation submitted to the Washington State Department of Ecology describing the status of implementation of the requirements of the City’s Western Washington Phase II municipal stormwater permit. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.890 Surface water master plan.

“Surface water master plan” means the 2015 City of Kenmore Surface Water Master Plan, which was an update to the 2001 and 2008 City of Kenmore Surface Water Management Plans. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.910 Undeveloped parcel.

“Undeveloped parcel” means any parcel which has not been altered from its native state by the construction, creation or addition of impervious or pervious surfaces, including the alteration of soil conditions, ground cover, and species of vegetation (such as landscaping). [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.920 Waters of the State.

“Waters of the State” means those waters as defined as “waters of the United States” in 40 CFR within the boundaries of Washington State and “waters of the State” as defined in Chapter 90.48 RCW. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.930 Water quality treatment facility.

“Water quality treatment facility” means a drainage facility designed to reduce pollutants once they are already contained in surface water and stormwater runoff. A water quality treatment facility is the structural component of best management practices (BMPs). When used singly or in combination, a water quality treatment facility reduces the potential for contamination of both surface and groundwaters. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


13.32.940 Western Washington Phase II municipal stormwater permit.

“Western Washington Phase II municipal stormwater permit” means the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System and State waste discharge general permit for discharges from small municipal separate storm sewers in Western Washington issued to the City by the Washington State Department of Ecology. [Ord. 16-0428 § 4 (Att. C).]


Chapter 13.35 SURFACE WATER RUNOFF POLICY

Sections:

13.35.010    Scope.

13.35.020    Purposes.

13.35.030    King County Surface Water Design Manual adopted.

13.35.040    Critical drainage and/or erosion areas.

13.35.050    Construction timing and final approval.

13.35.060    Liability insurance required.

13.35.070    Financial guarantees authorized.

13.35.080    Hazards.

13.35.090    Administration.

13.35.100    Enforcement.

13.35.110    Liberal construction.

13.35.120    Penalty.


13.35.010 Scope.

Compliance with the standards in this chapter and the Surface Water Design Manual does not necessarily mitigate all probable and significant environmental impacts to aquatic biota. Fishery resources and other living components of aquatic systems are affected by a complex set of factors. While employing a specific flow control standard may prevent stream channel erosion or instability, other factors affecting fish and other biotic resources (such as increases in stream flow velocities) are not directly addressed by the Surface Water Design Manual. Thus, compliance with this manual should not be construed as mitigating all probable and significant stormwater impacts, and additional mitigation may be required to protect aquatic biota in streams and wetlands. [Ord. 16-0428 § 6 (Att. D).]


13.35.020 Purposes.

The city council finds that this chapter is necessary in order to promote the public health, safety and welfare by providing for the comprehensive management of surface water and stormwater and erosion control, especially that which preserves and utilizes the many values of the City’s natural drainage system, including open space, fish and wildlife habitat, recreation, education and urban separation. The city council also finds that the City shall conduct programs to reduce flooding, erosion, and sedimentation, prevent and mitigate habitat loss, enhance groundwater recharge, and prevent water quality degradation through the implementation of comprehensive and thorough permit review, construction inspection, enforcement, and maintenance in order to promote the effectiveness of the requirements contained in this chapter. The city council also finds that elements of this chapter fulfill certain requirements of the Western Washington Phase II municipal stormwater permit, issued to the City by the Washington State Department of Ecology, pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1251) and the State law governing water pollution control (Chapter 90.48 RCW). [Ord. 16-0428 § 6 (Att. D).]


13.35.030 King County Surface Water Design Manual adopted.

A. The King County Surface Water Design Manual (SWDM), dated April 24, 2016, as modified by subsection B of this section, is hereby adopted for use in the City. Revisions of the SWDM by King County shall be applicable in the City only if approved by the city council.

B. Modifications to the Surface Water Design Manual. The city council adopts the Kenmore Addendum to the 2016 King County Surface Water Design Manual for the following purposes:

1. To translate specific wording or reference from King County to the City;

2. To cross-reference City ordinances and City maps in lieu of King County ordinances and maps;

3. To provide a linkage or reference to other City requirements such as more restrictive requirements outlined in basin plans and the City’s critical areas ordinances; and

4. To provide exceptions and additions to the KCSWDM.

C. Interpretation. The city manager is authorized to interpret the Surface Water Design Manual, as amended, adopt interpretive guidelines, promulgate rules, and resolve conflicts or inconsistencies. [Ord. 16-0428 § 6 (Att. D).]


13.35.040 Critical drainage and/or erosion areas.

Development in areas where the city manager has determined that the existing flooding, drainage and/or erosion conditions present an imminent likelihood of harm to the welfare and safety of the surrounding community shall meet special drainage requirements set by the city manager until such time as the community hazard is alleviated. Such conditions may include the limitation of the volume of discharge from the subject property to predevelopment levels, preservation of wetlands or other natural drainage features or other controls necessary to protect against community hazard. Where alternate facility designs or methods will produce a compensating or comparable result in the public interest and which will meet this section’s objectives of safety, function, appearance, environmental protection and maintainability, based upon sound engineering judgment, an adjustment to the special drainage requirements promulgated under this section may be proposed; provided, that the resulting development shall be subject to all of the remaining terms and conditions of this chapter. Where application of this section will deny all reasonable use of a property and a facility or design that produces a compensating or comparable result cannot be obtained, then a best practicable alternative may be obtained, to be determined by the city manager according to the adjustment process defined in the Surface Water Design Manual. [Ord. 16-0428 § 6 (Att. D).]


13.35.050 Construction timing and final approval.

A. No work related to permanent or temporary storm drainage control for a permitted development may proceed without the approval of the city manager.

B. Erosion and sediment control measures associated with both the interim and permanent drainage systems shall be:

1. Constructed in accordance with the approved plan prior to any grading or land clearing other than that associated with an approved erosion and sediment control plan; and

2. Satisfactorily sequenced and maintained until all improvements, restoration, and landscaping associated with the permit and approvals for the project are completed and the potential for on-site erosion has passed.

C. The applicant shall have constructed and have in operation those portions of the drainage facilities necessary to accommodate the control of surface water and stormwater runoff discharging from the site before the construction of any other improvements or buildings on the site, or to final recording of a plat or short plat, unless, upon written request of the applicant, the city manager authorizes recording before construction of facilities in order to minimize impacts that may result from construction of facilities during inappropriate times of the year. [Ord. 16-0428 § 6 (Att. D).]


13.35.060 Liability insurance required.

The applicant required to construct the drainage facility pursuant to this chapter shall maintain a combined single limit per occurrence liability policy in the amount established by the City risk management program, which shall name the City as an additional insured and protect the City from liability relating to the construction or maintenance of the facility until construction approval or acceptance for maintenance, whichever is last. Proof of this required liability policy shall be provided to the city manager prior to commencing construction of any drainage facility. If this liability insurance is not kept in effect as required, the City may initiate enforcement action pursuant to Chapter 1.20 KMC. [Ord. 16-0428 § 6 (Att. D).]


13.35.070 Financial guarantees authorized.

The city manager is authorized to require all applicants who are issued permits or approvals under the provisions of this division to post financial guarantees consistent with the provisions of KMC Title 21. [Ord. 16-0428 § 6 (Att. D).]


13.35.080 Hazards.

A. Whenever the city manager determines that any existing construction site, erosion and sedimentation problem and/or drainage facility poses a hazard to life and limb, endangers any property, and/or adversely affects the condition or capacity of other drainage facilities, the safety and operation of City right-of-way, utilities, and/or other property owned or maintained by the City, the applicant/person to whom the permit was issued pursuant to KMC 13.35.040, the owner of the property within which the drainage facility is located, the applicant/person responsible for operation and maintenance of the facility, and/or other person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the city manager, shall, within the period specified therein, repair or otherwise address the cause of the hazardous situation in conformance with the requirements of this chapter.

B. Should the city manager have reasonable cause to believe that the situation is so hazardous as to preclude written notice, the city manager may take the measures necessary to eliminate the hazardous situation; provided, that the city manager shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner before acting. In such instances the applicant of whom a drainage plan was required pursuant to KMC 13.35.040, the owner of the property and/or the person responsible for the maintenance of the facility shall be obligated for the payment of all costs incurred. If costs are incurred and a financial guarantee pursuant to this chapter or other City requirement has been posted, the city manager shall have the authority to collect against the financial guarantee to cover costs incurred. [Ord. 16-0428 § 6 (Att. D).]


13.35.090 Administration.

A. The city manager is authorized to promulgate and adopt administrative rules for the purpose of implementing and enforcing the provisions of this chapter. The administrative rules shall be on file with the city manager.

B. The city manager is authorized to develop procedures for applying adopted rules and regulations during the review of permit applications for the development of land. These procedures may also be contained in the Surface Water Design Manual.

C. The city manager is authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

D. Whenever necessary to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter or to monitor for proper function of drainage facilities, or whenever the city manager has reasonable cause to believe that violations of this chapter are present or operating on a subject property or portion thereof, the city manager may enter such premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the city manager by this chapter; provided, that if such premises or portion thereof is occupied, the city manager shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the premises or portion thereof and demand entry.

E. Proper ingress and egress shall be provided to the city manager to inspect, monitor or perform any duty imposed upon the city manager by this chapter. The city manager shall notify the responsible party in writing of failure to comply with this access requirement. Failing to obtain a response within seven days from the receipt of notification, the city manager may order the work required completed or otherwise address the cause of improper access. The obligation for the payment of all costs that may be incurred or expended by the City in causing such work to be done shall thereby be imposed on the person holding title to the subject property. [Ord. 16-0428 § 6 (Att. D).]


13.35.100 Enforcement.

The city manager is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the ordinances and resolutions codified in it, and any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder pursuant to the enforcement and penalty provisions of Chapters 1.15 and 1.20 KMC. [Ord. 16-0428 § 6 (Att. D).]


13.35.110 Liberal construction.

This chapter is exempted from the rule of strict construction and shall be liberally construed to give full effect to the objectives and purposes for which it was enacted. [Ord. 16-0428 § 6 (Att. D).]


13.35.120 Penalty.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the civil and criminal penalties set forth in Chapter 1.15 KMC. [Ord. 16-0428 § 6 (Att. D).]


Chapter 13.40 SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM

Sections:

13.40.010    Authority.

13.40.020    Purpose.

13.40.030    Applicability.

13.40.040    Policy.

13.40.050    Rate structure.

13.40.060    Rate adjustments and appeals.

13.40.070    Billing procedure.

13.40.080    Delinquencies and foreclosures.

13.40.085    Stormwater capital facilities charge.

13.40.090    Administrative procedures.

13.40.100    Report of revenue and expenditure analysis.

13.40.110    Penalty.

13.40.120    Adopted – Surface water loan program.

13.40.130    Adoption – Stormwater side line repair program.


13.40.010 Authority.

A. There is hereby created and established the surface water management program of the City under which the provisions of this chapter shall be carried out.

B. The program created in this section shall be administered by the City.

C. Whenever necessary to examine the property characteristics of a particular parcel for the purposes of implementing this chapter, the city manager may enter any property or portion thereof at reasonable times in compliance with the following procedures:

1. If the property or portion thereof is occupied, the city manager shall present identification credentials, state the reason for entry and request entry;

2. If the property or portion thereof is unoccupied, the city manager shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the property or portion thereof and request entry; and

3. Unless entry is consented to by the owner or person in control of any property or portion thereof, the city manager, before entry, shall obtain a search warrant as authorized by the laws of the State of Washington.

D. The city manager is authorized to enforce this chapter, the ordinances and resolutions codified in it and any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder pursuant to the enforcement and penalty provisions of Chapter 1.20 KMC.

E. The program may provide services related to surface water and stormwater management, including but not limited to basin planning, facilities maintenance, regulation, financial administration, public involvement, drainage investigation and enforcement, aquatic resource restoration, surface and stormwater quality and environmental monitoring, natural surface water drainage system planning, intergovernmental relations, and facility design and construction. The program may contract for services with interested municipalities or special districts including but not limited to sewer and water districts, school districts, port districts or other governmental agencies. [Ord. 16-0428 § 8 (Att. E).]


13.40.020 Purpose.

It is the finding of the City that the surface water management program is necessary in order to promote public health, safety and welfare by establishing and operating a comprehensive approach to surface water and stormwater problems which would reduce flooding, erosion and sedimentation, prevent and mitigate habitat loss, enhance groundwater recharge and prevent water quality degradation. This comprehensive approach includes the following elements: basin planning, land use regulation, construction of facilities, maintenance, public education, and provision of surface water and stormwater management services. It is the finding of the City that the most cost-effective and beneficial approach to surface water and stormwater management is through preventative actions and protection of the natural drainage system. In approaching surface water and stormwater problems, the surface water management program shall give priority to methods which provide protection or enhancement of the natural surface water drainage system over means which primarily involve construction of new drainage facilities or systems. The purpose of the rates and charges established herein is to provide a method for payment of all or any part of the cost and expense of surface water and stormwater management services or to pay or secure the payment of all or any portion of any issue of general obligation or revenue bonds issued for such services. These rates and charges are necessary in order to promote the public health, safety and welfare by minimizing uncontrolled surface water and stormwater, erosion, and water pollution, to preserve and utilize the many values of the City’s natural drainage system including water quality, open space, fish and wildlife habitat, recreation, education, urban separation and drainage facilities, and to provide for the comprehensive management and administration of surface water and stormwater. [Ord. 16-0428 § 8 (Att. E).]


13.40.030 Applicability.

Developed parcels within the City shall be billed each year for surface water and stormwater management services pursuant to RCW 36.89.080. [Ord. 16-0428 § 8 (Att. E).]


13.40.040 Policy.

A. It is the finding of the City that basins are shared with other municipalities and cities. In order to achieve a comprehensive approach to surface water and stormwater management, the City and municipalities within a specific basin should coordinate surface water and stormwater management services. In addition, the program may contract for services with interested municipalities.

B. It is the finding of the City that many of the difficulties found in the management of surface water and stormwater problems are contributed to by the general lack of public knowledge about the relationship between human actions and surface water and stormwater management. In order to achieve a comprehensive approach to surface water and stormwater management, the City should provide general information to the public about land use and human activities which impact surface water and stormwater management.

C. It is the finding of the City that developed parcels contribute to an increase in surface water and stormwater runoff. This increase in surface water and stormwater runoff results in the need to establish rates and charges to finance the City’s activities in surface water and stormwater management. Developed parcels shall be subject to the rates and charges of the surface water management program based on their surface water and stormwater percentage of impervious surface coverage on the parcel and the total acreage of the parcel.

D. It is the finding of the City that undeveloped parcels do not contribute as much as developed parcels to an increase in surface water and stormwater runoff into the surface water and stormwater management system. Undeveloped properties shall be exempt from the rates and charges of the surface water management program.

E. It is the finding of the City that maintained drainage facilities mitigate the increased runoff contribution of developed parcels by providing on-site drainage control. Parcels served by retention/detention facilities which were required for development of the parcel pursuant to Chapter 13.35 KMC and approved by the City or can be demonstrated as required in KMC 13.40.060 by the property owner to provide detention/retention of surface water and stormwater to the standards in Chapter 13.35 KMC shall receive a discount as provided in the rates and charges of the surface water management program, if the facility is maintained at the parcel owner’s expense to the standard established by the department.

F. It is a finding of the City that open space properties provide a benefit to the surface water and stormwater management system by the retention of property in an undeveloped state. Open space properties shall receive a discount from the rates and charges to encourage the retention of property as open space.

G. It is a finding of the City that the majority of parcels are residential. The administrative cost of calculating the service charge individually for each residential parcel and maintaining accurate information would be very high. A flat charge for residential parcels is less costly to administer than calculating a separate charge for each parcel. Therefore, residential parcels shall be charged a flat charge based upon an average amount of impervious surface allowed per maximum impervious percentages set forth in Chapter 18.21 KMC.

H. City streets and State highway programs provide substantial annual programs for the construction and maintenance of drainage facilities, and the streets systems and their associated drainage facilities serve as an integral part of the surface water and stormwater management system. City and State streets will not be charged a service fee.

I. It is the finding of the City that comprehensive management of surface water and stormwater runoff must include anticipation of future growth and development in the design and improvement of the surface water and stormwater management system. Service charge revenue needs shall be based upon the present and future requirements of the surface water and stormwater management system, and these needs shall be considered when determining the rates and charges of the program.

J. It is the finding of the City that basin plans are essential to establishing a comprehensive approach to a capital improvement program, maintenance of facilities and regulation of new developments. A plan should analyze the measures needed to control surface water and stormwater runoff which results from existing and anticipated development within the basin. The measures investigated to control runoff should include land use regulation such as setback requirements or community plan revisions which revise land use densities as well as the use of drainage facilities. A plan also should recommend the quantity and water quality runoff control measures required to further the purposes set forth in KMC 13.40.020, and community goals. The institutional requirements and regulations, including but not limited to land use management, funding needs, and incentives for preserving the natural surface water drainage system should be identified in the plan. The proposed ordinances and regulations necessary to implement the plan shall be transmitted to the council simultaneously with the plan.

K. It is the finding of the City that areas with development related surface water and stormwater problems require comprehensive management of surface water and stormwater. The use of low impact development best management practices and principles represent the City’s preferred and commonly used approach for site development.

L. It is the finding of the City that additional surface water and stormwater runoff problems may be caused by new land use development if not properly mitigated both through protection of natural systems and through constructed improvements. The Surface Water Design Manual, this title and KMC Titles 15, 18 and 19 have been adopted by the City to mitigate the impact of land use development. Further mitigation of these impacts is based on expertise which continues to evolve as new information on our natural systems is obtained and new techniques are discovered. The surface water management program, through reconnaissance studies, basin plans, and other special studies, will continuously provide valuable information on the existing problems and areas of the natural drainage system that need special protection. The City is researching and developing methods to protect the natural drainage system through zoning, buffering and setbacks to alleviate existing problems. Setback and buffering measures allow natural preservation of wetlands and stream corridors to occur, alleviate erosion and water pollution and provide a safe environment for the small mammals and fish which inhabit critical areas. Based upon the findings in this subsection, and as information and methods become available, the city manager, as appropriate, shall draft and submit to the council regulations and development standards to allow protection of the surface water and stormwater management system including natural drainage systems.

M. The program will maintain long-term fiscal viability and fund solvency for all of its related funds. All required capital and operating expenditures will be covered by service charges, stormwater capital facilities charges, and other revenues generated or garnered by the program. The program will pay all current operating expenses from current revenues and will maintain an operating reserve to minimize service impacts due to revenue or expenditure variances from plan during a fiscal year. This reserve will be calculated based on the historic variability of revenue and expenditures. The program will adopt a strategic financial planning approach which recognizes the dynamic nature of the program’s fiscal operating environment. Long-term projections will be updated in the program’s adopted strategic plan. One-time revenues will be dedicated to one-time-only expenditures and will not be used to support ongoing requirements. The program’s approach to financial reporting and disclosure will be comprehensive, open, and accessible.

N. The program shall prepare an annual, multi-year capital improvement program which encompasses all of the program’s activities related to the acquisition, construction, replacement, or renovation of capital facilities or equipment. All proposed new facilities will be subject to a consistent and rigorous needs analysis. The program’s capital facilities will be planned and financed to ensure that the benefits of the facilities and the costs for them are balanced over time.

O. The program will manage its debt, if any, to ensure continued high credit quality, access to credit markets, and financial flexibility. All of the program’s debt management activities will be conducted to maintain at least the current credit ratings assigned to the City’s debt by the major credit rating agencies and to maintain an adequate debt service coverage ratio. Long-term debt will not be used to support operating expenses. The program will develop and maintain a central system for all debt-related records which will include all official statements, bid documents, ordinances, indentures, leases, etc., for all of the program’s debt and will accurately account for all interested earnings in debt-related funds. These records will be designed to ensure that the program is in compliance with all debt covenants and with State and Federal laws.

P. It is the finding of the City that surface water, groundwater and stormwater impact public properties, rights-of-way, and privately owned properties within the City. Except as set forth in KMC 13.40.120 and 13.40.130, unless the City agrees to maintain and operate a drainage facility in accordance with this section, a drainage facility shall be a private facility, and the person or persons holding title to the property shall be responsible for operation and maintenance of the drainage facility. The City may assume ownership, maintenance and/or operation of drainage facilities only if the following conditions have been met:

1. The drainage facility is located within a right-of-way; or

2. The drainage facility is not located within a right-of-way; and:

a. All necessary easements or dedications entitling the City to properly access, operate and maintain the facility have been conveyed to the City;

b. The facility is located on residential property or properties;

c. The facility is required for reasons beyond the control of the residential property owner;

d. The facility does not contain waters of the State;

e. The facility is not required primarily as a result of impacts associated with groundwater;

f. The facility is not required primarily as a result of runoff from neighboring private properties; and

g. Before assuming maintenance of privately maintained drainage facilities, the City will consider:

(1) The cost of assuming maintenance and operations;

(2) The public benefit of assuming maintenance and operations; or

3. Operation and maintenance of the drainage facility will contribute to protecting or improving the health, safety and welfare of the community based upon review of the existence of or potential for:

a. Flooding;

b. Downstream erosion;

c. Property damage due to improper function of the facility;

d. Safety hazard associated with the facility;

e. Degradation of water quality or in-stream resources; or

f. Degradation to the general welfare of the community. [Ord. 19-0503 § 2; Ord. 19-0480 § 2; Ord. 16-0428 § 8 (Att. E).]


13.40.050 Rate structure.

A. The service charge revenue needs of the program are based upon all or any part, as determined by the city council, of the cost of surface water and stormwater management services or to pay or secure the payment of all or any portion of any issue of general obligation or revenue bonds issued for that purpose.

B. There is hereby imposed upon all developed properties in the City annual service charges as imposed by the city council by resolution. [Ord. 16-0428 § 8 (Att. E).]


13.40.060 Rate adjustments and appeals.

A. Any person billed for service charges may file a “request for rate adjustment” with the City within three years of the date from which the bill was sent. However, filing of such a request does not extend the period for payment of the charge.

B. Requests for rate adjustment may be granted or approved by the city manager only when one of the following conditions exists:

1. The parcel is owned and is the personal residence of a person or persons determined by the county assessor as qualified for a low-income senior citizen property tax exemption authorized under RCW 84.36.381. Parcels qualifying under this subsection shall be exempt from all charges imposed in KMC 13.40.050;

2. The acreage of the parcel charged is in error;

3. The parcel is nonresidential and the actual impervious surface coverage of the parcel charged places it in a different rate category than the rate category assigned by the City;

4. The parcel is nonresidential and the parcel meets the definition of open space in KMC 13.32.580. Parcels qualifying under this subsection will be charged only for the area of impervious surface and at the rate which the parcel is classified under using the total parcel acreage;

5. The parcel is served by one or more retention/detention facilities required pursuant to Chapter 13.35 KMC, or can be demonstrated by the property owner to provide detention/retention of surface water and stormwater to the standards in Chapter 13.35 KMC, and is maintained at the expense of the parcel owner to the standards required by the City. Parcels served by facilities permitted: (a) prior to September 1, 1998, shall receive a 10 percent reduction, (b) on or after September 1, 1998, and prior to January 1, 2010, shall receive a 20 percent reduction, (c) on or after January 1, 2010, and prior to December 31, 2016, shall receive a 30 percent discount, and (d) on or after December 31, 2016, shall receive a 40 percent reduction. Larger parcels, which are partially served by a facility, may receive a partial reduction based on the percentage of the parcel served, with only the portion of the parcel being served by the facility receiving the reduction;

6. The service charge bill was otherwise not calculated in accordance with this chapter.

C. The property owner shall have the burden of proving that the rate adjustment sought should be granted.

D. Decisions on requests for rate adjustments shall be made by the city manager based on information submitted by the applicant and by the City within 30 days of the adjustment request except when additional information is needed. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the city manager’s decision. If an adjustment is granted which reduces the charge for the current year or two prior years, the applicant shall be refunded the amount overpaid in the current and two prior years.

E. If the city manager finds that a service charge bill has been undercharged, then either an amended bill shall be issued which reflects the increase in the service charge or the undercharged amount will be added to the next year’s bill. This amended bill shall be due and payable under KMC 13.40.080. The city manager may include in the bill the amount undercharged for two previous billing years in addition to the current bill.

F. Decisions of the city manager on requests for rate adjustments shall be final unless, within 30 days of the date the decision was mailed, the applicant submits in writing to the city manager a notice of appeal setting forth a brief statement of the grounds for appeal and requesting a hearing before the city hearing examiner. The examiner’s decision shall be a final decision pursuant to KMC 19.30.070. [Ord. 16-0428 § 8 (Att. E).]


13.40.070 Billing procedure.

A. All property subject to charges of the program shall be billed based on the property characteristics existing on November 1st of the year prior to the billing year and at the rate as set forth in KMC 13.40.060. Billing year is the year that the bills are sent. The service charge shall be displayed and billed on the annual property tax statement for the parcel and shall be mailed to the name and address shown on the real property tax roll at the time annual property tax bills are prepared. Parcels which are exempt from property taxes and do not receive an annual property tax statement will receive a bill only for the service charge. If a payment less than the sum of the total property tax plus service charge or less than the sum of one-half of the property tax plus one-half of the service charge is received for a combined property tax and service charge, and the parcel owner has not otherwise specified, the city manager shall first apply the payment to the annual property tax of the parcel pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 84.56 RCW and then apply any remaining amount to the service charge.

B. The total amount of the service charge shall be due and payable to the city manager on or before the thirtieth day of April and shall be delinquent after that date; however, if one-half of such service charge is paid on or before the said thirtieth day of April, the remainder shall be due and payable on or before the thirty-first day of October and shall be delinquent after that date.

C. Parcel characteristics affecting the service charge which are altered after November 1st of any year shall not be a basis for calculation of the service charge until after December 31st of the following year. [Ord. 16-0428 § 8 (Att. E).]


13.40.080 Delinquencies and foreclosures.

A. Delinquent service charges shall bear interest as provided in RCW 36.89.092 at the rate of 12 percent per annum, or such rate as may hereafter be authorized by law, computed on a monthly basis from the date of delinquency until paid. Interest shall be calculated at the rate in effect at the time of payment of the charges regardless of when the charges were first delinquent.

B. Pursuant to RCW 36.89.093, the City shall have a lien for delinquent service charges, including interest thereon, against any property subject to service charges. The lien shall be superior to all other liens and encumbrances except general taxes and local and special assessments. Pursuant to RCW 36.89.093, such lien shall be effective and shall be enforced and foreclosed in the same manner as the foreclosure of real property tax liens as provided in RCW 36.94.150. The City may commence to foreclose a surface water management service charge lien after three years from the date surface water management charges become delinquent. Pursuant to RCW 36.94.150, collections shall include costs of foreclosure in addition to service charges and interest. [Ord. 16-0428 § 8 (Att. E).]


13.40.085 Stormwater capital facilities charge.

A. There is hereby established a stormwater capital facilities charge for all development, as defined in KMC 13.32.160, that will create impervious surface, as defined in KMC 13.32.340. The charge shall be applied to each parcel, as defined in KMC 13.32.590. If the charge was paid for development of a parcel, and an applicant, as defined in KMC 13.32.040, proposes additional development or redevelopment of the parcel, the charge shall apply only to new impervious surfaces, as defined in KMC 13.32.530. The city council shall establish the stormwater capital facilities charge by resolution.

B. The stormwater capital facilities charge shall be based upon equivalent residential units (ERU) applicable to the parcel. An ERU shall be 2,500 square feet of impervious surface, which is the assumed square feet of impervious surface for a single-family residential parcel. A single-family residential parcel shall be one ERU. A commercial or multifamily parcel shall be the number of ERUs calculated by dividing the total square feet of impervious surface (rounded down to the nearest whole square foot) by 2,500 (the quotient rounded to the nearest tenth). A commercial or multifamily parcel shall be a minimum of one ERU.

C. There is established a stormwater capital fund into which shall be paid all stormwater capital facility charges collected under this section.

D. The public works department shall establish a system for recording payments of stormwater capital facilities charges so that credit may be recorded and given for stormwater capital facilities charges paid by applicants in connection with development.

E. The owners of all property within the City being improved or developed shall be responsible for the installation of an adequate surface water and stormwater management system within the property in conformity with City standards and the City surface water master plan. Payment of stormwater capital facilities charges shall not relieve property owners and developers from installation of such systems or from construction of improvements to downstream surface water or water facilities as may be necessary to convey surface water or stormwater from the property to receiving waters or to a regional surface water or stormwater facility without downstream flooding.

F. The following development shall be exempt from payment of the stormwater capital facilities charge:

1. Development located within City right-of-way or City-owned property.

2. Alteration or expansion of a single detached dwelling unit, as defined in KMC 18.20.840, on a single-family residential parcel.

3. Construction of a shelter for temporary placement, as defined in KMC 18.20.2540, or a low-income housing project that serves low-income persons, as determined by the city manager.

4. Any development determined to be appropriate for exemption by the city manager. [Ord. 19-0480 § 1.]


13.40.090 Administrative procedures.

The city manager shall develop administrative procedures and take all necessary actions relating to the implementation of this chapter. This includes, but is not limited to, procedures for the programs established in KMC 13.40.120 and 13.40.130, procedures for the imposition and collection of service charges and/or for filing of liens and initiation of foreclosure on delinquent accounts and the collection of the debt service portion of the service charge in areas that annex or incorporate. [Ord. 19-0503 § 3; Ord. 16-0428 § 8 (Att. E).]


13.40.100 Report of revenue and expenditure analysis.

The surface water management program shall report to the city council every three years regarding the results of a revenue and expenditure analysis for capital improvement projects in the City. [Ord. 16-0428 § 8 (Att. E).]


13.40.110 Penalty.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as set forth in Chapter 1.15 KMC. [Ord. 16-0428 § 8 (Att. E).]


13.40.120 Adopted – Surface water loan program.

A. The city council adopts the surface water loan program, as established in this section. Property owners who meet the requirements of this section may qualify for a loan to repair private stormwater facilities that connect to City-owned surface water facilities. The principal amount of the loan authorized by this section shall not exceed the amount approved by the city manager, less any private financing or prepayment of such repairs by the owner. The actual amount financed shall be determined under the following formula:

Owner’s share of stormwater project equals total project cost less private financing or prepayment (if any) minus total loan amount (not to exceed amount approved by city manager).

B. In order for a property owner to qualify for a loan under this section, the property to which the stormwater maintenance will occur must be:

1. Located within the City of Kenmore;

2. Developed with an existing single-family home served by an existing stormwater system or that includes an existing stormwater facility;

3. Qualify for needed maintenance as set forth in the City’s Operations and Maintenance Practices and Policies Manual;

4. Qualify for any additional eligibility requirements as determined by the city manager;

5. Has not received a loan under this program for a minimum of 10 years.

C. Commercial property, vacant property, property used for multifamily dwelling units, and other nonresidential property shall not be eligible for the loan program. New construction of single-family homes shall not be eligible for the loan program.

D. Applicants must apply for the loan before the maintenance project is completed. In order to qualify for a loan under this section, the property owner must fill out a credit application and pass an appropriate credit check. The City reserves the right to exercise reasonable business judgment and to disapprove any loan based upon a credit check. The application must be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in an amount set in the City’s fee resolution.

E. The terms of the loan shall, at a minimum, be as follows:

1. The loan will be structured as a simple promissory note.

2. The term of the note shall not exceed 10 years, commencing at the time the City pays the loan amount in the manner set forth herein.

3. The note will bear interest at the rate which is based on the City’s current Washington State local government investment pool net earnings rate at the time of the loan.

4. The loan will be secured by an interest in the property. The property interest may take the form of a lien, a deed of trust, or such other instrument as may be acceptable to the city finance director and city attorney.

5. The note shall provide for acceleration of the principal upon default in any payment. In the event of default, the City shall have all available remedies, including, but not limited to, foreclosure of its interest in the property, notification of credit bureaus, use of collection agencies, and terminating service.

6. Loan principal and interest charges will be billed by the City and due monthly. Appropriate penalties may be imposed by the City for delinquent accounts.

7. There shall be no penalty for prepayment.

8. The note will contain a due on sale clause which provides for payment in full of all outstanding principal and interest upon sale of the property.

9. The billing procedure, frequency of billing, collection and enforcement of delinquent loan installment payments shall be set forth in the applicable loan instrument.

F. In no event shall the loan be used to pay the City’s annual service charges imposed under KMC 13.40.050, or any other charge not included in the maintenance/repair of the private stormwater facilities.

G. Nothing in this section requires any person to finance any portion of private stormwater repair charges through the City. After completion of any repairs authorized under this program, all property owners receiving loans under this program shall acknowledge that all future maintenance, repair, replacement and operation of stormwater facilities located on private property are the sole responsibility of said property owners.

H. Loans shall be limited by available funds. The amount of available funds shall be at the discretion of the city council and shall be determined periodically by city council motion, resolution, or ordinance. All funds used for loan purposes shall be derived from revenues of the surface water and stormwater management services established under this chapter. [Ord. 19-0503 § 4.]


13.40.130 Adoption – Stormwater side line repair program.

A. Pursuant to RCW 35.67.020(1), the city council adopts the stormwater side line repair program, as established in this section. Consistent with the policy set forth in KMC 13.40.040(N), the city manager may include in the surface water management program’s annual, multi-year capital improvement program projects relating to repair or replacement of stormwater facilities or equipment on private property if determined to be of benefit to the City’s operation and continued longevity of City-owned stormwater and surface water facilities. Such projects will be subject to a consistent and rigorous needs analysis, as determined by the city manager.

B. The city manager shall develop eligibility criteria for the projects authorized in subsection A of this section, which eligibility criteria will include, but not be limited to, projects that confer benefits to the City, such as reduced localized flooding, reduced habitat degradation, reduced landslide events, reduced damage to property, or prolonging the lifespan of City-owned stormwater facilities.

C. The City or its contractors and agents may perform the projects identified by the city manager only if the owner of the property or authorized agent signs a right of entry agreement, in a form approved by the city attorney, prior to such project occurring. Said right of entry agreement shall include acknowledgment from the affected property owners that all future maintenance, repair, replacement and operation of stormwater facilities located on private property are the sole responsibility of said property owners.

D. The amount of available funds for the program shall be at the discretion of the city council and shall be determined periodically by city council motion, resolution, or ordinance. All funds used for program purposes shall be derived from revenues of the surface water and stormwater management services established under this chapter. [Ord. 19-0503 § 5.]


Chapter 13.45 WATER QUALITY

Sections:

13.45.010    Purpose.

13.45.020    Discharges into City waters.

13.45.030    Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual.

13.45.040    Administration.

13.45.050    Enforcement.

13.45.060    Hazards.

13.45.070    Criminal penalty.

13.45.080    Civil penalties for water quality.

13.45.090    Construction – Intent.

13.45.100    Penalty.


13.45.010 Purpose.

A. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the City’s surface and groundwater quality by providing minimum requirements for reducing and controlling the discharge of contaminants. The city council recognizes that water quality degradation can result either directly from one discharge or through the collective impact of many small discharges. Therefore, this chapter prohibits the discharge of contaminants into surface water and stormwater and groundwater, and outlines preventive measures to restrict contaminants from entering such waters. These measures include the implementation of best management practices (BMPs) by the residents of the City.

B. The city council finds this chapter is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City and the integrity of the City’s resources for the benefit of all by: minimizing or eliminating water quality degradation; preserving and enhancing the suitability of waters for recreation, fishing, and other beneficial uses; and preserving and enhancing the aesthetic quality and biotic integrity of the water. The city council recognizes that implementation of this chapter is required under the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. In meeting the intent of the Clean Water Act, the city council also recognizes the importance of maintaining economic viability while providing necessary environmental protection and believes this chapter helps achieve both goals. [Ord. 16-0428 § 10 (Att. F).]


13.45.020 Discharges into City waters.

A. It is unlawful for any person to discharge any contaminants into surface water and stormwater or groundwater. Contaminants include, but are not limited to, the following:

1. Trash or debris;

2. Construction materials;

3. Petroleum products including but not limited to oil, gasoline, grease, fuel oil, and heating oil;

4. Antifreeze and other automotive products;

5. Metals in either particulate or dissolved form;

6. Flammable or explosive materials;

7. Radioactive material;

8. Batteries;

9. Acids, alkalis, or bases;

10. Paints, stains, resins, lacquers, or varnishes;

11. Degreasers and solvents;

12. Drain cleaners;

13. Pesticides, herbicides, or fertilizers;

14. Steam cleaning wastes;

15. Soaps, detergents, or ammonia;

16. Swimming pool backwash;

17. Chlorine, bromine, and other disinfectants;

18. Heated water;

19. Domestic animal wastes;

20. Sewage;

21. Recreational vehicle waste;

22. Animal carcasses;

23. Food wastes;

24. Bark and other fibrous materials;

25. Collected lawn clippings, leaves, or branches;

26. Silt, sediment, or gravel;

27. Dyes (except as stated in subsection (E)(1) of this section);

28. Chemicals not normally found in uncontaminated water; and

29. Any hazardous material or waste not listed above.

B. Any connection, identified by the city manager, that could convey anything not composed entirely of surface water and stormwater directly to surface water and stormwater or groundwater is an illicit connection and is prohibited, with the following exceptions:

1. Connections conveying allowable discharges;

2. Connections conveying discharges pursuant to an NPDES permit (other than an NPDES stormwater permit) or a State waste discharge permit; and

3. Connections conveying effluent from on-site sewage disposal systems to subsurface soils.

C. This section applies to certain business and residential activities that have the potential to contribute pollutants to stormwater runoff or directly to receiving waters. To prevent a prohibited discharge, BMPs from the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual, or supplemental BMPs as determined necessary by the city manager, shall be applied to the activities identified in the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual. Examples of common activities identified in the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual that might result in prohibited discharges include, but are not limited to, the following:

1. Potable water line flushing;

2. Dust control with water;

3. Automobile and boat washing;

4. Pavement and building washing;

5. Swimming pool and hot tub maintenance;

6. Vehicle and equipment repair and maintenance;

7. Building repair and maintenance;

8. Landscaping activities and vegetation management;

9. Hazardous waste handling;

10. Solid and food waste handling; and

11. Application of pesticides or other chemicals (other than landscaping maintenance).

D. The following types of discharges shall not be considered prohibited discharges for the purpose of this chapter unless the city manager determines that the type of discharge, whether singly or in combination with other discharges, is causing significant contamination of surface water and stormwater or groundwater:

1. Spring water;

2. Diverted stream flows;

3. Uncontaminated water from crawl space pumps, foundation drains, or footing drains;

4. Pumped groundwater flows that are uncontaminated;

5. Materials placed as part of an approved habitat restoration or bank stabilization project;

6. Natural uncontaminated surface water or groundwater;

7. Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;

8. Collected rainwater that is uncontaminated;

9. Uncontaminated groundwater that seeps into or otherwise enters stormwater conveyance systems;

10. Air conditioning condensation;

11. Irrigation water from agricultural sources that is commingled with stormwater runoff; and

12. Other types of discharges as determined by the city manager.

E. Exceptions.

1. Dye testing is allowable but requires verbal notification to the city manager at least one day prior to the date of test.

2. A person does not violate subsections A and B of this section if:

a. That person has properly designed, constructed, implemented and is properly maintaining BMPs, and is carrying out AKART as required by this chapter, but contaminants continue to enter surface water and stormwater or groundwater; or

b. That person can demonstrate that there are no additional contaminants being discharged from the site above the background conditions of the water entering the site.

3. A person who, under subsection (E)(2) of this section, is not in violation of subsections A and B of this section is still liable for any prohibited discharges through illicit connections, dumping, spills, or other discharges not addressed by BMPs satisfying subsection (E)(2) of this section that allow contaminants to enter surface water and stormwater or groundwater.

4. Emergency response activities or other actions that must be undertaken immediately or within a time too short to allow full compliance with this chapter in order to avoid an imminent threat to public health or safety shall be exempt from this section. The city manager may specify actions that qualify for this exception in City procedures. A person undertaking emergency response activities shall take steps to ensure that the discharges resulting from such activities are minimized to the greatest extent possible. In addition, this person shall evaluate BMPs and the site plan, where applicable, to restrict recurrence. [Ord. 16-0428 § 10 (Att. F).]


13.45.030 Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual.

A. Adoption. The King County Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual (SPPM), dated April 2016, as modified by subsection B of this section, is hereby adopted for use in the City. Revisions of the SPPM by King County shall be applicable in the City only if approved by the city council.

B. Modifications to the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual. The city council adopts the Kenmore Addendum to the 2016 King County Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual for the following purposes:

1. To translate specific wording or reference from King County to the City;

2. To cross-reference City ordinances and City maps in lieu of King County ordinances and maps;

3. To provide a linkage or reference to other City requirements such as more restrictive requirements outlined in basin plans and the City’s critical areas ordinances; and

4. To provide exceptions and additions to the KCSWDM.

C. Compliance with this chapter shall be achieved through the use of best management practices described in the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual. In applying the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual, the city manager shall first require the implementation of source control BMPs. If these are not sufficient to prevent contaminants from entering surface water and stormwater or groundwater, the city manager may require implementation of treatment BMPs, as set forth in AKART. The city manager will provide, upon reasonable request, available technical assistance materials and information, and information on outside financial assistance options to persons required to comply with this chapter.

D. In applying the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual to prohibited discharges from normal single-family residential activities, the city manager shall use public education and warnings as the primary method of gaining compliance with this chapter and shall not use citations, notice and orders, assessment of civil penalties and fines, or other compliance actions as authorized in Chapter 1.20 KMC, unless the city manager determines:

1. The discharge from a normal single-family residential activity, whether singly or in combination with other discharges, is causing a significant contribution of contaminants to surface water and stormwater or groundwater; or

2. The discharge from a normal single-family residential activity poses a hazard to the public health, safety or welfare, endangers any property or adversely affects the safety and operation of City right-of-way, utilities or other City-owned or maintained property.

E. Persons implementing BMPs through another Federal, State, or local program shall not be required to implement the BMPs prescribed in the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual, unless the city manager determines the alternative BMPs are ineffective at reducing the discharge of contaminants. If the other program requires the development of a stormwater pollution prevention plan or other best management practices plan, the person shall make their plan available to the City upon request. Persons who qualify for exemptions include, but are not limited to, persons who are:

1. Required to obtain a general or individual NPDES permit from the Washington State Department of Ecology;

2. Implementing and maintaining, as scheduled, a City-approved farm management plan;

3. Implementing BMPs in compliance with Chapter 18.70 KMC;

4. Implementing BMPs in compliance with the management program of the City’s NPDES permit;

5. Engaged in forest practices, with the exception of forest practices occurring on lands platted after January 1, 1960, or on lands being converted to another use, or when regulatory authority is otherwise provided to local government by RCW 76.09.240; or

6. Identified by the city manager as being exempt from this section. [Ord. 16-0428 § 10 (Att. F).]


13.45.040 Administration.

The city manager is authorized to implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The city manager is authorized to promulgate and adopt administrative rules and regulations for the purpose of implementing and enforcing the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 16-0428 § 10 (Att. F).]


13.45.050 Enforcement.

A. The city manager is authorized to carry out enforcement actions pursuant to the enforcement and penalty provisions of this chapter, Chapters 1.15 and 1.20 KMC, and other enforcement provisions adopted by rule.

B. The city manager shall use public education, warnings, technical assistance and the implementation of BMPs and, when necessary, AKART, as the primary methods of gaining compliance with this chapter, unless the city manager determines a violation is a result of a flagrant act that should be addressed through immediate penalties or poses a hazard as defined in KMC 13.45.060, Hazards.

C. The city manager shall develop and implement additional enforcement procedures. These procedures shall indicate how the City will investigate and respond to reports or instances of noncompliance with this chapter and shall identify by title the official(s) responsible for implementing the enforcement procedures.

D. The city manager is authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

1. The city manager may observe BMPs or examine or sample surface water and stormwater or groundwater as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. Whenever an inspection of a property is made, the findings shall be recorded and a copy of the inspection findings shall be furnished to the owner or the person in charge of the property after the conclusion of the investigation and completion of the inspection findings. The person in violation of this chapter shall be responsible for all costs and expenses related to the City’s sampling, examination, analysis, application of BMPs authorized herein and/or abatement of the violation.

2. When the city manager has made a determination under subsection (D)(1) of this section that any person is violating this chapter, the city manager may require the violator to sample and analyze any discharge, surface water and stormwater, groundwater, and/or sediment, in accordance with sampling and analytical procedures or requirements determined by the city manager. If the violator is required to complete this sampling and analysis, a copy of the analysis shall be provided to the city manager. The person in violation of this chapter shall be responsible for all costs and expenses related to the sampling, examination, analysis, application of BMPs required by the city manager and/or abatement of the violation.

E. In addition to any other penalty or method of enforcement, the City may bring actions for injunctive or other relief to enforce this chapter. [Ord. 16-0428 § 10 (Att. F).]


13.45.060 Hazards.

A. Whenever the city manager determines that any violation of this chapter poses a hazard to public health, safety, or welfare, endangers any property, or adversely affects the safety and operation of City right-of-way, utilities, and/or other property owned or maintained by the City, the person holding title to the subject property, and/or other person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the city manager, shall within the period specified therein address the cause of the hazardous situation in conformance with the requirements of this chapter.

B. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, whenever it appears to the city manager that conditions covered by this chapter exist requiring immediate action to protect the public health and/or safety, the city manager is authorized to enter at all times in or upon any such property, public or private, for the purpose of inspecting and investigating such emergency conditions. The city manager, without prior notice, may order the immediate discontinuance of any activity leading to the emergency condition. Failure to comply with such order shall constitute a misdemeanor. [Ord. 16-0428 § 10 (Att. F).]


13.45.070 Criminal penalty.

Any willful violation of an order issued pursuant to KMC 13.45.050 or 13.45.060 for which a criminal penalty is not prescribed by State law is a misdemeanor. [Ord. 16-0428 § 10 (Att. F).]


13.45.080 Civil penalties for water quality.

The enforcement provisions for water quality are intended to encourage compliance with this chapter. To achieve this, violators will be required to take corrective action and comply with the requirements of this chapter, and may be required to pay a civil penalty for the redress of ecological, recreational, and economic values lost or damaged due to their unlawful action.

A. The provisions in this section are in addition to and not in lieu of any other penalty, sanction or right of action provided by law.

B. Any person in violation of this chapter may be subject to civil penalties assessed as follows:

1. An amount reasonably determined by the city manager to be equivalent to the economic benefit the violator derives from the violation as measured by the greater of the resulting increase in market value of the property or business value received by the violator, or savings of construction or retrofitting costs realized by the violator performing any act in violation of this chapter; and

2. An amount, not to exceed $25,000, that is reasonably based upon the nature and gravity of the violation and the cost to the City of enforcing this chapter against the violator.

C. Any person who, through an act of commission or omission, aids or abets in a violation shall be considered to have committed the violation for the purposes of the civil penalty.

D. Each violator is jointly and severally liable for a violation of this chapter. The city manager may take enforcement action, in whole or in part, against any violator. The decisions whether to take enforcement action, what type of action to take, and which person to take action against are all entirely within the city manager’s discretion. Factors to be used in taking such enforcement actions shall be:

1. Awareness of the violation;

2. Ability to correct the violation;

3. Cooperation with government agencies; and

4. Degree of impact or potential threat to water or sediment quality, human health, or the environment.

E. In the event more than one person is determined to have violated the provisions of this chapter, all applicable civil penalties may be imposed against each person, and recoverable damages, costs, and expenses may be allocated among the persons on any equitable basis. Factors that may be considered in determining an equitable allocation include:

1. Awareness of the violation;

2. Ability to correct the violation;

3. Ability to pay damages, costs, and expenses;

4. Cooperation with government agencies; and

5. Degree of impact or potential threat to water or sediment quality, human health, or the environment.

F. The city manager may engage in mitigation discussions with the violator. The city manager may reduce the penalties based upon one or more of the following mitigating factors:

1. The person responded to City attempts to contact the person and cooperated with efforts to correct the violation;

2. The person showed due diligence and/or substantial progress in correcting the violation; or

3. An unknown person was the primary cause of the violation.

Payment of a monetary penalty pursuant to this chapter does not relieve the person of the duty to correct the violation.

G. All civil penalties recovered during the enforcement of this chapter under Chapter 1.20 KMC shall be deposited into a fund of the City and shall be used for the protection of surface water and stormwater or groundwater as set forth in this chapter, through education or enhanced implementation. [Ord. 16-0428 § 10 (Att. F).]


13.45.090 Construction – Intent.

A. This chapter is enacted as an exercise of the City’s power to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare. Its provision shall be exempted from the rule of strict construction and shall be liberally construed to give full effect to the objectives and purposes for which it was enacted. This chapter is not enacted to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this chapter.

B. The primary obligation of compliance with this chapter is placed upon the person holding title to the property. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to be or shall be construed to create or form a basis for liability for the City, its officers, employees or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of the person holding title to the property to comply with the provisions of this chapter, or by reason or in consequence of any act or omission in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this chapter by the City, its officers, employees or agents. [Ord. 16-0428 § 10 (Att. F).]


13.45.100 Penalty.

Except as provided in KMC 13.45.080(B)(1) and (2) for civil penalties, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter may be subject to the general penalty and enforcement provisions in this chapter and Chapters 1.15 and 1.20 KMC. [Ord. 16-0428 § 10 (Att. F).]


Chapter 13.50 UTILITY EXTENSIONS

Sections:

13.50.010    Utility extensions underground.


13.50.010 Utility extensions underground.

Any person desiring to extend utilities in connection with any new construction within the City shall install such utilities underground. The applicant shall be responsible for complying with the requirements of this section, and shall make all necessary arrangements with the utility companies and other persons or corporations affected by installation of such underground facilities. As used in this section, the term “utilities” shall have its ordinary meaning, which shall include, but not be limited to, public services provided in the form of electricity, natural gas, telephone, and cable televison. [Ord. 01-0125 § 1.]


Title 14 (Reserved)

 


Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapters:

15.05    General Provisions

15.10    Fire Code

15.15    Repealed

15.20    Building Codes

15.25    Land Alterations

15.30    Construction Administrative Code

15.35    Condominium Conversion


Chapter 15.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

15.05.010    Relationship to comprehensive plan and Growth Management Act.

15.05.015    Copies of codes on file.

15.05.018    Purpose.

15.05.020    Interpretation.

15.05.025    Penalty for violation.


15.05.010 Relationship to comprehensive plan and Growth Management Act.

This title is hereby enacted to be consistent with and implement the comprehensive plan in accordance with Chapter 36.70A RCW. [Ord. 04-0201 § 1; Ord. 98-0021 §§ 1, 2 (KCC 17.02.010).]


15.05.015 Copies of codes on file.

A. Pursuant to State law (Chapters 19.27 and 19.27A RCW), the Kenmore building code includes the Washington State Building Code, composed of the codes in subsections (A)(1) through (6) of this section, and the additional codes in subsections (A)(3) and (7) through (14) of this section, all as modified in this title. The City shall at all times keep on file with the city clerk, for reference by the general public, a copy of the codes and resolutions, or parts thereof, as herein adopted by reference, together with the amendments and supplements thereto herein made a part of this title:

1. 2015 International Building Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc.;

2. 2015 International Residential Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc.;

3. 2015 International Existing Building Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc.;

4. 2015 International Mechanical Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc.;

5. 2015 International Fire Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc.;

6. 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials;

7. 2015 National Fuel Gas Code (NFPA 54), published by the National Fire Protection Association;

8. 2014 Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code (NFPA 58), published by the National Fire Protection Association;

9. 2015 International Fuel Gas Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc.;

10. 2015 Washington State Energy Code;

11. 2015 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc.;

12. 1997 Uniform Housing Code, published by the International Conference of Building Officials;

13. 1997 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, published by the International Conference of Building Officials;

14. 2014 National Electrical Code (NFPA 70-2014), published by the National Fire Protection Association;

15. All amendments, supplements, modifications, exclusions, exemptions and additions to the codes identified in subsections (A)(1) through (6) of this section adopted by the Washington State Building Code Council and published in WAC Title 51, including, but not by way of limitation, Chapters 51-11C, 51-11R, 51-50, 51-51, 51-52, 51-54A, and 51-56 WAC;

16. All amendments, supplements, modifications, exclusions, exemptions and additions to the code identified in subsection (A)(14) of this section adopted by the Washington State Department of Labor and Industries and published in Chapter 296-46B WAC;

B. The copies of codes on file may be placed by the city clerk in the custody of the office of the building official in order to make them more readily available to inspection and use by the general public. [Ord. 16-0423 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 13-0360 § 1; Ord. 10-0310 § 1; Ord. 07-0261 § 1; Ord. 04-0201 § 1.]


15.05.018 Purpose.1

The purpose of these codes as adopted in KMC Title 15 is to provide for and promote the health, safety and welfare of the general public, and not to create or to otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of these codes. [Ord. 04-0201 § 1.]


15.05.020 Interpretation.

A. Whenever the following words appear in the codes adopted by reference in this title, they are to be interpreted as follows:

1. “Administrative authority” or “code official” as “building official”;

2. “Fire code official” as “fire marshal”;

3. “Corporation counsel” as “city attorney or designee”;

4. “Local zoning code” as the “City of Kenmore zoning code,” KMC Title 18;

5. “Municipality” and “the jurisdiction” as “the City of Kenmore.”

B. Whenever reference is made to local authority, codes, jurisdiction and similar concepts within the codes adopted by reference in this title, interpretations rendered by such reference shall apply to the City jurisdiction and authority. [Ord. 13-0360 § 2; Ord. 04-0201 § 1.]


15.05.025 Penalty for violation.

A. In addition to the administrative remedies provided for in this title, any person found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of or to have violated any mandatory provision of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation is found to exist shall be deemed a separate offense.

B. A person who has previously been convicted of a crime for violation of this title shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor for any subsequent violation. [Ord. 04-0201 § 1.]1

Ord. 04-0201 added this section as 15.05.015. It has been renumbered to 15.05.018 to avoid duplication. 


Chapter 15.10 FIRE CODE*

Sections:

15.10.005    International Fire Code adopted.

15.10.010    IFC Section 101.1, Title, amended.

15.10.015    IFC Section 102.7, Referenced Codes and Standards, amended.

15.10.020    IFC Section 105.1, General, amended.

15.10.025    IFC Section 105.7, Required Construction Permits, amended.

15.10.030    IFC Section 108, Board of Appeals, replaced.

15.10.035    IFC Section 109.3, Violation Penalties, amended.

15.10.040    IFC Section 308.3, Open Flame in Group A Occupancies, amended.

15.10.045    IFC Section 401.7.1, Evacuation Required, added.

15.10.050    IFC Section 503.1, Where Required, amended.

15.10.055    IFC Section 503.1.1, Buildings and Facilities, amended.

15.10.060    IFC Section 503.2.1, Dimensions, amended.

15.10.065    IFC Section 503.2.6, Bridges and Elevated Surfaces, amended.

15.10.070    IFC Section 503.3, Marking, amended.

15.10.075    IFC Section 503.4, Obstruction of Fire Apparatus Access Roads, amended.

15.10.080    IFC Section 506.1, Where Required, amended.

15.10.085    IFC Section 507.5.1, Where Required, amended.

15.10.090    IFC Section 510.1, Emergency Responder Radio Coverage in New Buildings, amended.

15.10.095    IFC Section 510.2, Emergency Responder Radio Coverage in Existing Buildings, amended.

15.10.100    IFC Section 510.2.4, Signal Booster Requirements, amended.

15.10.105    IFC Section 510.5.3, Acceptance Test Procedure, amended.

15.10.110    IFC Section 510.5.5, Approval Prior to Occupancy, amended.

15.10.115    IFC Section 510.6, Maintenance, amended.

15.10.120    IFC Section 510.6.1, Testing and Proof of Compliance, amended.

15.10.125    IFC Section 510.6.3, Field Testing, amended.

15.10.130    IFC Section 510.6.4, Identification, added.

15.10.135    IFC Section 901.7, Systems Out of Service, amended.

15.10.140    IFC Section 903.2, Where Required, amended.

15.10.145    IFC Section 903.2.13, Additional Fire Sprinkler Requirements for New and Existing Buildings, added.

15.10.150    IFC 903.3.1.1.1, Exempt locations, amended.

15.10.155    IFC Section 903.3.1.2, NFPA 13R Sprinkler Systems, amended.

15.10.160    IFC Section 903.4.3, Floor Control Valves, amended.

15.10.165    IFC Section 903.5.1, Fire Sprinkler and Standpipe Drains, added.

15.10.170    IFC Section 907.2, Where Required – New Buildings and Structures, amended.

15.10.175    IFC Section 5003.9, General Safety Precautions, amended.

15.10.180    IFC Section 5003.9.11, Manufacturer’s Limitations, added.

15.10.185    IFC Section 5307.5.2, Emergency Alarm System, amended.

15.10.190    IFC Section 5604.1, General, amended.

15.10.195    IFC Section 5704.2.9.6.1, Locations Where Above-Ground Tanks Are Prohibited, amended.

15.10.200    IFC Section 5806.2, Limitations, amended.

15.10.205    IFC Section 6104.2, Maximum Capacity within Established Limits, amended.

15.10.210    IFC Appendix B, Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings, amended.

*Prior legislation: Ord. 07-0261 § 2.


15.10.005 International Fire Code adopted.

The 2015 Edition of the International Fire Code, together with Appendix B (Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings), as published by the International Code Council, is adopted, together with the amendments set forth in Chapter 51-54A WAC. [Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-0310 § 2 (Exh. A). Formerly 15.10.010.] 


15.10.010 IFC Section 101.1, Title, amended.

Section 101.1 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended by inserting the phrase “City of Kenmore.” [Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-0310 § 2 (Exh. A). Formerly 15.10.012.]


15.10.015 IFC Section 102.7, Referenced Codes and Standards, amended.

Section 102.7 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended by adding the following:

When allowed by the fire code official, editions of standards not herein referenced may be utilized provided the entire standard is utilized.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-0310 § 2 (Exh. A).]


15.10.020 IFC Section 105.1, General, amended.

Section 105.1 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 105.1 General. Permits shall be in accordance with Sections 105.1 through 105.7.22.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A).]


15.10.025 IFC Section 105.7, Required Construction Permits, amended.

Section 105.7 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended by adding the following:

105.7.19 Emergency and standby power systems. A construction permit is required to install or modify an Emergency Power Supply System (EPSS) that supplies power to life safety systems, fire pumps, elevators or any system required by the International Fire Code or the International Building Code.

105.7.20 High-piled combustible storage. A construction permit is required to install, alter or increase the hazard level of storage under the following criteria: Storage area including aisles exceeds 500 square feet floor area, and either Class I – IV commodities are stored more than 12 feet high, or high hazard materials are stored more than 6 feet high.

105.7.21 Mechanical refrigeration. A construction permit is required to install, modify or expand any mechanical refrigeration system containing more than 220 pounds of a Group A1 refrigerant or more than 30 pounds of any other group refrigerant.

105.7.22 Emergency alarm system. A construction permit is required to install an emergency alarm system in accordance with Section 5307. An emergency alarm is required for carbon dioxide systems with more than 100 pounds of carbon dioxide.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-0310 § 2 (Exh. A). Formerly 15.10.022.]


15.10.030 IFC Section 108, Board of Appeals, replaced.

Section 108 of the International Fire Code is hereby deleted and replaced with the following:

Section 108 Hearing Examiner. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the fire code official shall be made to the hearing examiner in accordance with the requirements and process of Chapter 19.30 KMC. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder has been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply or an equally good or better solution is proposed. The hearing examiner shall have not authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of this code nor shall the hearing examiner be empowered to waive requirements of either this code or the technical codes which are the codes, appendices and referenced code standards adopted by the city.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 12-0333 § 1; Ord. 10-0310 § 2 (Exh. A). Formerly 15.10.025.]


15.10.035 IFC Section 109.3, Violation Penalties, amended.

Section 109.3 of the International Fire Code is hereby deleted and replaced with the following:

Notice of violation. Any person who violates the provisions of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or lawful directive of the fire code official, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-0310 § 2 (Exh. A). Formerly 15.10.030.]


15.10.040 IFC Section 308.3, Open Flame in Group A Occupancies, amended.

Section 308.3 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended by adding the following exception:

4. Where approved by the fire code official.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-0310 § 2 (Exh. A). Formerly 15.10.035.]


15.10.045 IFC Section 401.7.1, Evacuation Required, added.

Section 401.7.1 of the International Fire Code is added to Section 401.7:

401.7.1 Evacuation required. In the event of activation of a fire, emergency alarm, or at the direction the fire code official, occupants of the building or portion of the building in which the alarm is activated shall make a safe and orderly evacuation out of the building, or as provided in the building’s fire safety and evacuation or high-rise emergency operations plan.

Exceptions:

1. Where the occupant’s physical or other disability make the occupant unable to evacuate without assistance and no assistance is immediately available; or

2. Where the presence of smoke, fire, structural collapse or other hazard or obstruction of the occupant’s means of egress make evacuation unsafe.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-0310 § 2 (Exh. A). Formerly 15.10.040.]


15.10.050 IFC Section 503.1, Where Required, amended.

Section 503.1 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

503.1 Where required. Fire apparatus access roads shall be provided and maintained in accordance with Sections 503.1.1 and 503.1.2.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B).]


15.10.055 IFC Section 503.1.1, Buildings and Facilities, amended.

Section 503.1.1 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

503.1.1 Buildings and facilities. Approved fire apparatus access roads shall be provided for every facility, building or portion of a building hereafter constructed or moved into or within a jurisdiction. The fire apparatus access road shall comply with the requirements of this section and shall extend to within 150 feet of all portions of the facility and all portions of the exterior walls of the first story of the building as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the building or facility.

Exception:

1. The fire code official is authorized to increase the dimensions of 150 feet where any of the following conditions occur:

1.1. The building is equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, 903.3.1.2 or 903.3.1.3.

1.2. Fire apparatus access roads cannot be installed because of location on the property, topography, waterways, nonnegotiable grades or other similar conditions, and an approved alternative means of fire protection is provided.

1.3. There are not more than two Group R-3 or Group U occupancies.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B).]


15.10.060 IFC Section 503.2.1, Dimensions, amended.

Section 503.2.1 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows:

503.2.1 Dimensions. Driveways serving one single-family residence shall have a minimum clear width of 12 feet.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-0310 § 2 (Exh. A). Formerly 15.10.045.]


15.10.065 IFC Section 503.2.6, Bridges and Elevated Surfaces, amended.

Section 503.2.6 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows:

503.2.6 Bridges, structures and elevated surfaces. Where a bridge, structure or an elevated surface is part of a fire apparatus access road, the bridge shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with AASHTO HS-25. Bridges, structures, and elevated surfaces shall be designed for a live load sufficient to carry the live loads of fire apparatus. In addition, these structures shall be designed to support a 45,000 lb point load over four square feet. Vehicle load limits shall be posted at both entrances to bridges where required by the fire code official. Where elevated surfaces are designed for emergency vehicle use are adjacent to surfaces which are not designed for such use, approved barriers, approved signs or both shall be installed and maintained where required by the fire code official.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-0310 § 2 (Exh. A). Formerly 15.10.050.]


15.10.070 IFC Section 503.3, Marking, amended.

Section 503.3 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows:

503.3 Marking. Where required by the fire code official, approved signs or other approved notices, as described in the Northshore Fire Department Access Standard, shall be provided for fire apparatus access roads to identify such roads or prohibit the obstruction thereof. Signs or notices shall be maintained a clean and legible condition at all times and be replaced or repaired when necessary to provide adequate visibility.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-0310 § 2 (Exh. A). Formerly 15.10.055.]


15.10.075 IFC Section 503.4, Obstruction of Fire Apparatus Access Roads, amended.

Section 503.4 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows:

503.4 Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads. Fire apparatus access roads shall not be obstructed in any manner, including parking of vehicles. The minimum widths and clearances shall be maintained at all times.

Exception: Parking of vehicles along residential streets where all homes along the road are protected by approved fire sprinkler systems.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-0310 § 2 (Exh. A). Formerly 15.10.060.]


15.10.080 IFC Section 506.1, Where Required, amended.

Section 506.1 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended by adding the following:

506.1 Where required. All occupancies equipped with an automatic sprinkler system, fire alarm system, or hazardous occupancies, or when required by the fire code official, shall have an emergency access key box mounted in an approved location.

Exception: One- and two-family dwellings.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-0310 § 2 (Exh. A). Formerly 15.10.065.]


15.10.085 IFC Section 507.5.1, Where Required, amended.

Section 507.5.1 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read:

507.5.1. Where required. Where a facility or building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the city is more than 150 feet from a hydrant on a fire apparatus access road, onsite fire hydrants and mains shall be provided where required by the fire code official. At least one hydrant shall be located within 400 feet of all portions of the exterior wall of the first story of the facility or building as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the building. All fire hydrants required by this section, whether existing or new shall be equipped with a 4-inch Storz fitting on the steamer port. A 4-inch Storz fitting shall also be installed on any hydrant required for protection of existing structures where the valuation of the improvement or alteration exceeds 50% of the assessed valuation or where the square footage is increased by 25% or 1,000 square feet, whichever is less.

Exceptions:

1. For one- and two-family dwellings and Group U occupancies, the maximum distance to the structure shall be 300 feet and 450 feet when protected by an approved fire sprinkler system.

2. Distances may be modified by the fire code official for facilities or buildings equipped with approved automatic sprinkler systems.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-0310 § 2 (Exh. A). Formerly 15.10.070.]


15.10.090 IFC Section 510.1, Emergency Responder Radio Coverage in New Buildings, amended.

Section 510.1 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

510.1 Emergency responder radio coverage in new buildings. Approved radio coverage for emergency responders shall be provided with buildings meeting any of the following conditions:

1. There are more than five stories above grade plane (as defined by the International Building Code, Section 202);

2. The total building is 50,000 square feet or more;

3. The total basement area is 10,000 square feet or more; or,

4. There are floors used for human occupancy more than 30 feet below the finish floor of the lowest level of exit discharge.

Radio coverage is based upon the existing coverage levels of the public safety communication systems of the jurisdictions at the exterior of the building. This section shall not require improvements of the existing public safety communication system.

Exception:

Buildings and areas of buildings that have minimum radio coverage signal strength levels of the King County Regional 800 MHz Radio System within the building in accordance with Section 510.4.1.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-0310 § 2 (Exh. A). Formerly 15.10.075.]


15.10.095 IFC Section 510.2, Emergency Responder Radio Coverage in Existing Buildings, amended.

Section 510.2 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

510.2 Emergency responder radio coverage in existing buildings. Existing buildings shall be provided with approved radio coverage for emergency responders as required in Section 1103.2.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B).]


15.10.100 IFC Section 510.2.4, Signal Booster Requirements, amended.

Section 510.2.4 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

510.4.2.4 Signal Booster Requirements. If used, signal boosters shall meet the following requirements:

1. All active signal booster components shall be contained in a (NEMA) 4, IP66 -type waterproof cabinet or equivalent.

2. The battery system shall be contained in a (NEMA) 4, IP66-type waterproof cabinet or equivalent.

3. The system shall include automatic alarming of malfunctions of the signal booster and battery system. Any resulting trouble alarm shall be automatically transmitted to an approved central station.

4. Equipment shall have FCC certification prior to installation.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B).]


15.10.105 IFC Section 510.5.3, Acceptance Test Procedure, amended.

Section 510.5.3 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

510.5.3 Acceptance test procedure. Acceptance testing for Emergency responder radio amplification system is required, upon completion of installation. It is the building owner’s responsibility to have the radio system tested by qualified personnel to ensure a minimum of 95% two-way coverage on each floor of the building.

A report shall be submitted to the Northshore Fire Department at the conclusion of acceptance testing containing a floor plan and the signal strengths at each location tested and other relevant information. A representative of the Northshore Fire Department may oversee the acceptance test. Acceptance testing is also required whenever changes occur to the building that would materially change the original field performance test. The test procedure shall be conducted as follows:

1. Each floor of the building shall be divided into a grid of approximately forty (40) equal areas.

2. Testing shall use a two (2) watt, portable transceiver with speaker/microphone and flexible antenna (or any calibrated device which will produce signal levels useable by the prescribed portable radio). Field strength testing instruments must have been calibrated within one (1) year of the date of the acceptance test. Field strength testing instruments must be of the frequency selective type incorporating a flexible antenna similar to the ones used on the hand held transceivers. A Radio System Manager may designate alternate methods of measuring the signal level, which satisfy appropriate levels of public safety coverage.

3. A maximum of two (2) nonadjacent areas will be allowed to fail the test.

4. In the event that three (3) of the areas fail the test, the floor may be divided into eighty (80) equal areas in order to be more statistically accurate. In such event, a maximum of four (4) nonadjacent areas will be allowed to fail the test. After the eighty (80) area tests, if the system continues to fail, the building owner shall have the system altered to meet the 95% coverage requirement.

5. A spot located approximately in the center of a grid area will be selected for the test, then the radio will be keyed to verify two-way communication to and from the outside of the building through the Regional 800 MHz Radio System. Once the spot has been selected, prospecting for a better spot within the grid area is not permitted. The gain values of all amplifiers shall be measured and the results kept on file with the building owner so that the measurements can be verified each year during the annual tests. In the event that the measurement results become lost, the building owner will be required to rerun the acceptance test to reestablish the gain values.

6. The gain values of all amplifiers shall be measured and the test measurement results shall be kept on file with the building owner so that the measurements can be verified during annual tests. In the event that the measurement results become lost, the building owner shall be required to rerun the acceptance test to reestablish the gain values.

7. As part of the installation a spectrum analyzer or other suitable test equipment shall be utilized to ensure spurious oscillations are not being generated by the subject signal booster. This test shall be conducted at time of installation and subsequent annual inspections.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B).]


15.10.110 IFC Section 510.5.5, Approval Prior to Occupancy, amended.

Section 510.5.5 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

510.5.5 Approval prior to occupancy. A Certificate of Occupancy will not be issued to any structure if the building fails to comply with KMC 15.10.060.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B).]


15.10.115 IFC Section 510.6, Maintenance, amended.

Section 510.6 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

510.6 Maintenance. The emergency responder radio coverage system shall be maintained operational at all times in accordance with Sections 510.6.1 through 510.6.4.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B).]


15.10.120 IFC Section 510.6.1, Testing and Proof of Compliance, amended.

Section 510.6.1 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

510.6.1 Testing and proof of compliance. The emergency responder radio coverage system shall be inspected and tested annually, or whenever structural changes occur including additions or remodels that could materially change the original field performance tests. Testing shall consist of the following:

1. In-building coverage test as described in Section 510.5.3.

Exception: Group R Occupancy annual testing is not required within dwelling units.

2. Signal boosters shall be tested to ensure that the gain is the same as it was upon initial installation and acceptance.

3. Backup batteries and power supplies shall be tested under load of a period of 1 hour to verify that they will properly operate during an actual power outage. If within the 1-hour test period the battery exhibits symptoms of failure, the test shall be extended for additional 1-hour periods until the integrity of the battery can be determined.

4. All other active components shall be checked to verify operation within the manufacturer’s specifications.

5. At the conclusion of the testing, a report, which shall verify compliance with Section 510.5.3, shall be submitted to the fire code official.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B).]


15.10.125 IFC Section 510.6.3, Field Testing, amended.

Section 510.6.3 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

510.6.3 Field Testing. Police and Fire Personnel shall have the right to enter onto the property at any reasonable time to conduct its own field-testing to be certain that the required level of radio coverage is present.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B).]


15.10.130 IFC Section 510.6.4, Identification, added.

Section 510.6.4 of the International Fire Code is hereby added as follows:

510.6.4 Identification. Radio Coverage system shall be identified by a sign located on or near the Fire Alarm Control Panel stating “This building is equipped with an Emergency Responder Radio Coverage System.”

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B).]


15.10.135 IFC Section 901.7, Systems Out of Service, amended.

Section 901.7 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

901.7 System out of service. Where a fire protection system is out of service, the fire department and the fire code official shall be notified immediately and, where required by the fire code official, the building shall either be evacuated or an approved fire watch shall be provided for all occupants left unprotected by the shutdown until the fire protection system has been returned to service. Where utilized, fire watches shall be provided with at least one means for notification of the fire department and their only duty shall be to perform constant patrols of the protected premises and keep watch for fires.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-0310 § 2 (Exh. A). Formerly 15.10.080.]


15.10.140 IFC Section 903.2, Where Required, amended.

Section 903.2 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new and existing buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described in Section 903.2.1 through 903.13.

The exception has been deleted.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-0310 § 2 (Exh. A). Formerly 15.10.085.]


15.10.145 IFC Section 903.2.13, Additional Fire Sprinkler Requirements for New and Existing Buildings, added.

Section 903.2 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended by adding a new Section 903.2.13 as follows:

903.2.13 Additional fire sprinkler requirements for new and existing buildings.

NEW BUILDINGS

1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in all occupancies requiring 2,000 gallons per minute or more fire flow, or where the gross square footage exceeds 5,000 square feet. This applies to all buildings regardless of type or use.

2. All newly constructed buildings regardless of gross square footage shall be provided with an automatic sprinkler system if adequate fire flow, hydrant spacing, or approved fire department access is not provided as required in IFC Section 503, Appendix B, and or Title 15 of the Kenmore Municipal Code.

3. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in new residential occupancies.

Exception: Detached accessory dwelling units (ADU’s).

EXISTING BUILDINGS

1. The provisions of this section shall apply to existing buildings that are subject to alterations, repairs, modifications or similar improvements where the total cost of the work performed exceeds 50% of the King County Assessors Office valuation of the structure. Where subsequent alterations, repairs, modifications or similar improvements occur within five years of the first permitted work, the original building valuation shall be used and the total costs of improvements shall be accumulative.

2. The provisions of this section shall apply to existing buildings where the gross floor area of the building is increased. Additions to buildings that would result in a gross floor area greater than 5,000 square feet shall be retrofitted throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system.

Exception: The floor area of an existing building may be increased by up to 25%, not to exceed 5,000 square foot floor area increase. This exception shall be allowed one time only and acknowledgement of its use shall be recorded to run with the property title prior to permit issuance.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-0310 § 2 (Exh. A). Formerly 15.10.090.]


15.10.150 IFC 903.3.1.1.1, Exempt locations, amended.

Item 6 from Section 903.3.1.1.1 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

6. Machine rooms, machinery spaces, control rooms and control spaces associated with traction elevators. The elevator machinery shall not be of the hydraulic type.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B).]


15.10.155 IFC Section 903.3.1.2, NFPA 13R Sprinkler Systems, amended.

Section 903.3.1.2 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

Automatic sprinkler systems in Group R occupancies up to and including four stories in height in buildings not exceeding 60 feet in height, as measured from the lowest point of fire department access, shall be permitted to be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13R.

The number of stories of Group R constructed in accordance with Sections 510.2 and 510.4 of the International Building Code shall be measured from the horizontal assembly creating separate buildings.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B).]


15.10.160 IFC Section 903.4.3, Floor Control Valves, amended.

Section 903.4.3 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

903.4.3. Floor control valves. In multi-level buildings approved, supervised indicating control valves shall be provided at the point of connection to the riser on each floor.

Exception: When approved by the fire code official.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-0310 § 2 (Exh. A). Formerly 15.10.095.]


15.10.165 IFC Section 903.5.1, Fire Sprinkler and Standpipe Drains, added.

Section 903.5.1 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended by adding a new Section 903.5.1 as follows:

903.5.1 Fire sprinkler and standpipe drains. Fire sprinkler and standpipe main/express drains shall be positioned to drain to the sanitary sewer. Additionally, maintenance or testing discharges from fire pumps shall be treated in order to comply with the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) requirements.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B).]


15.10.170 IFC Section 907.2, Where Required – New Buildings and Structures, amended.

Section 907.2, excluding subsections 907.2.1 through 907.2.23, of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

907.2 Where required—new buildings and structures.

All occupancies exceeding 3,000 square feet gross floor area shall be required to provide an approved, monitored automatic fire detection system. Fire walls as noted in Section 706 of the International Building Code shall not be considered to be a separate building to enable deletion of the required fire detection system.

Exception: Group U or IRC regulated structures.

An approved fire alarm system installed in accordance with this code and NFPA 72 shall be provided in new buildings and structures in accordance with Sections 907.2.1 through 907.2.23. and provide occupant notification in accordance with Section 907.6, unless other requirements are provided by another section of this code. Where automatic sprinkler protection installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 is provided and connected to the building fire alarm system, automatic heat detection required by this section shall not be required.

A minimum of one fire alarm box shall be provided in an approved location to initiate a fire alarm signal for fire alarm systems employing automatic fire detectors or water-flow devices. Where other sections of this code allow elimination of fire alarm boxes due to sprinklers, a single fire alarm box shall be installed.

EXISTING BUILDINGS

The provisions of this section shall apply to existing buildings that are subject to alterations, repairs, modifications or similar improvements where the total cost of the work performed exceeds 50% of the King County Assessor’s Office valuation of the structure. Where subsequent alterations, repairs, modifications or similar improvements occur within five years of the first permitted work, the original building valuation shall be used and the total costs of improvements shall be accumulative.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-0310 § 2 (Exh. A). Formerly 15.10.100.]


15.10.175 IFC Section 5003.9, General Safety Precautions, amended.

Section 5003.9 of the International Fire Code is amended to read as follows:

5003.9 General safety precautions. General precautions for the safe storage, handling or care of hazardous materials shall be in accordance with Sections 5003.9.1 through 5003.9.11.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-0310 § 2 (Exh. A). Formerly 15.10.105.]


15.10.180 IFC Section 5003.9.11, Manufacturer’s Limitations, added.

Section 5003.9 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding a new section 5003.9.11 as follows:

5003.9.11 Manufacturer’s Limitations. The storage and use of hazardous materials shall not exceed the manufacturer’s limitations on shelf life and any other restrictions on use.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A). Formerly 15.10.110.]


15.10.185 IFC Section 5307.5.2, Emergency Alarm System, amended.

Section 5307.5.2 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

5307.5.2 Emergency alarm systems. An emergency alarm system shall comply with all of the following:

1. Continuous gas detection shall be provided to monitor areas where carbon dioxide can accumulate.

2. The threshold for activation on an alarm shall not exceed 5,000 parts per million.

3. Activation of the emergency alarm system shall initiate a local alarm at the entrance to the room(s) and inside the room(s) where CO2 systems are installed.

4. A warning sign shall be posted at the entrance to the room that reads: “Carbon Dioxide Alarm. Do Not Enter. Call 911.”

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B).]


15.10.190 IFC Section 5604.1, General, amended.

Section 5604.1 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended by adding the following:

5604.1 General. The storage of blasting agents, detonators, explosives, explosive materials and special industrial explosive devices is prohibited within the city limits.

Exceptions:

1. Approved storage areas in law enforcement facilities and as otherwise provided in the Municipal Code.

2. When approved by the fire code official.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-0310 § 2 (Exh. A). Formerly 15.10.115.]


15.10.195 IFC Section 5704.2.9.6.1, Locations Where Above-Ground Tanks Are Prohibited, amended.

Section 5704.2.9.6.1 of the International Fire Code is amended to read as follows:

5704.2.9.6.1 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited. Throughout the city, the use of above ground storage tanks outside of buildings shall be limited to flammable or combustible liquids in outside above ground tanks of 2,000 gallons per tank with an aggregate capacity of 4,000 gallons per site, unless otherwise specifically approved by the fire code official. All above ground storage tanks containing flammable or combustible liquids with a capacity of 500 gallons or more shall be protected tanks designed in accordance with Section 5704.2.9.7 and UL2085, or other systems with prior approval of the fire code official. Above ground combustible liquid tanks, used for the storage of heating oil, for a single family residence shall not exceed 300 gallons. Above ground flammable liquid tanks shall not be permitted in a residential zone or within 100 feet of a residential zone within the city, except that such tanks may be located at fire stations or municipal facilities. Temporary uses may be permitted during periods of construction with the approval of the fire code official. Permits for above ground tanks shall be approved by the fire code official prior to installation or placement.

Exception: Existing installations exceeding 2,000 gallon tank or aggregate capacity of 4,000 gallons per site shall be allowed to continue until tank replacement is necessary or tank decommissioning.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-0310 § 2 (Exh. A). Formerly 15.10.120.]


15.10.200 IFC Section 5806.2, Limitations, amended.

Section 5806.2 of the International Fire Code is amended to read as follows:

5806.2 Outdoor storage. The storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of buildings is prohibited within the city limits.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A). Formerly 15.10.125.]


15.10.205 IFC Section 6104.2, Maximum Capacity within Established Limits, amended.

Section 6104.2 of the International Fire Code is amended to read as follows:

6104.2 Maximum capacity within established limits. Throughout the city, the aggregate capacity of any one installation of liquefied petroleum gas shall not exceed five hundred (500) gallons water capacity. This capacity limit may be increased up to, but not to exceed, two thousand (2,000) gallons water capacity if the installation is not within, or closer than 100 feet of a residential zone and must be approved by the fire code official. A permit is required to install a liquefied petroleum gas tank.

Exception: Existing installations exceeding five hundred (500) gallons water capacity, but not exceeding two thousand (2,000) gallons water capacity, shall be allowed to continue.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A). Formerly 15.10.130.]


15.10.210 IFC Appendix B, Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings, amended.

Appendix B, Sections B104.1, B104.2, and B105.1, and the footnotes of Table B105.1, are amended to read as follows:

B104.1 General. The fire flow calculation area shall be the total floor area of all floor levels within the exterior walls, and under the horizontal projections of the roof of a building, including basements and attached garages, except as modified in Section B104.3.

B104.2 Area separation. Portions of buildings which are separated by four-hour fire walls without openings, constructed in accordance with the International Building Code, are allowed to be considered as separate fire-flow calculation areas.

B105.1 One and Two Family dwellings. The minimum fire flow requirements for one and two family dwellings having a fire-flow calculation area where the gross floor area, including attached garages, does not exceed 3,600 square feet (344.5 m2) shall be 1,500 gallons per minute (3785.4 L/min). Fire flow and flow duration for dwellings having a gross square footage in excess of 3,600 square feet (344.5 m2) shall be not less than that specified in Table B105.1 and the ISO Guide for the Determination of Needed Fire Flow.

Exception: The minimum fire flow required for one- and two-family dwellings protected by approved fire sprinkler systems that have a gross floor area under 3,600 square feet shall be 500 gallons per minute. Fire sprinkler protected one- and two-family dwellings that have gross floor areas over 3,600 square feet shall have available fire flow of at least 1/2 the value in Table B105.1(2).

B105.2 Buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings. The minimum fire flow and flow duration for buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings shall be as determined by utilizing Table B105.1 and the ISO Guide for the Determination of Needed Fire Flow.

Exception: A reduction in required fire flow of up to 50 percent, as approved, is allowed when the building is provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 of the International Fire Code. Where buildings are of Type I or II construction and are a light-hazard occupancy as defined by NFPA 13, the reduction may be up to 75 percent. The resulting fire flow shall not be less than 1,500 gallons per minute (5678 l/min) for the prescribed duration as specified in Table B105.1.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 2 (Exh. B); Ord. 13-0360 § 3 (Exh. A); Ord. 10-0310 § 2 (Exh. A). Formerly 15.10.135.]


Chapter 15.15 FIRE HYDRANTS AND WATER MAINS

(Repealed by Ord. 13-0360)


Chapter 15.20 BUILDING CODES*

Sections:

15.20.010    International Building Code adopted.

15.20.015    IBC Section 312.1, U-Occupancy Use – General, amended.

15.20.020    IBC Section 403.4.8, Standby Power, amended.

15.20.025    IBC Section 403.4.8.1, Equipment Room, amended.

15.20.030    IBC Section 403.4.8.1.1, Standby Power Room Penetrations, added.

15.20.035    IBC Section 403.4.8.3, Standby Power Loads, amended.

15.20.040    IBC Section 403.7, Smoke Control, added.

15.20.045    IBC Section 405.8, Standby Power, amended.

15.20.050    IBC Section 712.1.3.1, Opening Size, amended.

15.20.055    IBC Section 903.2, Sprinklers Where Required, amended.

15.20.060    IBC Section 903.2.13, Additional Fire Sprinkler Requirements for New and Existing Buildings, added.

15.20.065    IBC Section 903.3.1.1.1, Exempt locations, amended.

15.20.070    IBC Section 903.3.1.2, NFPA 13R sprinkler systems, amended.

15.20.075    IBC Section 903.4.3, Floor Control Valves, amended.

15.20.080    IBC Section 903.5.1, Fire Sprinkler and Standpipe Drains, added.

15.20.085    IBC Section 907.2, Alarms Where Required – New Buildings and Structures, amended.

15.20.090    IBC Section 911.1.2.1, Fire Command Center Penetrations, added.

15.20.095    IBC Section 1608.1, Snow Load – General, amended.

15.20.100    IBC Section 1612.3, Establishment of Flood Hazard Areas, amended.

15.20.105    IBC Section 3002.4, Elevator Car to Accommodate Ambulance Stretcher, amended.

15.20.110    IBC Section 3112, Waterfront Structures, added.

15.20.115    IBC Appendix adoption.

15.20.120    International Residential Code adopted.

15.20.125    IRC Table R301.2(1), Climate and Geographic Design Criteria, amended.

15.20.130    IRC Appendix V, Fire Sprinklers, amended.

15.20.135    1997 Uniform Housing Code adopted.

15.20.140    UHC Section 203, Appeals – Amended.

15.20.145    UHC Section 1201.2, Processing of Appeals – Amended.

15.20.150    UHC Section 1201.3 deleted.

15.20.155    UHC Chapter 13 deleted.

15.20.160    International Mechanical Code adopted.

15.20.165    Uniform Plumbing Code adopted.

15.20.170    National Fuel Gas Code (NFPA 54) adopted.

15.20.175    Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code (NFPA 58) adopted.

15.20.180    International Fuel Gas Code adopted.

15.20.185    Washington State Energy Code adopted.

15.20.200    Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings adopted.

15.20.205    UCADB Section 205, Appeals, amended.

15.20.210    UCADB Section 501.2, Processing of Appeals, amended.

15.20.215    UCADB Section 501.3 deleted.

15.20.220    UCADB Chapter 6 deleted.

15.20.225    International Existing Building Code adopted.

15.20.230    International Swimming Pool and Spa Code adopted.

*Prior legislation: Ord. 07-0261 § 3.


15.20.010 International Building Code adopted.

The 2015 Edition of the International Building Code, excluding Chapter 1, “Scope and Administration,” as published by the International Code Council, is adopted, together with the amendments set forth in Chapter 51-50 WAC. The Construction Administrative Code, as set forth in Chapter 15.30 KMC, shall be used in place of IBC Chapter 1. [Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B).]


15.20.015 IBC Section 312.1, U-Occupancy Use – General, amended.

Section 312.1 of the International Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows by adding the following use to the list:

Waterfront structures

[Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B).]


15.20.020 IBC Section 403.4.8, Standby Power, amended.

Section 403.4.8 of the International Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

Add the following sentence to the end of the paragraph:

Fuel-fired emergency generator sets and associated fuel storage, including optional generator sets, located more than 75 feet above the lowest level of Fire Department vehicle access requires the approval of the Fire Code Official.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B).]


15.20.025 IBC Section 403.4.8.1, Equipment Room, amended.

Section 403.4.8.1 of the International Building Code, is hereby amended to read as follows:

403.4.8.1 Equipment room. If the standby system is a generator set inside the building, the system shall be located in a separate room enclosed with 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 403.4.8.1.1 and Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. System supervision with manual start and transfer features shall be provided at the fire command center.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B).]


15.20.030 IBC Section 403.4.8.1.1, Standby Power Room Penetrations, added.

Section 403.4.8.1.1 of the International Building Code is hereby added as follows:

403.4.8.1.1 Penetrations. Penetrations into and openings through a room containing a standby power system are prohibited except for required exit doors, equipment and ductwork necessary for heating, cooling or ventilation, sprinkler branch line piping, or electrical raceway serving the standby power system or being served by the standby power system and metallic piping with no joints or openings. Such penetrations shall be protected in accordance with Section 714.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B).]


15.20.035 IBC Section 403.4.8.3, Standby Power Loads, amended.

Section 403.4.8.3 of the International Building Code is amended by adding a fifth item which reads as follows:

5. Smoke control system. 

[Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B).]


15.20.040 IBC Section 403.7, Smoke Control, added.

Section 403.7 of the International Building Code is hereby added as follows:

403.7 Smoke control. A smoke control system meeting the requirements of Section 909 shall be provided in buildings that exceed ten stories, or contain a use requiring defend-in-place firefighting operations in which occupants of some area cannot readily evacuate that area. This includes portions of facilities housing functions essential to continuity of public safety operations, and Group I and LC Occupancies where in the judgment of the Building Official and Fire Code Official, occupants having limited capacity for self-preservation are located on floors more than 75 feet above the lowest level of Fire Department vehicle access. A smoke control system for a defend-in-place use may be a performance-based design to protect that use without providing smoke control throughout the entire building, but shall otherwise comply with Section 909.

Exception: Smoke control may be omitted when approved by the Building Official and Fire Code Official.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B).]


15.20.045 IBC Section 405.8, Standby Power, amended.

Section 405.8 of the International Building Code is hereby amended by adding the following sentence:

Fuel-fired emergency generator sets and associated fuel storage, including optional generator sets, located more than 30 feet below the lowest level of exit discharge requires the approval of the Fire Code Official.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B).]


15.20.050 IBC Section 712.1.3.1, Opening Size, amended.

Section 712.1.3.1 of the International Building Code is hereby amended by revising the last sentence, to read:

This application is limited to openings that do not connect more than four stories in buildings not required to have smoke control systems. In buildings that are required to have smoke control systems, escalators are limited to openings that do not connect more than four stories and non-egress stairs are limited to openings that do not atmospherically connect more than two stories.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B). Formerly 15.20.045.]


15.20.055 IBC Section 903.2, Sprinklers Where Required, amended.

Section 903.2 of the International Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new and existing buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described in Section 903.2.1 through 903.13.

The exception has been deleted.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B). Formerly 15.20.050.]


15.20.060 IBC Section 903.2.13, Additional Fire Sprinkler Requirements for New and Existing Buildings, added.

Section 903.2 of the International Building Code is hereby amended by adding a new Section 903.2.13 as follows:

903.2.13 Additional fire sprinkler requirements for new and existing buildings.

NEW BUILDINGS

1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in all occupancies requiring 2,000 gallons per minute or more fire flow, or where the gross square footage exceeds 5,000 square feet. This applies to all buildings regardless of type or use. Fire walls shall not be considered to separate a building to enable deletion of the required sprinkler system.

2. All newly constructed buildings regardless of gross square footage shall be provided with an automatic sprinkler system if adequate fire flow, hydrant spacing, or approved fire department access is not provided as required in the International Fire Code Section 503, Appendix B, and/or Title 15 of the Kenmore Municipal Code.

3. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in newly constructed residential occupancies.

Exception: Detached accessory dwelling units (ADU’s).

EXISTING BUILDINGS

1. The provisions of this section shall apply to existing buildings that are subject to alterations, repairs, modifications or similar improvements where the total cost of the work performed exceeds 50% of the King County Assessor’s Office valuation. Where subsequent alterations, repairs, modifications or similar improvements occur within five years of the first permitted work, the original building valuation shall be used and the total costs of the improvements shall be accumulative.

2. The provisions of this section shall apply to existing buildings where the gross floor area of the building is increased. Additions to buildings that would result in a gross floor area greater than 5,000 square feet shall be retrofitted throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system.

Exception: The floor area of an existing building may be increased up to 25%, not to exceed 5,000 square foot floor area increase. This exception shall be allowed one time only and acknowledgement of its use shall be recorded on the property title prior to permit issuance.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B). Formerly 15.20.055.]


15.20.065 IBC Section 903.3.1.1.1, Exempt locations, amended.

Item 6 from Section 903.3.1.1.1 of the International Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

6. Machine rooms, machinery spaces, control rooms and control spaces associated with traction elevators. The elevator machinery shall not be of the hydraulic type.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C).]


15.20.070 IBC Section 903.3.1.2, NFPA 13R sprinkler systems, amended.

Section 903.3.1.2 of the International Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

Automatic sprinkler systems in Group R occupancies up to and including four stories in height in buildings not exceeding 60 feet in height, as measured from the lowest point of fire department access, shall be permitted to be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13R.

The number of stories of Group R constructed in accordance with Sections 510.2 and 510.4 shall be measured from the horizontal assembly creating separate buildings.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C).]


15.20.075 IBC Section 903.4.3, Floor Control Valves, amended.

Section 903.4.3 of the International Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

903.4.3 Floor control valves. In multi-level buildings approved, supervised indicating control valves shall be provided at the point of connection to the riser on each floor.

Exception: When approved by the fire code official.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B). Formerly 15.20.065.]


15.20.080 IBC Section 903.5.1, Fire Sprinkler and Standpipe Drains, added.

Section 903.5.1 of the International Building Code is amended by adding a new Section 903.5.1 as follows:

903.5.1 Fire sprinkler and standpipe drains. Fire sprinkler and standpipe main/express drains shall be positioned to drain to the sanitary sewer. Additionally, maintenance or testing discharges from fire pumps shall be treated in order to comply with the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) requirements.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C).]


15.20.085 IBC Section 907.2, Alarms Where Required – New Buildings and Structures, amended.

Section 907.2 of the International Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

907.2 Where required – new buildings and structures.

All occupancies exceeding 3,000 square feet gross floor area shall be required to provide an approved and monitored fire detection system. Fire walls shall not be considered to be a separate building to enable deletion of the required fire detection system.

Exception: Group U or IRC regulated structures.

An approved fire alarm system installed in accordance with Sections 907.2.1 through 907.2.23 and provide occupant notification in accordance with Section 907.6, unless other requirements are provided by another section of the IFC. Where automatic protection installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 is provided and connected to the building fire alarm system, automatic heat detection required by this section shall not be required.

A minimum of one fire alarm box shall be provided in an approved location to initiate a fire alarm signal for the fire alarm systems employing automatic fire detectors or water-flow devices. Where other sections of this code allow elimination of fire alarm boxes due to sprinklers, a single fire alarm box shall be installed.

EXISTING BUILDINGS

The provisions of this section shall apply to existing buildings that are subject to alterations, repairs, modifications or similar improvements where the total cost of the work performed exceeds 50% of the King County Assessor’s Office valuation of the structure. Where subsequent alterations, repairs, modifications or similar improvements occur within five years of the first permitted work, the original building valuation shall be used and the total costs of improvements shall be accumulative.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B). Formerly 15.20.070.]


15.20.090 IBC Section 911.1.2.1, Fire Command Center Penetrations, added.

Section 911.1.2.1 of the International Building Code is hereby added to read as follows:

911.1.2.1 Penetrations. Penetrations into and openings through a fire command center are prohibited except for required exit doors, equipment and ductwork necessary for heating, cooling or ventilation, sprinkler branch line piping, electrical raceway for the fire department communication and control, electrical raceway serving the fire command center for being controlled from the fire command center and metallic piping with no joints or openings. Such penetrations shall be protected in accordance with Section 714.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B). Formerly 15.20.075.]


15.20.095 IBC Section 1608.1, Snow Load – General, amended.

Section 1608.1 of the International Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

1608.1 General. Design snow loads shall not be less than 25 psf, and the design roof loads shall not be less than that determined by Section 1607.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B). Formerly 15.20.080.]


15.20.100 IBC Section 1612.3, Establishment of Flood Hazard Areas, amended.

Section 1612.3 of the International Building Code is hereby amended by revising the second sentence to read as follows:

The flood hazard map shall include, at a minimum, areas of special flood hazard as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in an engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for King County, Washington and Incorporated Areas,” DATED April 9, 2005, as amended or revised with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and related supporting data along with any revisions thereto.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B). Formerly 15.20.085.]


15.20.105 IBC Section 3002.4, Elevator Car to Accommodate Ambulance Stretcher, amended.

Section 3002.4 of the International Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

3002.4 Elevator car to accommodate ambulance stretcher. Where elevators are provided in buildings four or more stories above, or four or more stories below grade plane, or in any R or I occupancy building provided with an elevator regardless of the number of stories, at least one elevator shall be provided for fire department emergency access to all floors. The elevator car shall be of such a size and arrangement to accommodate a 24-inch by 84-inch (610 mm by 1930 mm) ambulance stretcher in the horizontal, open position and shall be identified by the international symbol for emergency medical services (star of life). The symbol shall not be less than 3 inches (76 mm) high and shall be placed inside on both sides of the hoistway door frame.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B). Formerly 15.20.090.]


15.20.110 IBC Section 3112, Waterfront Structures, added.

Section 3112 of the International Building Code is hereby added as follows:

SECTION 3112

WATERFRONT STRUCTURES

Section 3112.1 General. In addition to other requirements of this code, all waterfront structures shall comply with the regulations of this section and the Kenmore Shoreline Management Code.

Section 3112.2 Approvals Required. Before any permit for a new waterfront structure or revisions to an existing waterfront structure is issued by the building official, the applicant shall obtain prior approval from all applicable state and federal agencies.

Section 3112.3 Definitions. For the purpose of this section, certain terms are defined as follows:

BULKHEAD. As defined in the Kenmore Shoreline Management Code.

COVERED WATERFRONT STRUCTURE. Any waterfront structure covered in whole or in part by a roof.

DOCK. As defined in the Kenmore Shoreline Management Code.

FLOAT. As defined in the Kenmore Shoreline Management Code.

PIER. As defined in the Kenmore Shoreline Management Code.

POLLUTION-GENERATING MATERIAL. Include those which are erodable or leachable materials, wastes, or chemicals. Metal roofs are considered to be pollution-generated unless they are treated to prevent leaching.

SUBSTRUCTURE. That portion of the construction of a dock, pier, wharf or other similar waterfront structure below and including the deck.

SUPERSTRUCTURE. That portion of the construction of a dock, pier, wharf or other similar waterfront structure above the deck.

WATERFRONT STRUCTURE. Structures including, but not limited to docks, piers, wharves, floats, mooring piles, anchor buoys, bulkheads, submerged or overhead wires, pipes and cables, and any object passing beneath, through or over the water, waterward of the ordinary high water mark.

WHARF. A structure of timber, stone, concrete or other material having a platform built along and parallel to navigable waters so that vessels may be moored alongside for loading and unloading, or for storage or repair.

Section 3112.4 Construction Requirements. Waterfront structures shall comply with Sections 3112.4.1 through 3112.4.4.

Section 3112.4.1 Substructure. The substructure may be constructed of any nonpollution-generating materials allowed by this code, and the Kenmore Shoreline Management Code. All decks shall sustain, within the limitations of this code, all dead loads plus a live load of not less than 100 pounds per square foot, assumed to act vertically. In addition to the live load requirement, all structures and every portion thereof shall be designed and constructed to resist a horizontal force of not less than 100 pounds per lineal foot acting at the deck line, in any direction.

Exception: For waterfront structures serving only a single-family dwelling, a live load of 40 psf may be used and a horizontal force need only be considered where applicable.

Automatic sprinklers shall be installed under the substructure in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 9 and the International Fire Code.

Section 3112.4.2 Superstructure. The superstructure shall be designed and constructed to sustain all dead loads, live loads, and wind loads required by this code, and may be constructed of any nonpollution-generating materials allowed by this code and the Kenmore Shorelines Management Code, except when the building area of a covered waterfront structure exceeds 1,000 square feet the entire superstructure and deck shall be constructed of noncombustible materials or as required for Type IV-H.T. Construction per Section 602.4 or be equipped throughout the structure with an approved automatic sprinkler system.

Section 3112.4.3 Hardware. All hardware used structurally shall be of a corrosive-resistant metal such as aluminum, brass, copper, and stainless steel, or be completely protected by an approved corrosion-resistant metal, such as zinc.

Section 3112.4.4 Standpipes. When a distance of travel to fire apparatus access exceeds one hundred fifty (150) feet, a Class I manual, dry standpipe system shall be provided in accordance with NFPA 303. Systems shall be provided with outlets located such that no point of the structure exceeds one hundred fifty (150) feet from a standpipe outlet.

Exception: Waterfront structures serving not more than one single-family dwelling.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B). Formerly 15.20.095.]


15.20.115 IBC Appendix adoption.

The City hereby adopts Appendix Chapter E, “Supplementary Accessibility Requirements,” and Appendix Chapter H, “Signs,” pursuant to Chapters 19.27 and 70.92 RCW. [Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B). Formerly 15.20.100.]


15.20.120 International Residential Code adopted.

The 2015 Edition of the International Residential Code, including Appendix Q, “Dwelling Unit Fire Sprinkler Systems,” and Appendix V, “Fire Sprinklers,” but excluding Chapter 1 of the IRC, “Scope and Administration,” as published by the International Code Council, is adopted, together with the amendments set forth in Chapter 51-51 WAC. The Construction Administrative Code, as set forth in Chapter 15.30 KMC, shall be used in place of IRC Chapter 1. [Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 11-0322 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B). Formerly 15.20.105.]


15.20.125 IRC Table R301.2(1), Climate and Geographic Design Criteria, amended.

Table R301.2(1) of the International Residential Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria IRC Table R301.2(1) 

	GROUND SNOW LOAD	WIND DESIGN	Seismic Design Categoryf	Subject To Damage From	Winter Design Tempe	Ice Barrier Underlayment Requiredh	Flood Hazardsg	Air Freezing Indexi	Mean Annual Tempj

	Speedd (mph)	Topographic effectsk	Special wind regionl	Wind-borne debris zonem	Weatheringa	Frost Line Depthb	Termitec

	25	110	No	No	No	D2	Moderate	12"	Slight to Moderate	24°F	No	Per KMC	148	51°F

For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kN/m2, 1 mile = 1.609 km/h.

a. Weathering may require a higher strength concrete or grade of masonry than necessary to satisfy the structural requirements of this code. The weathering column shall be filled in with the weathering index (i.e., “negligible,” “moderate” or “severe”) for concrete as determined from the Weathering Probability Map [Figure R301.2(3)]. The grade of masonry units shall be determined from ASTM C 34, C 55, C 62, C 73, C 90, C 129, C 145, C 216 or C 652.

b. The frost line depth may require deeper footings than indicated in Figure R403.1(1). The city shall fill in the frost line depth column with the minimum depth of footing below finish grade.

c. The city shall fill in this part of the table to indicate the need for protection depending on whether there has been a history of local subterranean termite damage.

d. The city shall fill in this part of the table with the wind speed from the basic wind speed map [Figure R301.2(4)A]. Wind exposure category shall be determined on site-specific basis in accordance with Section R301.2.1.4.

e. The outdoor design temperature shall be selected from the Washington State Energy Code, Appendix C. Deviations from the Appendix C temperatures shall be permitted to reflect local climates or local weather experience as determined by the building official.

f. The city shall fill in this part of the table with the Seismic Design Category determined from Section R301.2.2.1.

g. The city shall fill in this part of the table with (a) the date of the city’s entry into the National Flood Insurance Program (date of adoption of the first code or ordinance for management of flood hazard areas), (b) the date(s) of the currently effective FIRM and FBFM, or other flood hazard map adopted by the community, as may be amended.

h. In accordance with Sections R905.2.7.1, R905.4.3.1, R905.5.3.1, R905.6.3.1, R905.7.3.1 and R905.8.3.1, where there has been a history of local damage from the effects of ice damming, the city shall fill in this part of the table with “YES.” Otherwise, the city shall fill in this part of the table with “NO.”

i. The city shall fill in this part of the table with the 100-year return period air freezing index (BF-days) from Figure R403.3(2) or from the 100-year (99%) value on the National Climatic Data Center data table “Air Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32° Fahrenheit)” at http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/oa/fpsf/AFI-pubreturn.pdf.

j. The city shall fill in this part of the table with the mean annual temperature from the National Climatic Data Center data table “Air Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32° Fahrenheit)” at http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/oa/fpsf/AFI-pubreturn.pdf.

k. In accordance with Section R301.2.1.5, where there is local historic data documenting structural damage to buildings due to topographic wind speed-up effects, the city shall fill in this part of the table with “YES.” Otherwise, the city shall indicate “NO” in this part of the table.

l. In accordance with Figure R301.2(4)A, where there is no local historical data documenting unusual wind conditions, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with “YES” and identify any specific requirements. Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate “NO” in this part of the table.

m. In accordance with Section R301.2.1.2.1, the jurisdiction shall indicate the wind-borne debris wind zone(s). Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate “NO” in this part of the table.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 11-0322 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B). Formerly 15.20.110.]


15.20.130 IRC Appendix V, Fire Sprinklers, amended.

Appendix V, Section AV107.1 of the 2015 International Residential Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

AV107.1 Fire Sprinklers. An approved fire sprinkler system shall be installed in new one-family and two-family dwellings and townhouses in accordance with Appendix R.

Exception: Accessory dwelling units.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 11-0322 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B). Formerly 15.20.115.]


15.20.135 1997 Uniform Housing Code adopted.

The Uniform Housing Code issued by the International Conference of Building Officials, 1997 Edition, together with amendments and/or additions thereto, is adopted in its entirety by this reference as the housing code for the City except that references to the uniform codes shall be replaced with the appropriate technical codes and sections as adopted by the City. [Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B). Formerly 15.20.120.]


15.20.140 UHC Section 203, Appeals – Amended.

Section 203 of the Uniform Housing Code is hereby amended to read:

SECTION 203 – APPEALS

Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official shall be made to the hearing examiner in accordance with the requirements and process of Chapter 19.30 KMC. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder has been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply or an equally good or better solution is proposed. The hearing examiner shall have not authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of this code nor shall the hearing examiner be empowered to waive requirements of either this code or the technical codes which are the codes, appendices and referenced code standards adopted by the city.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 12-0333 § 3. Formerly 15.20.125.]


15.20.145 UHC Section 1201.2, Processing of Appeals – Amended.

Section 1201.2 of the Uniform Housing Code is hereby amended to read:

1201.2 Processing of Appeal. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official shall be made to the hearing examiner in accordance with the requirements and process of Chapter 19.30 KMC.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 12-0333 § 4. Formerly 15.20.130.]


15.20.150 UHC Section 1201.3 deleted.

Section 1201.3 of the Uniform Housing Code is deleted. [Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 12-0333 § 5. Formerly 15.20.135.]


15.20.155 UHC Chapter 13 deleted.

Chapter 13, “Rules for Conduct of Hearing Appeals,” of the Uniform Housing Code is deleted. [Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 12-0333 § 6. Formerly 15.20.140.]


15.20.160 International Mechanical Code adopted.

The 2015 Edition of the International Mechanical Code, excluding Chapter 1, “Scope and Administration,” as published by the International Code Council, is adopted, together with the amendments set forth in Chapter 51-52 WAC. The Construction Administrative Code, as set forth in Chapter 15.30 KMC, shall be used in place of IMC Chapter 1. [Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B). Formerly 15.20.145.]


15.20.165 Uniform Plumbing Code adopted.

The 2015 Edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code, excluding Chapter 1, “Administration,” as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, is adopted, together with Appendix A, “Recommended Rules for Sizing the Water Supply System,” Appendix B, “Explanatory Notes on Combination Waste and Vent Systems,” Appendix C, “Alternate Plumbing Systems,” Appendix I, “Installation Standards,” Appendix K, “Potable Rainwater Catchment Systems,” and the amendments set forth in Chapters 51-52 and 51-57 WAC. The Construction Administrative Code, as set forth in Chapter 15.30 KMC, shall be used in place of UPC Chapter 1. [Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B). Formerly 15.20.150.]


15.20.170 National Fuel Gas Code (NFPA 54) adopted.

The 2015 National Fuel Gas Code, excluding Chapter 1, “Administration,” as published by NFPA, is adopted together with the amendments set forth in Chapter 51-52 WAC. The Construction Administrative Code, as set forth in Chapter 15.30 KMC, shall be used in place of NFPA 54 Chapter 1. [Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B). Formerly 15.20.155.]


15.20.175 Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code (NFPA 58) adopted.

The 2014 Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code, excluding Chapter 1, “Administration,” as published by NFPA, is adopted, together with the amendments set forth in Chapter 51-52 WAC. The Construction Administrative Code, as set forth in Chapter 15.30 KMC, shall be used in place of NFPA 58 Chapter 1. [Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B). Formerly 15.20.160.]


15.20.180 International Fuel Gas Code adopted.

The 2015 Edition of the International Fuel Gas Code, excluding Chapter 1, “Administration,” as published by the International Code Council, is adopted, together with the amendments set forth in Chapter 51-52 WAC. The Construction Administrative Code, as set forth in Chapter 15.30 KMC, shall be used in place of IFGC Chapter 1. [Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B). Formerly 15.20.165.]


15.20.185 Washington State Energy Code adopted.

The 2015 Washington State Energy Code, excluding Chapter 1, as adopted by the State Building Code Council in Chapters 51-11C and 51-11R WAC, is adopted. The Construction Administrative Code, as set forth in Chapter 15.30 KMC, shall be used in place of Chapter 1. [Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B). Formerly 15.20.170.]


15.20.200 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings adopted.

The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, issued by the International Conference of Building Officials, 1997 Edition, together with amendments and/or additions thereto, is adopted in its entirety by this reference as if fully set forth herein as the dangerous buildings code for the City, except that references to the uniform codes shall be replaced with the appropriate technical codes and sections as adopted by this City. [Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B). Formerly 15.20.185.]


15.20.205 UCADB Section 205, Appeals, amended.

Section 205 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read:

SECTION 205 – APPEALS

Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official shall be made to the hearing examiner in accordance with the requirements and process of Chapter 19.30 KMC. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder has been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply or an equally good or better solution is proposed. The hearing examiner shall have not authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of this code nor shall the hearing examiner be empowered to waive requirements of either this code or the technical codes which are the codes, appendices and referenced code standards adopted by the city.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 12-0333 § 7. Formerly 15.20.190.]


15.20.210 UCADB Section 501.2, Processing of Appeals, amended.

Section 501.2 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read:

501.2 Processing of Appeal. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official shall be made to the hearing examiner in accordance with the requirements and process of Chapter 19.30 KMC.

[Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 12-0333 § 8. Formerly 15.20.195.]


15.20.215 UCADB Section 501.3 deleted.

Section 501.3 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is deleted. [Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 12-0333 § 9. Formerly 15.20.200.]


15.20.220 UCADB Chapter 6 deleted.

Chapter 6, “Procedures for Conduct of Hearing Appeals,” of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is deleted. [Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 12-0333 § 10. Formerly 15.20.205.]


15.20.225 International Existing Building Code adopted.

The 2015 Edition of the International Existing Building Code, excluding Chapter 1, “Scope and Administration,” as published by the International Code Council, is adopted, together with Appendix A, “Guidelines for the Seismic Retrofit of Existing Buildings,” and the amendments set forth in Chapter 51-50 WAC. The Construction Administrative Code, as set forth in Chapter 15.30 KMC, shall be used in place of IEBC Chapter 1. [Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C); Ord. 13-0360 § 5 (Exh. B); Ord. 10-0310 § 3 (Exh. B). Formerly 15.20.210.]


15.20.230 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code adopted.

The 2015 Edition of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, excluding Chapter 1, as published by the International Code Council, is adopted, together with the amendments set forth in Chapter 51-50 WAC. The Construction Administrative Code, as set forth in Chapter 15.30 KMC, shall be used in place of ISPSC Chapter 1. [Ord. 16-0423 § 3 (Exh. C).]


Chapter 15.25 LAND ALTERATIONS

Sections:

15.25.010    Purpose.

15.25.020    Scope.

15.25.030    Definitions.

15.25.040    References adopted.

15.25.050    Administration.

15.25.060    Hazards.

15.25.070    Permit required – Exception.

15.25.080    Emergency repairs or activities.

15.25.090    Application requirements.

15.25.100    Time limitation of application.

15.25.110    Validity of permit.

15.25.120    Permit expiration.

15.25.130    Suspension or revocation.

15.25.140    Liability insurance required – Exception.

15.25.150    Restrictions.

15.25.160    Standards.

15.25.170    Land restoration.

15.25.180    Shorelines.

15.25.190    Enforcement.

15.25.200    Financial guarantees authorized.


15.25.010 Purpose.

This chapter is intended to regulate land alterations within the City in order to protect public health, safety and welfare by:

A. Minimizing adverse stormwater impacts caused by land alterations;

B. Protecting water quality from the adverse impacts associated with erosion and sedimentation;

C. Minimizing aquatic and terrestrial wildlife habitat loss caused by the removal of vegetation;

D. Encouraging the retention of native vegetation and soils and soils during clearing and grading activities;

E. Protecting critical areas from adverse clearing and grading activities;

F. Preventing damage to property and harm to persons caused by land alterations;

G. Establishing administrative procedures for the issuance of permits, approval of plans, and inspection of land alteration operations; and

H. Providing penalties for the violation of this chapter. [Ord. 16-0428 § 11 (Att. G); Ord. 12-0345 § 3 (Exh. A).]


15.25.020 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter apply to land alterations within the City, except work located in a public right-of-way. Where conflicts occur between the technical requirements of this chapter and a geotechnical report, the geotechnical report shall govern. [Ord. 12-0345 § 3 (Exh. A).]


15.25.030 Definitions.

Certain words and phrases used in this chapter, unless otherwise clearly indicated by their context, mean as follows:

A. “Applicant” means a person who files an application for a permit under this chapter and who is either the owner of the land on which that proposed activity would be conducted, a contract purchaser, or the authorized agent of such a person.

B. “Bench” is a relatively level step excavated or constructed on the face of a graded slope surface for drainage and maintenance purposes.

C. “City manager” means the City of Kenmore city manager or his or her designee(s).

D. “Clearing” means the cutting or removal of vegetation or other organic plant material by physical, mechanical, chemical or any other means.

E. “Department” means the department designated by the city manager to administer this chapter.

F. “Diameter at breast height” means a tree’s diameter in inches at four and one-half feet above the ground. On multiple stemmed or trunked trees, the diameter shall be the sum of diameters of all individual stems or trunks.

G. “Director” means the director of the department designated by the city manager to administer this chapter.

H. “Earth material” is any rock, natural soil or any combination thereof.

I. “Erosion” is the wearing away of the ground surface as the result of the movement of wind, water and/or ice.

J. “Excavation” is the removal of earth material.

K. “Fill” is a deposit of earth material placed by mechanical means.

L. “Grade” means the elevation of the ground surface.

1. “Existing grade” is the grade prior to grading.

2. “Rough grade” is the stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plan.

3. “Finish grade” is the final grade of the site which conforms to the approved plan.

M. “Grading” is any excavating, filling, removing of the duff layer, or combination thereof.

N. “Hazard tree” means any tree that has a high probability of failure due to any structural defect, disease or damage or combination of defect, disease or damage. A “high probability of failure” means falling and causing damage to persons or property. A “hazard tree” includes, but is not limited to, any isolated tree(s) that have a high probability of failure due to low wind-firmness in post-construction conditions as determined by a qualified tree protection professional.

O. “Impervious surface” means a nonvegetated surface which either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil mantle under natural conditions prior to development, and/or which causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at a rate of flow greater than the flow under natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, roofs, walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, paved areas, gravel areas, areas of packed or oiled earthen materials or other surfaces which similarly impede the natural infiltration of surface and stormwater. Open uncovered flow control or water quality treatment facilities shall not be considered as impervious surfaces for the purposes of determining whether thresholds for the application of minimum requirements are exceeded, but shall be considered impervious surfaces for the purposes of runoff modeling.

P. “Land alteration” means any alteration to the surface of the land or the surface drainage including improvements to a storm water tract. Land alterations include but are not limited to: excavations, fills, clearing, grading, and tree removal or any combination thereof; placing or removing impervious surfaces, including structures and pavement; compacting the earth surface; changing the existing grade; or changing the surface so that surface water leaves the site differently, including changes to flow path, flow rate, or flow volume.

Q. “Removal” with regard to trees means the act of removing a tree by digging up, cutting down, or causing a tree to die within a period of three years from such act.

R. “Shorelines” means those lands defined as shorelines in the State Shorelines Management Act of 1971.

S. “Significant tree” means an existing healthy tree that is not a hazard tree and that, when measured four and one-half feet above grade, has a minimum diameter of:

1. Eight inches for evergreen trees; or

2. Twelve inches for deciduous trees.

T. “Site” is any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof where projects covered by this chapter are performed or permitted.

U. “Slope” is an inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of vertical distance to horizontal distance.

V. “Storm drain system” means a system of gutters, pipes, or ditches used to carry surface and stormwater from the surrounding lands to drainage facilities, critical areas, streams or lakes.

W. “Stormwater” means water originating from rainfall and other precipitation that ultimately flows into drainage facilities, rivers, streams, lakes and wetlands. As applied in this chapter, stormwater is synonymous with the term “surface water.”

X. “Structure” means anything permanently constructed in or on the ground, or over the water, and excluding fences eight feet or less in height, decks less than 18 inches above grade, paved areas, and structural or nonstructural fill.

Y. “Terrace” is a relatively level step excavated or constructed on the face of a graded slope surface for drainage and maintenance purposes.

Z. “Tree” means a self-supporting woody perennial plant characterized by one main stem or trunk of at least six inches diameter at breast height, or a multiple stemmed or trunk system with a definite crown, maturing at a height of at least 12 feet above ground level. The department shall determine whether any specific woody plant shall be considered a tree.

AA. “Vegetation” means any and all organic plant life growing at, below, or above the soil surface. [Ord. 16-0428 § 11 (Att. G); Ord. 12-0345 § 3 (Exh. A).]


15.25.040 References adopted.

The following codes and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this chapter to the extent applicable. In the event of differences between provisions of this chapter and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.

A. The street standards of Chapter 12.50 KMC;

B. The appropriate version of the Washington State Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road, Bridge, and Municipal Construction, as referenced in the road standards adopted by the City;

C. The King County Surface Water Design Manual (KCSWDM) adopted by Chapter 13.35 KMC;

D. The current edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways (MUTCD). [Ord. 12-0345 § 3 (Exh. A).]


15.25.050 Administration.

The city manager is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

A. Inspections. The city manager is authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

B. Right of Entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the city manager has reasonable cause to believe that any land, building, structure, premises, or portion thereof is being used in violation of this chapter, the city manager may enter such land, building, structure, premises, or portion thereof at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the director by this chapter; provided, that if such building, land, structure, premises or portion thereof is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and demand entry, and if such land, building, structure, premises, or portion thereof be unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the land, building, structure, premises, or portion thereof and demand entry.

No owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of any building, land, structure, premises, or portion thereof shall fail or neglect, after proper demand, to promptly permit entry thereon by the city manager for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter. Any person violating this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor. [Ord. 12-0345 § 3 (Exh. A).]


15.25.060 Hazards.

Whenever the city manager determines that an existing site, as a result of land alterations, has become a hazard to life and limb, or endangers property, or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel, the owner of the property upon which the land alteration is located, or other person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the city manager, shall within the period specified therein restore the site affected by such land alteration or repair or eliminate such land alteration so as to eliminate the hazard and be in conformance with the requirements of this chapter. [Ord. 12-0345 § 3 (Exh. A).]


15.25.070 Permit required – Exception.

No land alteration shall be performed without first having obtained a permit therefor from the City. Exemptions from permit requirements of this chapter shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other laws or ordinances of the City. Even if a permit is required, best management practices must be utilized to limit erosion and sedimentation. Permits shall not be required for the following:

A. Grading.

1. Excavation for construction of a structure authorized by a valid building permit,

2. Excavations for trenches for utilities not within critical areas, shorelines or associated buffers,

3. Exploratory excavations performed under the direction of a registered design professional; provided, that any disturbance of the area shall be the minimum necessary to carry out the work or studies and the disturbed area shall be immediately restored, and

4. Excavation or fill less than four feet in vertical depth not involving more than 100 cubic yards of earth or other material on a single site and not within critical areas, shorelines or associated buffers;

B. Clearing and Tree Removal.

1. Clearing and removal of trees for the construction of a structure authorized by a valid building permit,

2. Removal of significant trees on lots that contain existing single-family detached dwellings, and that are not within critical areas, shorelines or associated buffers, native growth protection areas, wildlife protection zones, or that have not been previously designated for protection (e.g., as part of a plat) and based on the following table:

	Lots up to 10,000 sq. ft.:	2 trees per year

	Lots 10,001 sq. ft. to 20,000 sq. ft.:	4 trees per year

	Lots 20,001 sq. ft. to 30,000 sq. ft.:	6 trees per year

	Lots 30,000 sq. ft. and greater:	8 trees per year

3. Clearing by a public agency, franchise utility or public or private golf course for routine maintenance activities,

4. Minor stream restoration projects for fish habitat enhancement pursuant to a Washington State Joint Aquatic Resource Permit Application (JARPA),

5. Normal and routine maintenance of existing lawns and landscaping, and

6. Removal of noxious weeds. Removal of noxious weeds from critical areas, shorelines or associated buffers shall be subject to the requirements of KMC Title 16 and Chapter 18.55 KMC;

C. Engineering.

1. Less than 2,000 square feet of replaced impervious surface or new plus replaced impervious surface that is not within critical areas or associated buffers, and

2. Land alterations that are exempt from a grading permit and that do not alter the method by which the stormwater leaves the site. [Ord. 16-0428 § 11 (Att. G); Ord. 12-0345 § 3 (Exh. A).]


15.25.080 Emergency repairs or activities.

Where repairs or activities necessary to prevent or correct an immediate threat to public health, safety, property or welfare are performed in an emergency situation, the permit application and evidence of the threat shall be submitted within the next business working day to the City (for example, landslide stabilization, flood prevention and hazard tree removal). Mitigation may be required for such repairs or activities. [Ord. 12-0345 § 3 (Exh. A).]


15.25.090 Application requirements.

A. The department shall not commence review of any application for land alteration until the applicant has submitted the required materials and fees for a complete application.

B. The applicant shall file the following information with the department:

1. A complete permit application, with supporting affidavits, on forms provided by the department;

2. Information specified on the application checklist provided by the department for the requested decision(s); and

3. Any additional information or materials that the department specifies at the pre-application meeting.

C. A permit application is complete for purposes of this section upon satisfaction of the application requirements and upon the department’s determination that the application is sufficiently complete for continued processing, even though additional information may be required or project modifications may be undertaken subsequently. The determination of completeness shall not preclude the department from requesting additional information or studies either at the time of notice of completeness or subsequently if new or additional information is required or substantial changes in the proposed land application occur, as determined by the department.

D. The city manager may waive any specific submittal requirements that are determined to be unnecessary for review of an application.

E. The applicant shall attest by written oath to the accuracy of all information submitted with an application. [Ord. 12-0345 § 3 (Exh. A).]


15.25.100 Time limitation of application.

A. Applications for which no permit is issued within 18 months following the date of application shall expire by limitation and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed in accordance with State law by the city manager.

B. Applications may be canceled for inactivity, if an applicant fails to respond to the department’s written request for revisions, corrections, actions or additional information within 90 days of the date of request. The city manager may extend the response period beyond 90 days if within the original 90-day time period the applicant provides and subsequently adheres to an approved schedule with specific target dates for submitting the full revisions, corrections or other information needed by the department.

C. The city manager may extend the life of an application if any of the following conditions exist:

1. Compliance with the State Environmental Policy Act is in progress; or

2. Any other City review is in progress; provided, that the applicant has submitted a complete response to City requests or the city manager determines that unique or unusual circumstances exist that warrant additional time for such response, and the city manager determines that the review is proceeding in a timely manner toward final City decision; or

3. Litigation against the City or applicant is in progress, the outcome of which may affect the validity or the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to such application. [Ord. 12-0345 § 3 (Exh. A).]


15.25.110 Validity of permit.

The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of any other ordinance or law of the City. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter or other ordinance or law of the City shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the city manager from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents and other data. [Ord. 12-0345 § 3 (Exh. A).]


15.25.120 Permit expiration.

A. Stand-alone land alteration permits shall expire two years from the date of issuance. Land alteration permits issued and associated with another land use permit or approval shall expire in conjunction with the land use permit or approval. The city manager may approve a request for an extended expiration date where a construction schedule is provided by the applicant and approved prior to permit issuance.

B. Stand-alone land alteration permits which have been expired for less than one year may be renewed for a period of one year from the expiration date for an additional fee, as long as no changes have been made to the originally approved plans. Land alteration permits associated with a land use permit or approval which has been expired for less than one year may be renewed for an additional fee as long as no changes have been made to the originally approved land alteration plans and the originally approved land use permit or approval is not expired. For permits that have been expired for longer than one year, a new permit must be obtained and full new fees paid. No permit shall be renewed more than once. [Ord. 12-0345 § 3 (Exh. A).]


15.25.130 Suspension or revocation.

Subject to applicable case authority, the city manager is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter wherever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this code. [Ord. 12-0345 § 3 (Exh. A).]


15.25.140 Liability insurance required – Exception.

The applicant shall procure and maintain, for the duration of the permit, insurance against claims for injuries to persons or damage to property which may arise from or in connection with the performance of the land alteration. The insurance shall include automobile liability and commercial general liability. The automobile liability insurance shall be a minimum combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage of $1,000,000 per accident, and the commercial general liability insurance shall be with limits no less than $1,000,000 each occurrence, and $2,000,000 general aggregate. The City shall be named as an insured under the commercial general liability insurance policy. The insurance shall be endorsed to state that coverage shall not be cancelled, except after 30 days’ prior written notice to the City. Prior to issuance of a land alteration permit for grading, the applicant shall provide to the department an original certificate evidencing the required insurance, on a form approved by the city manager, and a copy of the amendatory endorsement. The insurance requirements may be waived or modified by the city manager for projects which do not present a risk to surrounding properties. Liability insurance shall not be required of other City departments. [Ord. 12-0345 § 3 (Exh. A).]


15.25.150 Restrictions.

Land alterations for projects within critical areas per Chapter 18.55 KMC are restricted to the time period between May 1st and October 1st, with all grading activities stabilized by October 1st. No land alteration activities shall occur outside of this time period, except with written approval from the city manager. [Ord. 12-0345 § 3 (Exh. A).]


15.25.160 Standards.

A. Any activity that will clear, grade or otherwise disturb the site, whether requiring a land alteration permit or not, shall provide erosion and sediment control (ESC) that prevents, to the maximum extent possible, the transport of sediment from the site to drainage facilities, water resources and adjacent properties. Erosion and sediment control shall be applied as specified by the temporary ESC measures and performance criteria and implementation requirements of KMC Title 13.

B. Cuts and fills shall conform to the following provisions unless otherwise approved by the city manager:

1. Slope. No slope of cut and fill of surfaces shall be steeper than is safe for the intended use and shall not exceed two horizontal to one vertical, unless approved by the geotechnical engineer of record.

2. Erosion Control. All disturbed areas including faces of cuts and fill slopes shall be prepared and maintained to control erosion in compliance with subsection A of this section.

3. Preparation of Ground. The ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, topsoil, and other unsuitable materials.

4. Fill Material. Fill material shall not include organic, frozen or other deleterious materials, and shall be made with nonnoxious, nonflammable, noncombustible and nonputrescible solids. No rock or similar irreducible material greater than 18 inches in diameter shall be used.

5. Drainage. Provisions shall be made to:

a. Prevent any surface water or seepage from damaging the cut face of any excavations or the sloping face of a fill; and

b. Carry any surface waters that are or might be concentrated as a result of a fill or excavation to a natural watercourse or public storm drain system, or by other means approved by the department of public works.

6. Compaction of Permeable Surfaces. The compaction of new permeable surfaces should protect the soil moisture holding capacity. The duff layer or native topsoil shall be retained to the maximum extent practicable. Soil amendments shall be required to mitigate for lost moisture holding capacity where compaction or removal of some or all of the duff layer or underlying topsoil has occurred. The amendment must be such that the replaced topsoil is a minimum of eight inches thick, unless the applicant demonstrates that a different thickness will provide conditions equivalent to the soil moisture holding capacity native to the site.

7. Bench/Terrace. Benches, if required, at least 10 feet in width shall be back-sloped and shall be established at not more than 25 feet vertical intervals to control surface drainage and debris. Swales or ditches on benches shall have a maximum gradient of five percent.

8. Access Roads Maintenance. Access roads to grading sites shall be maintained and located to the satisfaction of the city manager to minimize problems of dust, mud and traffic circulation.

9. Access Roads – Gate. Access roads to grading sites shall be controlled by a gate when required by the city manager.

10. Warning Signs. Signs warning of hazardous conditions, if such exist, shall be established at locations as required by the city manager. All signage and traffic control shall be compliant with Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.

11. Fencing. Fencing, where required by the city manager to protect life, limb and property, must be installed with lockable gates and must be closed and locked when work is not occurring at the site. The fence must be no less than five feet in height and cannot have a horizontal opening larger than two inches.

12. Setbacks. The tops and the toes of cut and fill slopes shall be set back from property boundaries as far as necessary to protect adjacent properties and to prevent damage from water runoff or erosion of the slopes.

The tops and the toes of cut and fill slopes shall be set back from structures as far as is necessary to protect foundation support and to prevent damage from water runoff or erosion of the slopes.

Slopes and setbacks shall be determined by the city manager.

13. Easements. The applicant shall provide to the department copies of recorded and executed easements for land alterations that are proposed on neighboring properties.

C. For land alteration permits issued under this chapter, the current vegetation standards contained in this section and in the following regulations shall apply:

1. Chapter 18.55 KMC, Critical Areas;

2. Property-specific development standards pursuant to Chapter 18.47 KMC;

3. Critical drainage area designations identified by adopted administrative rule;

4. Wildlife habitat corridors; and

5. Chapter 18.35 KMC, Development Standards – Landscaping.

D. Tree Removal. The following additional regulations shall apply to vacant property:

1. KMC 18.57.060, tree management and protection. [Ord. 16-0428 § 11 (Att. G); Ord. 12-0345 § 3 (Exh. A).]


15.25.170 Land restoration.

A. Finish grades shall encourage the uses permitted within the underlying zone classification.

B. Grading or backfilling shall not include organic, frozen or other deleterious materials, and shall be made with nonnoxious, nonflammable, noncombustible and nonputrescible solids. No rock or similar irreducible material greater than 18 inches shall be used.

C. Such graded or backfilled areas, except for roads, shall be sodded or surfaced with soil of a quality at least equal to the topsoil of the immediately surrounding land areas, and to a depth of at least four inches or a depth of that of the topsoil of immediately surrounding land areas if less than four inches.

D. Such topsoil as required by subsection C of this section shall be planted with trees, shrubs, legumes or grasses, and these plants shall be so selected as to be indigenous to the surrounding area, or as approved through a mitigation plan.

E. Graded or backfilled areas shall be reclaimed in a manner which will not allow water to collect and permit stagnant water to remain, unless otherwise approved through a mitigation plan. Suitable drainage systems approved by the city manager shall be constructed or installed if natural drainage is not possible.

F. Waste or soil piles shall be leveled and the area treated as to sodding or surfacing and planting as required in subsections D and E of this section. [Ord. 12-0345 § 3 (Exh. A).]


15.25.180 Shorelines.

A. No permit required by this chapter shall be issued for land alteration upon the shorelines until approved by the appropriate federal, State and local authority (see KMC Title 16).

B. For land alteration which requires a shoreline management substantial development permit, the conditions of the shoreline management substantial development permit shall be incorporated into the conditions of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter and shall be subject to the inspection and enforcement procedures authorized by this chapter. [Ord. 12-0345 § 3 (Exh. A).]


15.25.190 Enforcement.

The city manager is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the ordinances and resolutions codified in it, and any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder pursuant to the enforcement and penalty provisions of Chapter 1.20 KMC, Code Enforcement.

If land alterations inconsistent with the purposes and requirements of this chapter have occurred on a site, the City shall not accept or grant any development permits or approvals for the site unless the applicant adequately restores the site. The city manager shall require appropriate restoration of the site under a City approved restoration plan which shall include a time schedule for compliance if significant resource damage has or may occur. If restoration has not been completed within the time established by the department, the city manager shall order restoration using funds from the appropriate contingency accounts and seek restitution from the property owner through available legal methods. [Ord. 12-0345 § 3 (Exh. A).]


15.25.200 Financial guarantees authorized.

The department is authorized to require all applicants who are issued permits or approvals under the provisions of this chapter to post performance financial guarantees consistent with the provisions of KMC Title 21 in an amount up to 125 percent of the estimated cost of completing or restoring the work in accordance with the approved plans, specifications, permit or approval requirements, and applicable regulations. [Ord. 12-0345 § 3 (Exh. A).]


Chapter 15.30 CONSTRUCTION ADMINISTRATIVE CODE*

Sections:

Article I. General

15.30.010    Title.

15.30.015    Purpose.

15.30.020    Scope.

15.30.025    Definitions.

15.30.030    Appendices.

15.30.035    Intent.

15.30.040    Referenced codes.

15.30.045    International Building Code – Scope.

15.30.050    International Residential Code – Scope.

15.30.055    Mechanical code – Scope.

15.30.060    Liquid propane gas.

15.30.065    Natural gas code – Scope.

15.30.070    Plumbing code – Scope.

15.30.075    Energy code.

15.30.077    Swimming pool and spa code – Scope.

Article II. Applicability

15.30.080    General.

15.30.085    Other laws.

15.30.090    Application of references.

15.30.095    Referenced codes and standards.

15.30.100    Partial invalidity.

15.30.105    Existing structures.

15.30.110    Structures in areas of special flood hazard.

Article III. Department of Building Safety

15.30.115    Creation of enforcement agency.

15.30.120    Appointment.

15.30.125    Deputies.

Article IV. Duties and Powers of Building Official

15.30.130    General.

15.30.135    Applications and permits.

15.30.140    Notices and orders.

15.30.145    Inspections.

15.30.150    Identification.

15.30.155    Right of entry.

15.30.160    Department records.

15.30.165    Liability.

15.30.170    Approved materials and equipment.

15.30.175    Used materials and equipment.

15.30.180    Modifications.

15.30.185    Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and equipment.

15.30.190    Research reports.

15.30.195    Tests.

Article V. Permits

15.30.200    Permit required.

15.30.205    Work exempt from permit.

15.30.210    Emergency repairs.

15.30.215    Repairs.

15.30.220    Application for permit.

15.30.225    Complete application.

15.30.230    Action on application.

15.30.235    Time limitation of application.

15.30.240    Validity of permit.

15.30.245    Permit expiration.

15.30.250    Suspension or revocation.

15.30.255    Placement of permit.

Article VI. Floor and Roof Design Loads

15.30.260    Live loads posted.

15.30.265    Issuance of certificate of occupancy.

15.30.270    Restrictions on loading.

Article VII. Submittal Documents

15.30.275    General.

15.30.280    Construction documents.

15.30.290    Examination of documents.

15.30.295    Use of consultants.

15.30.300    Approval of construction documents.

15.30.305    Phased approval.

15.30.310    Design professional in responsible charge – General.

15.30.315    Deferred submittals.

15.30.320    Amended construction documents.

15.30.325    Retention of construction documents.

Article VIII. Temporary Structures and Uses

15.30.330    General.

15.30.335    Conformance.

15.30.340    Termination of approval.

Article IX. Fees

15.30.345    Payment of fees.

15.30.350    Schedule of permit fees.

15.30.355    Plan review fees.

15.30.360    Master and basic plan program.

15.30.365    Building permit valuations.

15.30.370    Work commencing before permit issuance.

15.30.375    Related fees.

15.30.380    Refunds.

Article X. Inspections

15.30.390    General.

15.30.395    Preliminary inspections.

15.30.400    Manufacturer’s installation instructions.

15.30.405    Required inspections.

15.30.410    Footing and foundation inspection.

15.30.415    Concrete slab and under-floor inspection.

15.30.420    Lowest floor elevation.

15.30.425    Exterior wall sheathing inspection.

15.30.430    Roof sheathing inspection.

15.30.435    IMC/UPC/GAS/NEC rough in inspection.

15.30.440    Frame inspection.

15.30.445    Multi-unit residential building enclosure inspection.

15.30.450    Lath, gypsum board and gypsum panel product inspection.

15.30.455    Fire- and smoke-resistant penetrations.

15.30.460    Energy efficiency inspection.

15.30.465    Reinspection.

15.30.470    Other inspections.

15.30.475    Special inspections.

15.30.480    Final inspection.

15.30.485    Inspection agencies.

15.30.490    Inspection requests.

15.30.495    Approval required.

Article XI. Certificate of Occupancy

15.30.500    Use and occupancy.

15.30.505    Certificate issued.

15.30.510    Temporary or phased occupancy.

15.30.515    Revocation.

Article XII. Service Utilities

15.30.520    Connection of service utilities.

15.30.525    Temporary connection.

15.30.530    Authority to disconnect service utilities.

Article XIII. Appeals

15.30.535    General.

15.30.540    Limitations on authority.

15.30.545    Qualifications.

15.30.550    Reconsideration.

15.30.555    Corrections.

15.30.560    Court review.

Article XIV. Violations

15.30.565    Unlawful acts.

15.30.570    Notice of violation.

15.30.575    Prosecution of violation.

15.30.580    Violation – Penalties.

Article XV. Stop Work Order

15.30.585    Authority.

15.30.590    Issuance.

15.30.595    Investigation fee.

15.30.600    Unlawful continuance.

Article XVI. Unsafe Structures and Equipment

15.30.605    General.

*Prior legislation: Ord. 07-0261 § 4.

Article I. General


15.30.010 Title.

The regulations contained in this chapter shall be known as the construction administrative code of the City, and are hereinafter referred to as “this code.” [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.015 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the administration, organization and enforcement of the technical codes adopted by the City. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.020 Scope.

The provisions of this code shall apply to the administration of the technical codes as adopted by the State of Washington and listed:

A. 2015 International Building Code – Chapter 51-50 WAC;

B. 2015 International Residential Code – Chapter 51-51 WAC;

C. 2015 International Mechanical Code – Chapter 51-52 WAC;

D. 2015 National Fuel Gas Code (NFPA 54) – Chapter 51-52 WAC;

E. 2014 Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code (NFPA 58) – Chapter 51-52 WAC;

F. 2015 International Fuel Gas Code – Chapter 51-52 WAC;

G. 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code – Chapters 51-56 and 51-57 WAC;

H. 2015 International Existing Building Code – Chapter 51-50 WAC;

I. 2015 Washington State Energy Code, Chapters 51-11C and 51-11R WAC;

J. 2015 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.025 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meanings set forth in this section. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. Webster’s Third International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged, latest edition, shall be considered as providing ordinary accepted meanings. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the masculine.

A. “Action” means a specific response complying fully with a specific request by the City.

B. “Building service equipment” means and refers to the plumbing, mechanical and electrical equipment including piping, wiring, fixtures, and other accessories which provide sanitation, lighting, heating, ventilation, cooling, refrigeration, firefighting, and transportation facilities essential to the occupancy of the building or structure for its designated use.

C. “Complete response” means an adequate response to all requests from City staff in sufficient detail to allow the application to be processed.

D. “Dangerous building code” means the 1997 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings promulgated by the International Council of Building Officials as adopted by the City.

E. “Energy code” means the Washington State Energy Code promulgated by the Washington State Building Code Council as adopted by the City.

F. “Housing code” means the 1997 Uniform Housing Code promulgated by the International Council of Building Officials as adopted by the City.

G. “IBC” means the latest edition of the International Building Code promulgated by the International Code Council as adopted by this City.

H. “IEBC” means the latest edition of the International Existing Building Code promulgated by the International Code Council as adopted by this City.

I. “IMC” means the latest edition of the International Mechanical Code promulgated by the International Code Council as adopted by this City.

J. “IRC” means the latest edition of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings promulgated by the International Code Council as adopted by this City.

K. “ISPSC” means the latest edition of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code promulgated by the International Code Council as adopted by this City.

L. “Minor field change” means a change to an approved plan that does not change the building use, area, height, or location on a lot and does not affect the means of egress, accessibility, or structural design and does not add plumbing or mechanical fixtures or appliances.

M. “NEC” means the latest edition of the National Electrical Code promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association as adopted by this City.

N. “Occupancy” means the purpose for which a building, or part thereof, is used or intended to be used.

O. “Shall,” as used in this chapter, is mandatory.

P. “Temporary growing structure” means a structure that has the sides and roof covered with polyethylene, polyvinyl, or similar flexible synthetic material and is used to provide plants with either frost protection or increased heat retention.

Q. “Temporary worker housing” means a place, area, or piece of land where sleeping places or housing sites are provided by an employer for his or her employees or by another person, including a temporary worker housing operator who is providing such accommodations for employees, for temporary, seasonal occupancy, and includes “labor camps” under RCW 70.54.110.

R. “UPC” means the latest edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code promulgated by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials as adopted by this City.

S. “Valuation” or “value,” as applied to a building or building service equipment, means and shall be the estimated cost to replace the building and its building service equipment in kind, based on current replacement costs. It shall also include the contractor’s overhead and profit. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.030 Appendices.

Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless specifically adopted. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.035 Intent.

The purpose of this code is to establish the minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare through structural strength, means of egress facilities, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, energy conservation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment and to provide safety to fire fighters and emergency responders during emergency operations. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.040 Referenced codes.

The codes listed in KMC 15.30.020 and referenced elsewhere in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.045 International Building Code – Scope.

The provisions of the International Building Code shall apply to the construction, alteration, relocation, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal, and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures.

Exception: Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories above grade plane in height with separate means of egress, and their accessory structures not more than three stories above grade plane in height, shall comply with the International Residential Code. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.050 International Residential Code – Scope.

The provisions of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal, and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories above grade plane in height with separate means of egress and their accessory structures not more than three stories above grade plane in height.

Exceptions:

A. Live/work units located in townhomes and complying with the requirements of Section 419 of the International Building Code shall be permitted to be constructed in accordance with the International Residential Code for One – and Two-Family Dwellings. Fire suppression required by Section 419.5 of the International Building Code when constructed under the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings shall conform to Appendix Q.

B. Owner-occupied lodging houses with five or fewer guest rooms shall be permitted to be constructed in accordance with the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings when equipped with a fire sprinkler system in accordance with Appendix R. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.055 Mechanical code – Scope.

The provisions of the International Mechanical Code shall apply to the design, installation, maintenance, alteration, and inspection of mechanical systems that are permanently installed and utilized to provide control of environmental conditions and related processes with buildings. The International Mechanical Code shall also regulate those mechanical systems, system components, equipment and appliances specifically addressed herein. The installation of fuel gas distribution piping and equipment, fuel gas-fired appliances and fuel gas-fired appliance venting systems shall be regulated by the International Fuel Gas Code.

Exceptions:

A. Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories high with separate means of egress and their accessory structures shall comply with the International Residential Code.

B. The standards for liquefied petroleum gas installations shall be NFPA 58 (Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code) and NFPA 54 (National Fuel Gas Code). [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.060 Liquid propane gas.

The provisions of the National Fuel Gas Code and Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code (NFPA 54 and 58) shall apply to the installation of all materials and equipment utilizing liquid propane gas. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.065 Natural gas code – Scope.

The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code shall apply to the installation of fuel gas piping systems, fuel gas utilization equipment, gaseous hydrogen systems and regulated accessories.

Exceptions:

A. Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories high with separate means of egress and their accessory structures shall comply with the International Residential Code.

B. The standards for liquefied petroleum gas installations shall be NFPA 58 (Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code) and NFPA 54 (National Fuel Gas Code). [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.070 Plumbing code – Scope.

The provisions of the Uniform Plumbing Code shall apply to the installation, alteration, repair and replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, where connected to a water or sewage system and all aspects of a medical gas system. Fuel gas-fired appliances and fuel gas-fired appliance venting systems shall be regulated by the International Fuel Gas Code and liquefied petroleum gas installations shall be regulated by NFPA 58 and NFPA 54. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.075 Energy code.

The provisions of the energy code shall apply to all matters governing the design and construction of buildings for energy efficiency. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.077 Swimming pool and spa code – Scope.

The provisions of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, renovation, replacement, repair and maintenance of aquatic recreation facilities, pools and spas. The pools and spas covered by this code are either permanent or temporary, and shall be only those that are designed and manufactured to be connected to a circulation system and that are intended for swimming, bathing or wading. In addition, all other “water recreation facilities” as defined in RCW 70.90.110 are regulated under Chapters 246-260 and 246-262 WAC. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D).]

Article II. Applicability


15.30.080 General.

A. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this code specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern except that the hierarchy of the codes named in Chapter 19.27 RCW shall govern.

B. New Installations. This chapter applies to new installs.

C. Existing Installations. Lawfully installed existing installations that do not comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be permitted to be continued without change, except as is specifically covered in this chapter, the International Fire Code or as is deemed necessary by the building official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and public. Where changes are required for correction of hazards, a reasonable amount of time shall be given for compliance, depending on the degree of the hazard.

D. Maintenance. Buildings and structures, including their electrical, plumbing, and mechanical systems, equipment, materials and appurtenances, both existing and new, and parts thereof, shall be maintained in proper operating condition in accordance with the original design and in a safe, hazard-free condition. Devices or safeguards that are required by this chapter shall be maintained in compliance with the code edition under which installed. The owner or the owner’s designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of the system and equipment. To determine compliance with this provision, the building official shall have the authority to require that the systems and equipment be reinspected.

E. Additions, Alterations, Modifications or Repairs. Additions, alterations, modifications or repairs to a building or structure or to the electrical, plumbing, or mechanical system(s) of any building, structure or premises shall conform to the requirements of this chapter without requiring those portions of the existing building or system not being altered or modified to comply with all the requirements of this chapter. Installations, additions, alterations, modifications, or repairs shall not cause an existing building to become unsafe or to adversely affect the performance of the building as determined by the building official or designated representative. Electrical wiring added to an existing service, feeder, or branch circuit shall not result in an installation that violates the provisions of the code in force at the time the additions were made.

Exception: Additions with less than 500 square feet of conditioned floor area to IRC regulated structures are exempt from the requirements for whole house ventilation systems, Section M1508.

F. Moved Buildings. Building or structures moved into or within a jurisdiction shall comply with the provisions of this code for new buildings or structures.

Exception: One- and two-family buildings or structures are not required to comply if:

1. The original occupancy classification is not changed; and

2. The original building is not substantially remodeled or rehabilitated.

For the purpose of this section, a building shall be considered to be substantially remodeled when the costs of remodeling exceed 60 percent of the value of the building exclusive of the costs relating to preparation, construction, demolition, or renovation of foundations. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.085 Other laws.

The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, State or federal law. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.090 Application of references.

References to chapter or section numbers, or to provisions not specifically identified by number, shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or provision of this code. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.095 Referenced codes and standards.

The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.100 Partial invalidity.

In the event that any part or provision of this code is held to be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making void or illegal any of the other parts or provisions. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.105 Existing structures.

The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without change, except as is specifically covered in this code, other codes referenced in this code, the International Fire Code, or as is deemed necessary by the building official or fire marshal for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public. Modifications to existing structures shall be permitted to be performed in accordance with the International Existing Building Code. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.110 Structures in areas of special flood hazard.

Buildings located in areas of special flood hazard shall be regulated by the International Building Code, International Residential Code or the Kenmore Municipal Code. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]

Article III. Department of Building Safety


15.30.115 Creation of enforcement agency.

The building department is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.120 Appointment.

The building official shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority of the City. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.125 Deputies.

In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this City and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the building official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy building official, the related technical officers, inspectors, plan examiners and other employees. Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the building official. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]

Article IV. Duties and Powers of Building Official


15.30.130 General.

The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this code. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.135 Applications and permits.

The building official shall receive applications, review construction documents and issue permits for the erection, alteration, demolition and moving of buildings, structures and building service equipment, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of this code. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.140 Notices and orders.

The building official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this code. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.145 Inspections.

The building official shall make all of the required inspections, or the building official shall have the authority to accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The building official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise at the applicant’s expense. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.150 Identification.

The building official shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this code. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.155 Right of entry.

Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this code, or where the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this code which makes the structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code; provided, that if such structure or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.160 Department records.

The building official shall keep official records of applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the official records for the period required for retention of public records. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.165 Liability.

The building official, member of the board of appeals or employee charged with the enforcement of this chapter and the technical codes, while acting for the City in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against an officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by legal representative of the City until the final termination of the proceedings. The building official or any subordinate shall not be liable for cost in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.170 Approved materials and equipment.

Materials, equipment and devices approved by the building official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.175 Used materials and equipment.

The use of used materials and building service equipment which meet the requirements of this code for new materials is permitted. Used equipment and devices shall not be reused unless prior approval is obtained from the building official. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.180 Modifications.

Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the building official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, upon application of the owner or owner’s representative, provided the building official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code and that such modification does not lessen health, accessibility, life and fire safety, or structural requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the department. The building official is authorized to charge an additional fee to evaluate any proposed modification under the provisions of this section. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.185 Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and equipment.

The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code; provided, that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material, design or method of construction shall be approved where the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.

The building official is authorized to charge an additional fee to evaluate any proposed alternate material, design and/or method of construction and equipment under the provisions of this section.

Where the alternate material, design or method of construction is not approved, the building official shall respond in writing, stating the reasons why the alternative was not approved. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.190 Research reports.

Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in this code, shall consist of valid research reports from approved sources. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.195 Tests.

Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this code, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the building official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to the City. Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the building official shall approve the testing procedures. Tests shall be performed by an approved agency. Reports of such tests shall be retained by the building official for the period required for retention of public records. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]

Article V. Permits


15.30.200 Permit required.

Any owner or owner’s authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.205 Work exempt from permit.

The provisions of this code shall not apply to work located primarily in a public way, public utility towers and poles and hydraulic flood control structures. Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this City. Permits shall not be required for the following:

A. Building.

1. One-story detached accessory structures accessory to residential buildings constructed under the provisions of the IRC used as tool and storage sheds, tree-supported play structures, playhouse and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 200 square feet, the height does not exceed 10 feet, and the structure is located in accordance with all land use regulations;

2. Fences not over eight feet high;

3. Oil derricks;

4. Retaining walls which are not over four feet in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or III-A liquids;

5. Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2:1;

6. Sidewalks, driveways, decks and steps not more than 30 inches above adjacent grade and not over any basement or story below and are not part of an accessible route;

7. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops and similar finish work; provided, that existing, required accessible features are not altered;

8. Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery;

9. Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a one- and two-family dwelling or Group R3 occupancy, which are less than 24 inches deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons and are installed entirely above ground;

10. Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes and not including service systems;

11. Swings, slides and other similar playground equipment;

12. Window awnings supported by an exterior wall of one- and two-family dwellings or Group R-3 and Group U occupancies which do not project more than 54 inches from the exterior wall and do not require additional support;

13. Nonfixed and movable cases, counters and partitions not over five feet nine inches in height;

14. Satellite earth station antennas six and one-half feet or less in diameter or diagonal dimensions in zones other than residential zones;

15. Satellite earth station antennas three and one-quarter feet or less in diameter in residential zones;

16. Video programming service antennas three and one-quarter feet or less in diameter or diagonal dimension, regardless of zone;

17. Replacement of nonstructural siding on IRC structures except for veneer, stucco, or exterior finish and insulation systems (EFIS);

18. In-kind window replacement for IRC structures where no alteration of framing members is required and when the window U-values meet the prescriptive requirements within the energy code;

19. Job shacks that are placed at a permitted job site during construction may be allowed on a temporary basis and shall be removed upon final approval of construction. A job shack is a portable structure for which the primary purpose is to house equipment and supplies, and which may serve as a temporary office during construction for the purposes of the construction activity;

20. In-kind reroofing on IRC structures, provided roof sheathing is not removed, replaced or added; and

21. Photovoltaic solar panels installed on IRC structures, provided they comply with all land use regulations and:

a. Each photovoltaic array is no larger than 150 feet by 150 feet in either axis;

b. Total dead load of panels, supports, mountings, raceways and all other appurtenances weigh no more than four pounds per square foot;

c. Panels are mounted no higher than 18 inches above the surface of the roof;

d. The equipment layout meets the IFC access and pathways requirements.

B. Mechanical.

1. Portable heating, cooking, or clothes drying appliances.

2. Portable ventilation appliances and equipment.

3. Portable cooling unit.

4. Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment or appliances regulated by the construction codes.

5. Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe.

6. Portable evaporative cooler.

7. Self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 pounds or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower or less.

8. Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected.

C. Plumbing.

1. The stopping and/or repairing of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that should any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe become defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, the same shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code.

2. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.

3. Reinstallation or replacement of prefabricated fixtures that do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves or pipes. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.210 Emergency repairs.

Where equipment replacements and equipment repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next working business day to the building official. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.215 Repairs.

Application or notice to the building official is not required for ordinary repairs to structures. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.220 Application for permit.

To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file a complete application as defined by the City therefor in writing on a form furnished by the building department for that purpose. Such application shall:

A. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made.

B. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work.

C. Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.

D. Be accompanied by construction documents and other information as required in KMC 15.30.260 through 15.30.325.

E. State the valuation of the proposed work.

F. Be signed by the applicant, or the applicant’s authorized agent.

G. Give such other data and information as required by the building official. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.225 Complete application.

A. No application for building permit relating to any construction, including landfill or pier and piling to support same upon privately owned shorelands submerged by the water of Lake Washington, shall be accepted for filing with the building department, unless there are attached to such application certified copies of the approval of such project by such State and federal agencies as may have jurisdiction or regulatory authority over such proposed project.

B. The requirements for a fully complete building permit application include compliance with KMC 15.30.220 and RCW 19.27.097 (which relates to water supply); provided, that for any construction project costing more than $5,000 the following shall also be required:

1. The legal description, or the tax parcel number assigned pursuant to RCW 84.40.160, and the street address if available, and may include any other identification of the construction site by the prime contractor;

2. The property owner’s name, address, and phone number;

3. The prime contractor’s business name, address, phone number, and current State contractor registration number; and

4. Either:

a. The name, address and phone number of the office of the lender administering the interim construction financing, if any, or

b. The name and address of the firm that has issued a payment bond, if any, on behalf of the prime contractor for the protection of the owner, if the bond is for an amount not less than 50 percent of the total amount of the construction project; provided, that if any of this information is not available at the time the application is submitted, the applicant shall so state and the lack of said information shall not cause the application to be deemed incomplete for the purposes of this section. However, the applicant shall provide the remaining information as soon as the applicant can reasonably obtain such information.

The requirements for a fully complete building permit application include a consent statement of the property owner to confirm dedication of rights-of-way which abut the subject property, if any are shown as such on City, county or plat maps, and to verify the designation of public road easements as rights-of-way. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.230 Action on application.

The building official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application is incomplete or the construction documents or other submittal information does not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the building official may reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the building official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the building official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.235 Time limitation of application.

A. Applications for which no permit is issued within 18 months following the date of application shall expire by limitation and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed in accordance with State law by the building official.

B. Applications may be canceled for inactivity, if an applicant fails to respond to the department’s written request for revisions, corrections, actions or additional information within 90 days of the date of request. The building official may extend the response period beyond 90 days if within the original 90-day time period the applicant provides and subsequently adheres to an approved schedule with specific target dates for submitting the full revisions, corrections or other information needed by the department.

C. The building official may extend the life of an application if any of the following conditions exist:

1. Compliance with the State Environmental Policy Act is in progress; or

2. Any other City review is in progress; provided the applicant has submitted a complete response to City requests or the building official determines that unique or unusual circumstances exist that warrant additional time for such response, and the building official determines that the review is proceeding in a timely manner toward final City decision;

3. Litigation against the City or applicant is in progress, the outcome of which may affect the validity or the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to such application; or

4. At the sole discretion of the building official when there have not been newly adopted codes, fees, ordinances or laws which affect the application. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.240 Validity of permit.

The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this code or of any other ordinance or laws of the City. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or other ordinances of the City shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the building official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents and other data. The building official is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure where in violation of this code or of any other ordinances of this City. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.245 Permit expiration.

A. Every permit issued shall expire two years from the date of issuance. The building official may approve a request for an extended expiration date where a construction schedule is provided by the applicant and approved prior to permit issuance.

B. Every permit which has been expired for less than one year may be renewed for a period of one year from the expiration date for an additional fee as long as no changes have been made to the originally approved plans and new building codes have not been adopted. For permits that have been expired for longer than one year, a new permit must be obtained and full new fees paid. No permit shall be renewed more than once, except at the sole discretion of the building official when there have not been newly adopted codes, fees, ordinances or laws which affect the permit.

C. Mechanical and plumbing permits shall expire at the same time as the associated building permit, except that if no associated building permit is issued, the mechanical and/or plumbing permit shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C); Ord. 09-0301 § 1 (Att. A).]


15.30.250 Suspension or revocation.

The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this code wherever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this code. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.255 Placement of permit.

The building permit or copy shall be kept on the site of the work until the completion of the project. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]

Article VI. Floor and Roof Design Loads


15.30.260 Live loads posted.

Where the live loads for which each floor or portion thereof of a commercial or industrial building is or has been designed to exceed 50 psf, such design live loads shall be conspicuously posted by the owner or the owner’s authorized agent in that part of each story in which they apply, using durable signs. It shall be unlawful to remove or deface such notices.

Exception: Floors or portions located on a concrete slab on grade. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.265 Issuance of certificate of occupancy.

A certificate of occupancy required by KMC 15.30.500 shall not be issued until the floor loads signs, required by KMC 15.30.260, have been installed. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.270 Restrictions on loading.

It shall be unlawful to place, or cause or permit to be placed, on any floor or roof of a building, structure or portion thereof, a load greater than is permitted by the IBC. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]

Article VII. Submittal Documents


15.30.275 General.

Submittal documents consisting of construction documents, statement of special inspection, structural observation programs, engineering reports and calculations, diagrams, and other data shall be submitted with each application for a permit. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required by the State of Washington. Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.

Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that review of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this code. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.280 Construction documents.

Construction documents shall be in accordance with this section.

A. Information on Construction Documents. Construction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn upon suitable material. Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the building official. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed in the proper orientation and layout as it is to be constructed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by the building official. The plans must include the relevant items listed in this section and any other information or documents as deemed necessary by the building official.

B. Fire Protection System Shop Drawings. Shop drawings for the fire protection system(s) shall be submitted to indicate conformance with this code and the construction documents and shall be approved prior to the start of system installation. Shop drawings shall contain all information as required by the referenced installation standards in Chapter 9 of the IBC. Shop drawings shall be prepared by a certified individual as required by the State of Washington.

C. Means of Egress. The construction documents shall show in sufficient detail the location, construction, size and character of all portions of the means of egress in compliance with the provisions of this code. In other than occupancies in Groups R-2, R-3, one- and two-family dwellings as applicable in Section 101.2, and I-1, the construction documents shall designate the number of occupants to be accommodated on every floor, and in all rooms and spaces.

D. Exterior Wall Envelope. Construction documents for all buildings shall describe the exterior wall envelope in sufficient detail to determine compliance with this code. The construction documents shall provide details of the exterior wall envelope as required, including flashing, intersections with dissimilar materials, corners, end details, control joints, intersections at roof, eaves or parapets, means of drainage, water-resistive membrane and details around openings. The construction documents shall include manufacturer’s installation instructions that provide supporting documentation that the proposed penetration and opening details described in the construction documents maintain the weather resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The supporting documentation shall fully describe the exterior wall system which was tested, where applicable, as well as the test procedure used.

Exception: Subject to the approval of the building official, R-3, one- and two-family dwellings, and U occupancies may be exempt from the detailing requirements of this section.

E. Site Plan. The construction documents submitted with the application for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing to scale the size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed finished grades and, as applicable, flood hazard areas, floodways, and design flood elevations; where design flood elevations are not specified, they shall be established in accordance with Section 1612.3.1 of the IBC; and it shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot. The building official is authorized to waive or modify the requirement for a site plan when the application for permit is for alteration or repair or when otherwise warranted.

F. Plumbing. Plans must be submitted for review and approval whenever the scope of the work is too complex for inspection alone as determined by the building official.

G. Mechanical. Plans must be submitted for review and approval whenever the scope of work is too complex for inspection alone as determined by the building official.

H. Structural Information. The construction documents shall provide the information specified in Section 1612.3.1 IBC.

I. Energy Information. The construction documents shall provide the information specified in the energy code. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.290 Examination of documents.

The building official shall examine or cause to be examined the accompanying submittal documents and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of this code and other pertinent laws or ordinances. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.295 Use of consultants.

Whenever review of a building permit application requires retention by the City for professional consulting services, the applicant shall reimburse the City the cost of such professional consulting services. This fee shall be in addition to the normal plan review and building permit fees. The City may require the applicant to deposit an amount with the City estimated in the discretion of the building official to be sufficient to cover anticipated costs of retaining professional consultant services and to ensure reimbursement for such costs. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.300 Approval of construction documents.

When the building official issues a permit, the construction documents shall be approved, in writing or by stamp, as “Reviewed for Code Compliance.” One set of construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the building official. The other set shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or a duly authorized representative. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.305 Phased approval.

The building official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure before the construction documents for the whole building or structure have been submitted; provided, that adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of this code. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder’s own risk with the building operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.310 Design professional in responsible charge – General.

When it is required that documents be prepared by a qualified registered design professional, the building official shall be authorized to require the owner or the owner’s authorized agent to engage and designate on the building permit application a registered design professional who shall act as the registered design professional in responsible charge. If the circumstances require, the owner or the owner’s authorized agent shall designate a substitute registered design professional in responsible charge who shall perform the duties required of the original registered design professional in responsible charge. The building official shall be notified in writing by the owner or the owner’s authorized agent if the registered design professional in responsible charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinating submittal documents prepared by others, including phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the design of the building. Where structural observation is required by Section 1710 of the IBC, the statement of special inspections shall name the individual or firms who are to perform structural observation and describe the stages of construction at which structural observation is to occur (see also other duties specified in Chapter 17 of the IBC). [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.315 Deferred submittals.

For the purposes of this section, “deferred submittals” are defined as those portions of the design that are not submitted at the time of the application and that are to be submitted to the building official within a specified period. Deferral of any submittal items shall have the prior approval of the building official. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall list the deferred submittals on the construction documents for review by the building official. Documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the registered design professional in responsible charge, who shall review them and forward them to the building official with a notation indicating that the deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and been found to be in general conformance to the design of the building. The deferred submittal items shall not be installed until the deferred submittal documents have been approved by the building official. The building official is authorized to charge an additional plan review fee to evaluate deferred submittals under the provisions of this section. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.320 Amended construction documents.

Work shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents. The building official may authorize minor field changes subject to the approval of the field inspector. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.325 Retention of construction documents.

One set of approved construction documents shall be retained by the building official for a period of not less than 180 days from date of completion of the permitted work, expired permit, or as required by State or local laws. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]

Article VIII. Temporary Structures and Uses


15.30.330 General.

The building official is authorized to issue a permit for temporary structures and temporary uses. Such permits shall be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than 180 days. The building official is authorized to grant extensions for demonstrated cause.

Exceptions:

A. The building official may authorize unheated tents and yurts under 500 square feet accommodating an R-1 recreational use as a temporary structure and allow them to be used indefinitely. Such sited structures must comply with the Kenmore zoning code provisions for setbacks and lot coverage.

B. The provisions of this code do not apply to temporary growing structures used solely for the commercial production of horticultural plants including ornamental plants, flowers, vegetables, and fruits. A temporary growing structure is not considered a building for purposes of this code.

C. The provisions of this code do not apply to the construction, alteration, or repair of temporary worker housing except as provided by rules adopted under Chapter 70.114A RCW or Chapter 37, Laws of 1998 (SB 6168). [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.335 Conformance.

Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the structural strength, fire safety, means of egress, accessibility, light, ventilation and sanitary requirements of this code as necessary to ensure the public health, safety and general welfare. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.340 Termination of approval.

The building official is authorized to terminate such permit for a temporary structure or use and to order the temporary structure or use to be discontinued when the use is in violation of other local ordinances or when the use becomes a public nuisance as defined in the City code. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]

Article IX. Fees


15.30.345 Payment of fees.

A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.350 Schedule of permit fees.

On buildings, structures, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority. The building official is authorized to establish fees for any permit activity not specifically set forth herein. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.355 Plan review fees.

When submittal documents are required by KMC 15.30.275, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting the submittal documents for plan review. The building official may have the option to charge a deposit in lieu of the full plan review fee if the full amount is not known at the time. Any plan review deposit shall be applied toward the total plan review fee owed. The actual permit fees and related plan review fee shall be determined upon completion of the plan review and the balance owing shall be paid at the time of permit issuance. The plan review fee shall be a separate fee from the permit fees specified in this section and are in addition to the permit fees. When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review or when the project involves deferred submittal items as defined in KMC 15.30.315, an additional plan review fee may be charged. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.360 Master and basic plan program.

A. The City has established a “master” and “basic” plan program, the purpose of which is to allow for an expedited review process for plans that are intended to remain unchanged but used multiple times. Options are allowed to be submitted with the initial registering of the basic plan to accommodate a variation of building styles using the basic plan. When plans are submitted under the City’s master and basic plan program, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of application for the first or “master” plan. Subsequent plans are called the “basic” plan.

B. Valuations used to compute the permit fees shall include all options submitted with a registered plan. When a registered plan consists of a number of plan options that can produce any number of similar but different buildings, the building official may charge plan review fees based on each different building configuration. Plan review fees shall be paid for at the time of application for a building permit. The building official may have the option to charge a partial deposit in lieu of the full plan review fee. All portions of fees paid as a deposit amount shall be applied to the total plan review fees owed. The applicant shall be required to pay the balance of amount owed for the plan review. The plan review fees specified in this section are separate fees from the permit fees and are in addition to the permit fees.

C. Plan Orientation. Master plan applications do not need to show a reverse or flip as an option. Mirrored plans are allowed at basic plan submittal. Basic plan orientation shall match the site plan.

D. Preapproved Master Plan. The building official may have the option to accept a basic plan where the master plan has been approved by a MyBuildingPermit.com participating jurisdiction.

E. Revisions. Once a plan and associated options are reviewed, approved and registered, changes or revisions to that plan are not permitted without requiring the plan to be resubmitted as a new registered plan and pay full new fees.

F. Field Revision. Once a permit is issued for a registered plan, no revisions will be permitted except for minor field changes as defined in KMC 15.30.025. Changes other than minor field changes will be considered major changes and require the permit holder to resubmit those changes as a new submittal and pay a fee.

G. Time Limitation. An application for a basic plan associated to a master plan approved and registered under a previous code edition shall not be accepted when there has been a code cycle change as required by the State. When this occurs the master plan shall be submitted as a new registered plan, and pay full new fees. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.365 Building permit valuations.

The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit value at time of application. The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of this code shall be made by the building official. The latest edition of the ICC “Building Safety Journal” publication shall be used to determine building valuations for the various building types and occupancies noted in that table except that the valuation for wooden decks, platforms, stairs, carports, and porches shall be $18.00 per square foot. Regional modifiers shall not be applicable. When a specific building type or occupancy is not noted in the valuation table, the building official is authorized to use any of the classification types noted in the table that most closely resembles the proposed type of building, or determine a valuation type independently. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.370 Work commencing before permit issuance.

Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a special investigation fee in an amount equal to twice the permit fee, or otherwise established by the building official. The special investigation fee shall be in addition to the required permit fees. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.375 Related fees.

The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition for work done in connection to or concurrently with the work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.380 Refunds.

The building official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. The building official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is done. The building official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of application. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]

Article X. Inspections


15.30.390 General.

Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official and such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the City. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the City shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor the City shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.395 Preliminary inspections.

Before issuing a permit, the building official is authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.400 Manufacturer’s installation instructions.

Manufacturer’s installation instructions, as required by this code, shall be available on the job site at the time of inspection. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.405 Required inspections.

The building official, upon notification, shall make the inspections set forth in KMC 15.30.410 through 15.30.480. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.410 Footing and foundation inspection.

Footing and foundation inspections shall be made after poles or piers are set or trenches or basement areas are excavated and all required hold-down anchor bolts, hold-down straps, any forms erected, and any required reinforcing steel is in place and supported. The foundation inspection shall include excavations for thickened slabs intended for the support of bearing walls, partitions, structural supports, or equipment and special requirements for wood foundations. Materials for the foundation shall be on the job, except where concrete is ready mixed in accordance with ASTM C 94, the concrete need not be on the job. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.415 Concrete slab and under-floor inspection.

Concrete slab and under-floor inspections shall be made after in-slab or under-floor reinforcing steel and building service equipment, conduit, slab insulation, piping accessories and other ancillary equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is placed or floor sheathing installed, including the subfloor. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.420 Lowest floor elevation.

In flood hazard areas, upon placement of the lowest floor, including the basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the elevation certification required in IBC Section 1612 or IRC Section R322 shall be submitted to the building official. FEMA flood elevation certificates shall contain an original stamp and signature of the surveyor, licensed by the State of Washington, and shall document the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, and other information required by the flood elevation certificate. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.425 Exterior wall sheathing inspection.

Exterior wall sheathing shall be inspected after all wall framing is complete, strapping and nailing is properly installed but prior to being covered. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.430 Roof sheathing inspection.

The roof sheathing shall be inspected after all roof framing is complete. No roof coverings shall be installed until inspections are made and approved. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.435 IMC/UPC/GAS/NEC rough in inspection.

Rough in mechanical, gas piping, plumbing and electrical shall be inspected when the rough in work is complete and, if required, under test. No connections to primary utilities shall be made until the rough in work is inspected and approved. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.440 Frame inspection.

Framing inspections shall be made after the roof deck, wall sheathing, all framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and pipes, chimneys and vents to be concealed are complete and the rough electrical, plumbing, fire suppression piping, heating wires, pipes and ducts are approved and the building is substantially dried in. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.445 Multi-unit residential building enclosure inspection.

Chapter 64.55 RCW, Engrossed House Bill (EHB) 1848, requires affected multi-unit residential buildings to provide a building enclosure inspection performed by a third-party, independent, and qualified inspector during the course of initial construction and during rehabilitative construction. The City does not verify the qualifications of the inspector or determine whether the building enclosure inspection is adequate or appropriate. However, the City is prohibited from issuing a certificate of occupancy for the building until the inspector prepares a report and submits to the building department a signed letter certifying that the building enclosure has been constructed in substantial compliance with the building enclosure design documents. Reference Chapter 64.55 RCW for additional requirements. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.450 Lath, gypsum board and gypsum panel product inspection.

Lath, gypsum board, and gypsum panel product inspections shall be made after lathing, gypsum board and gypsum panel product, interior and exterior, is in place, but before any plastering is applied or gypsum board and gypsum panel product joints and fasteners are taped and finished.

Exception: Gypsum board and gypsum panel products that are not part of a fire-resistance rated assembly or a shear assembly. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.455 Fire- and smoke-resistant penetrations.

Protection of joints and penetrations in fire-resistance-rated assemblies, smoke barriers and smoke partitions shall not be concealed from view until inspected and approved. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.460 Energy efficiency inspection.

A. Envelope.

1. Wall Insulation Inspection. To be made after all wall insulation and air vapor retarder sheet or film materials are in place, but before any wall covering is placed.

2. Glazing Inspection. To be made after glazing materials are installed in the building.

3. Exterior Roofing Insulation. To be made after the installation of the roof insulation, but before concealment.

4. Footing/Foundation/Slab/Floor Insulation. To be made after the installation of the footing/foundation/slab/floor insulation, but before concealment.

B. Mechanical.

1. Mechanical Equipment Efficiency and Economizer. To be made after all equipment and controls required by this code are installed and prior to the concealment of such equipment or controls.

2. Mechanical Pipe and Duct Insulation. To be made after all pipe, fire suppression piping and duct insulation is in place, but before concealment.

C. Lighting and Motors.

1. Lighting Equipment and Controls. To be made after the installation of all lighting equipment and controls required by this code, but before concealment of the lighting equipment.

2. Motor Inspections. To be made after installation of all equipment covered by this code, but before concealment. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.465 Reinspection.

The building official may require a structure or portions of work to be reinspected. A reinspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection when such portion of work for which the inspection was requested is not complete; or when previous corrections called for are not made; or when there are reoccurring missed items that have previously been identified to the same builder on multiple lots; or when the approved plans and permit are not on site in a conspicuous or pre-approved location; or when the building is not accessible. In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work shall be provided by the City until the required fees are paid. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.470 Other inspections.

In addition to the inspections specified above, the building official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this code and other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.475 Special inspections.

In addition to the inspections noted above, the building official is authorized to require special inspections for any type of work related to the technical codes by an approved agency at no cost to the City. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.480 Final inspection.

The final inspection shall be made after all work required by the building permit is completed. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.485 Inspection agencies.

The building official is authorized to accept reports of approved inspection agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the requirements as to qualifications and reliability. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.490 Inspection requests.

It shall be the duty of the holder of the building permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the building official when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and means for inspections of such work that are required by this code. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.495 Approval required.

Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. The building official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed or notify the permit holder or his or her agent wherein the same fails to comply with this code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]

Article XI. Certificate of Occupancy


15.30.500 Use and occupancy.

No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing use or occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made, until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the City.

Exceptions:

A. Work exempt from permits per KMC 15.30.205.

B. For single-family dwellings and their accessory structures, the City-issued building permit inspection record may serve as the certificate of occupancy when the final inspection has been approved by the building department. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.505 Certificate issued.

After the building official inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of this code or other laws that are enforced by the building department, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy that contains the following:

A. The building permit number.

B. The address of the structure.

C. The name and address of the owner or the owner’s authorized agent.

D. Project name.

E. A statement that the described portion of the structure has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of this code for the occupancy and division of occupancy and the use for which the proposed occupancy is classified.

F. The name of the building official.

G. The edition of the code under which the permit was issued.

H. The use and occupancy.

I. The type of construction.

J. The design occupant load.

K. If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, and whether the sprinkler system is required.

L. Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.510 Temporary or phased occupancy.

The building official is authorized to issue a temporary or phased certificate of occupancy before the completion of the entire work covered by the permit; provided, that such portion or portions shall be occupied safely. The building official is authorized to require, in addition to the completion of life safety building components, any or all accessibility components. The building official shall set a time period during which the temporary or phased certificate of occupancy is valid. The building official is authorized to require that a performance bond be posted with the City in an amount equal to 150 percent of the incomplete work as determined by the design professional. The bond shall be refundable upon inspection, final approval and a request in writing for the refund. It shall be the duty of the applicant to request the refund. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.515 Revocation.

The building official is authorized to, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy or completion issued under the provisions of this code wherever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this code. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]

Article XII. Service Utilities


15.30.520 Connection of service utilities.

No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that is regulated by this code for which a permit is required, until released by the building official. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.525 Temporary connection.

The building official shall have the authority to authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.530 Authority to disconnect service utilities.

The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by this code and the codes referenced in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property, or when such utility connection has been made without the required approval. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and wherever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]

Article XIII. Appeals


15.30.535 General.

Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official shall be made to the hearing examiner in accordance with the requirements and process of Chapter 19.30 KMC. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 12-0333 § 11; Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.540 Limitations on authority.

An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The hearing examiner shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of this code nor shall the board be empowered to waive requirements of either this code or the technical codes which are the codes, appendices and referenced code standards adopted by the City. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 12-0333 § 12; Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.545 Qualifications.

Repealed by Ord. 12-0333. [Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.550 Reconsideration.

Repealed by Ord. 12-0333. [Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.555 Corrections.

Repealed by Ord. 12-0333. [Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.560 Court review.

Repealed by Ord. 12-0333. [Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]

Article XIV. Violations


15.30.565 Unlawful acts.

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by this code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.570 Notice of violation.

The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.575 Prosecution of violation.

If the notice of violation is not complied with in the time prescribed by such notice, the building official is authorized to request the legal counsel of the City to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.580 Violation – Penalties.

Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]

Article XV. Stop Work Order


15.30.585 Authority.

Whenever the building official finds any work being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this code or other pertinent laws or ordinances that are violated during the course of work authorized by the building permit, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.590 Issuance.

The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.595 Investigation fee.

The building official is authorized to assess a special investigation fee for the issuance of a stop work order when work has started without the issuance of a permit. The special investigation fee shall be determined by KMC 15.30.370. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


15.30.600 Unlawful continuance.

Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]

Article XVI. Unsafe Structures and Equipment


15.30.605 General.

Structures or existing equipment that are or hereafter become unsafe, unsanitary or deficient because of inadequate means of egress facilities, inadequate light and ventilation, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or that involve illegal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance, shall be deemed an unsafe condition. Unsafe structures shall be taken down and removed or made safe, as the building official deems necessary and as provided for in the 1997 Edition of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings or the 1997 Edition of the Uniform Housing Code. A vacant structure that is not secured against entry shall be deemed unsafe. [Ord. 16-0423 § 4 (Exh. D); Ord. 13-0360 § 6 (Exh. C); Ord. 10-0310 § 4 (Exh. C).]


Chapter 15.35 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION

Sections:

15.35.010    Definitions.

15.35.015    Relocation assistance.

15.35.020    Violations.

15.35.025    Filing of complaint.

15.35.030    Civil penalty.

15.35.035    Criminal penalty.

15.35.040    Authority to make rules.


15.35.010 Definitions.

The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings set forth in this section:

A. “Condominium” means real property, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of those portions. Real property is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the unit owners, and unless a declaration and a survey map and plans have been recorded pursuant to the Horizontal Property Regimes Act (Chapter 64.32 RCW) or the Condominium Act (Chapter 64.34 RCW).

B.  “Condominium conversion notice” means the notice required by the Condominium Act (RCW 64.34.440) to be given to residential tenants and subtenants in real property to be converted to condominium ownership.

C. “Conversion condominium” means a condominium (1) that, at any time before creation of the condominium, was lawfully occupied wholly or partially by a tenant or subtenant for residential purposes pursuant to a rental agreement, oral or written, express or implied, or (2) that, at any time before the conveyance of, or acceptance of an agreement to convey, any unit therein other than to a declarant or any affiliate of a declarant, was lawfully occupied by a residential tenant of a declarant or an affiliate of a declarant and such tenant was not notified in writing, prior to lawfully occupying a unit or executing a rental agreement, whichever event first occurs, that the unit was part of a condominium and subject to sale. “Conversion condominium” shall not include a condominium in which, before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, any unit therein had been conveyed or been made subject to an agreement to convey to any transferee other than a declarant or an affiliate of a declarant.

D. “Declarant” means any person or group of persons acting in concert who:

1. Executes as declarant the document, however denominated, that creates a condominium by setting forth the information required by the Condominium Act (Chapter 64.34 RCW); or

2. Reserves or succeeds to any special declarant rights under such a document.

E. “Developer” means any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture or corporation or any other entity or combination of entities or successors thereto who undertake to convert, sell, or offer for sale units in a condominium. The term “developer” shall include the developer’s agent and any other person acting on behalf of the developer.

F. “Director” means the City of Kenmore director of community development or the director’s designee.

G. “Owners’ association” means the association formed by owners of units in a condominium for the purpose of managing the condominium.

H. “Person” means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, trustee or other legal entity.

I. “Tenant” means any person who occupies or has a leasehold interest in a rental unit under a lawful rental agreement, whether oral or written, express or implied.

J. “Unit” means a physical portion of a condominium designated for separate ownership, the boundaries of which are described pursuant to RCW 64.34.216(1)(d). [Ord. 07-0274 § 1.]


15.35.015 Relocation assistance.

A. Relocation assistance of $500.00 per unit shall be paid to tenants and subtenants of units who elect not to purchase a unit in a conversion condominium and who are in lawful occupancy for residential purposes of a unit on the date of the condominium conversion notice and whose monthly household income from all sources, on the date of the condominium conversion notice, was less than an amount equal to 80 percent of the monthly median income for comparably sized households in the Seattle-Everett Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area, as defined and established by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.

B. The household size of a unit shall be based on the number of persons actually in lawful occupancy of the unit on the date of the condominium conversion notice.

C. The tenant or subtenant actually in lawful occupancy of the unit shall be entitled to the relocation assistance.

D. Relocation assistance shall be paid on or before the date the tenant or subtenant vacates the unit and shall be in addition to any damage deposit or other compensation or refund to which the tenant is otherwise entitled. Unpaid rent or other amounts owed by the tenant or subtenant to the landlord may be offset against the relocation assistance. [Ord. 07-0274 § 1.]


15.35.020 Violations.

It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 07-0274 § 1.]


15.35.025 Filing of complaint.

A. Any person subjected to any violation of the provisions of this chapter may file a complaint with the director. The director is authorized and directed to receive complaints and conduct such investigations as are deemed necessary.

B. Whenever it is determined that there has been a violation of this chapter, the director is authorized, at the director’s discretion, to follow one or more of the following procedures:

1. Attempt to mediate the matter by conference or otherwise and secure a written mediation agreement;

2. Refer the matter to the city attorney for civil prosecution; or

3. Refer the matter to the city attorney for criminal prosecution. [Ord. 07-0274 § 1.]


15.35.030 Civil penalty.

A. Any person who fails or refuses to comply with the provisions or requirements of this chapter shall be subject to enforcement action and civil penalty per Chapter 1.20 KMC.

B. The director shall notify the city attorney in writing of the name of any person subject to the penalty. The city attorney shall, with the assistance of the director, take appropriate action to collect the penalty. [Ord. 07-0274 § 1.]


15.35.035 Criminal penalty.

Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter or who deliberately attempts to avoid the application of this chapter and who has had a prior civil judgment entered against him or her shall, upon conviction of the violation, be fined a sum not to exceed $500.00. Each day’s violation or failure to comply shall constitute a separate offense. [Ord. 07-0274 § 1.]


15.35.040 Authority to make rules.

The director is authorized to adopt, promulgate, amend and rescind in accordance with the administrative rules consistent with the provisions of this chapter and necessary to carry out the duties of the director under this chapter. [Ord. 07-0274 § 1.]


Title 16 SHORELINE MANAGEMENT

Chapters:

16.05    Shoreline Management Code – Purpose and Scope

16.10    Definitions

16.15    Shoreline Environment Designations

16.20    Downtown Waterfront Environment

16.23    Swamp Creek Commercial Environment

16.25    Shoreline Residential Environment

16.30    Urban Conservancy Environment

16.35    Natural Environment

16.40    Aquatic Environment

16.45    General Shoreline Development Standards

16.50    Shoreline Uses

16.55    Shoreline Modifications

16.60    Vegetation Conservation in Buffers

16.65    Shoreline Density and Dimensions

16.68    Signs

16.70    Subdivisions

16.75    Procedures


Chapter 16.05 SHORELINE MANAGEMENT CODE – PURPOSE AND SCOPE

Sections:

16.05.010    Purpose.

16.05.020    Citation.

16.05.030    Scope.

16.05.050    Liberal construction.

16.05.060    Relationship to other Kenmore programs.

16.05.070    Severability.


16.05.010 Purpose.

This title contains the regulations of the City of Kenmore Shoreline Master Program and the procedures to implement those regulations. The purpose of this title is to implement the Shoreline Management Act of 1971 and to provide for the regulation of development which impacts those areas of the City of Kenmore under the jurisdiction of the Shoreline Management Act consistent with Chapter 173-26 WAC and the goals and policies of the City of Kenmore comprehensive plan shoreline subelement. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.05.020 Citation.

This title shall be known as “the shoreline management code.” [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.05.030 Scope.

A. No development shall be undertaken by any person on the shorelines of the State unless such development is consistent with the provisions of this title and the goals and policies of the City of Kenmore comprehensive plan shoreline subelement.

B. Development prohibited by this title but otherwise permitted by the City of Kenmore land use controls is prohibited only within the shorelines of the State.

C. Development proposed on property in or adjacent to water bodies or wetlands under the jurisdiction of the Shoreline Management Act shall be evaluated in terms of the goals and policies of the City of Kenmore comprehensive plan shoreline subelement.

D. For purposes of this title, “shall” means a mandate; the action must be done. “Should” means that the particular action is required unless there is a demonstrated, compelling reason, based on the policies of Chapter 90.58 RCW and Chapter 173-26 WAC, against taking the action. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.05.050 Liberal construction.

This title is exempted from the rule of strict construction and shall be liberally construed to give full effect to the purposes for which it was enacted. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.05.060 Relationship to other Kenmore programs.

A. Kenmore shall issue no permit or approval contrary to the goals, policies, and regulations of the City of Kenmore Shoreline Master Program when property under the jurisdiction of the Shoreline Management Act is involved.

B. The following sections of the Kenmore Municipal Code are adopted and incorporated by reference as part of the Shoreline Master Program1:

1. Chapter 1.20 KMC – Code Enforcement.

2. Chapter 18.55 KMC – Critical Areas (Ordinance 19-0488, effective June 25, 2019), except for the following sections:

a. KMC 18.55.150 – Exemptions;

b. KMC 18.55.160 – Exception – Public agency or utility;

c. KMC 18.55.170 – Variances – Buffer widths and building setbacks;

d. KMC 18.55.180 – Exception – Reasonable use;

e. KMC 18.55.230 – Unauthorized critical area alterations and enforcement;

f. KMC 18.55.300(D) – Limited exemptions in wetlands;

g. Chapter 18.55 KMC, Article XIX, Flood Hazard Areas. While the flood hazard areas regulations apply within shoreline jurisdiction, the regulations, themselves, are not incorporated as part of this Shoreline Master Program.

Other sections of the Kenmore Municipal Code cross-referenced in this chapter are provided for reference purposes. Unless specifically stated, the Shoreline Master Program does not eliminate or reduce the requirements of any other portion of the Kenmore Municipal Code. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.05.070 Severability.

If any provision of this title or the master program regulations and procedures hereby adopted or its application to any person or circumstance is declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this title or the master program. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]1

Certain critical area code sections from Chapter 18.55 KMC – as they existed at the time of Shoreline Master Program approval by the Washington Department of Ecology in 2020 – have been adopted into the shoreline regulations as part of the Shoreline Master Program. Future amendments to these sections of Chapter 18.55 KMC will not be in effect in the shoreline jurisdiction unless and until the Shoreline Master Program also is amended. 


Chapter 16.10 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

16.10.010    Applicability of RCW and WAC definitions.

16.10.020    Repealed.

16.10.030    Access, public.

16.10.032    Accessory structure.

16.10.035    Accessory use.

16.10.038    Applicant.

16.10.040    Aquaculture.

16.10.050    Associated wetlands.

16.10.060    Average grade level.

16.10.070    Repealed.

16.10.080    Berm.

16.10.083    Boat launch.

16.10.085    Boating facility.

16.10.090    Breakwater.

16.10.100    Bulkhead.

16.10.105    Channel migration zone.

16.10.106    City manager.

16.10.107    Repealed.

16.10.110    Critical areas.

16.10.115    Repealed.

16.10.120    Department.

16.10.130    Development.

16.10.140    Repealed.

16.10.150    Dock.

16.10.160    Dredging.

16.10.170    Ecological functions.

16.10.173    Ecosystem-wide processes.

16.10.175    Ell.

16.10.178    Feasible.

16.10.180    Fill.

16.10.185    Fish and wildlife habitats of importance.

16.10.190    Float.

16.10.200    Floating home.

16.10.210    Floodplain.

16.10.220    Floodway.

16.10.225    Geotechnical report or geotechnical analysis.

16.10.230    Grading.

16.10.235    Repealed.

16.10.240    Groin.

16.10.250    Repealed.

16.10.260    Height.

16.10.270    Jetty.

16.10.275    Live-aboard.

16.10.280    Marina.

16.10.285    No net loss.

16.10.290    Nonconforming structure.

16.10.300    Nonconforming use.

16.10.310    Repealed.

16.10.320    Non-water-oriented uses.

16.10.330    Repealed.

16.10.340    Repealed.

16.10.350    Ordinary high-water mark.

16.10.355    Repealed.

16.10.360    Pier.

16.10.370    Repealed.

16.10.375    Ramp.

16.10.380    Recreational development.

16.10.390    Redesignation.

16.10.395    Repealed.

16.10.400    Restoration.

16.10.410    Repealed.

16.10.420    Sediment.

16.10.430    Repealed.

16.10.440    Shorelands.

16.10.445    Shoreline buffer.

16.10.450    Repealed.

16.10.460    Shoreline environment.

16.10.470    Shoreline Master Program.

16.10.480    Shoreline modifications.

16.10.500    Shoreline stabilization.

16.10.510    Shorelines.

16.10.520    Shorelines of statewide significance.

16.10.530    Shorelines of the State.

16.10.540    Sign.

16.10.550    Repealed.

16.10.560    Solid waste.

16.10.570    Substantial development.

16.10.575    Water access structure.

16.10.580    Repealed.

16.10.590    Water-dependent use.

16.10.600    Water-enjoyment use.

16.10.610    Water-oriented use.

16.10.620    Water-related use.

16.10.630    Repealed.

16.10.640    Wetlands.


16.10.010 Applicability of RCW and WAC definitions.

The definitions contained in this chapter, KMC Title 18 (zoning code), Chapter 90.58 RCW and Chapter 173-26 WAC shall apply within the shoreline jurisdiction. The definitions in Chapter 90.58 RCW and Chapter 173-26 WAC shall apply in shorelines if there is a conflict with the definitions contained in this title and KMC Title 18. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.030 Access, public.

“Public access” means the ability of the general public to reach, touch, and enjoy the water’s edge, to travel on waters of the State, and to view the water and the shoreline from adjacent locations. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.032 Accessory structure.

“Accessory structure” means a structure that is incidental to the principal structure. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.035 Accessory use.

“Accessory use” means a use typically subordinate in size to the principal use; that would not contribute significantly to traffic generation, noise, or nuisance; and that supports the primary use operation without displacing it. An accessory use may appear as an otherwise permitted, conditional or prohibited use in the use allowances for a given designation. Accessory uses are typically located upon the same lot occupied by a principal use. Examples of accessory uses include: equipment rental (bikes or skis) at a retail bike and ski shop, a secure facility required at an airport, and boat parking at a marina. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.038 Applicant.

“Applicant” means a person who files an application for a development proposal, permit or approval under this title and who is either the owner of the land on which that proposed activity would be located or the primary proponent of the project. A primary proponent shall have the permission of the landowner before proceeding with an application. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1). Formerly 16.10.020.]


16.10.040 Aquaculture.

“Aquaculture” means the culture or farming of fin fish, shellfish, algae or other plants or animals in fresh or marine waters. Excluded from the definition of aquaculture are related commercial or industrial uses such as wholesale or retail sales, or final processing, packing, or freezing. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.050 Associated wetlands.

“Associated wetlands” means wetlands that are in proximity to lakes, rivers or streams that are subject to the Shoreline Management Act and either influence or are influenced by such waters. Factors used to determine proximity and influence include, but are not limited to: location contiguous to a shoreline water body, presence of a surface connection, including through a culvert, location in part or whole within the floodplain of a shoreline, periodic inundation, and/or hydraulic continuity. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.060 Average grade level.

“Average grade level” is defined in WAC 173-27-030(3) and (11) as now or hereafter amended; as of March 20, 2020, “average grade level” means “the average of the natural or existing topography of the portion of the lot, parcel, or tract of real property which will be directly under the proposed building or structure. In the case of structures to be built over water, average grade level shall be the elevation of the ordinary high-water mark. The “natural or existing topography” means the topography of the lot, parcel, or tract of real property immediately prior to any site preparation or grading, including excavation or filling. Calculation of the average grade level shall be made by averaging the ground elevations at the midpoint of all exterior walls of the proposed building or structure.” [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.070 Backfill.

Repealed by Ord. 20-0506. [Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.080 Berm.

“Berm” means one or several linear mounds of sand and gravel at or landward of the ordinary high-water mark which are normally stable because of material size or vegetation. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.083 Boat launch.

“Boat launch” means an inclined slab, set of pads, rails, planks, or graded slope which extends waterward of the ordinary high-water mark, and is used for transferring watercraft between uplands and the water by means of a trailer, hand, or mechanical device. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.085 Boating facility.

“Boating facility” means developments and uses that support access to shoreline waters for purposes of boating, including marinas; community docks or piers serving more than four single-family residences or multifamily units; public piers and docks; and community, commercial or public boat launch facilities. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.090 Breakwater.

“Breakwater” means an offshore structure, either floating or not, which may or may not be connected to the shore, such structure being designated to absorb and/or reflect back into the water body the energy of the waves. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.100 Bulkhead.

“Bulkhead” means a solid or open pile wall of rock, concrete, steel or timber or other materials or a combination of these materials erected generally parallel to and near the ordinary high-water mark for the purpose of protecting adjacent wetlands and uplands from waves or currents. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.105 Channel migration zone.

“Channel migration zone” means the area within which a river channel can be reasonably predicted to move over a period of time as a result of natural and normally occurring hydrological and related processes when considered with the characteristics of the river and its surroundings.The channel migration zone is subject to risk due to stream bank destabilization, rapid stream incision, stream bank erosion, and shifts in the location of stream channels. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.106 City manager.

“City manager” means the City of Kenmore city manager or his or her designee(s). [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.107 Commercial development.

Repealed by Ord. 20-0506. [Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.110 Critical areas.

“Critical areas” means any of the following areas or ecosystems: aquifer recharge areas, fish and wildlife habitats of importance, frequently flooded areas, geologically hazardous areas, streams, and wetlands, as defined in Chapter 36.70A RCW and this chapter. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.115 Critical freshwater habitat.

Repealed by Ord. 20-0506. [Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.120 Department.

“Department” means the city department or outside agency assigned by the city manager to administer a portion of the City code. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.130 Development.

“Development” is defined in Chapter 90.58 RCW and WAC 173-27-030 as now or hereafter amended; as of March 20, 2020, “development” means “a use consisting of the construction or exterior alteration of structures; dredging; drilling; dumping; filling; removal of any sand, gravel, or minerals; bulkheading; driving of piling; placing of obstructions; or any project of a permanent or temporary nature which interferes with the normal public use of the surface of the waters overlying lands subject to the Shoreline Management Act at any state of water level. “Development” does not include dismantling or removing structures if there is no other associated development or redevelopment.” [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.140 Director.

Repealed by Ord. 20-0506. [Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.150 Dock.

“Dock” means an anchored walkway or other surface that abuts the shoreline and floats on the water to provide moorage for watercraft or landing for water-dependent recreation. “Dock” is the term which collectively applies to a ramp and float, or it may be comprised of a float only that abuts the shoreline. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.160 Dredging.

“Dredging” means the removal, displacement, and/or disposal of unconsolidated earth material such as sand, silt, gravel, or other submerged materials from the bottom of water bodies, ditches, or wetlands; maintenance dredging and/or support activities are included in this definition. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.170 Ecological functions.

“Ecological functions” or shoreline functions means the work performed or role played by the physical, chemical and biological processes that contribute to the maintenance of the aquatic and terrestrial environments that constitute the shoreline’s natural ecosystem. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.173 Ecosystem-wide processes.

“Ecosystem-wide processes” is defined in WAC 173-26-020(14) as now or hereafter amended; as of March 20, 2020, “ecosystem-wide processes” means “the suite of naturally occurring physical and geologic processes of erosion, transport, and deposition; and specific chemical processes that shape landforms within a specific shoreline ecosystem and determine both the types of habitat and the associated ecological functions.” [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.175 Ell.

“Ell” means a terminal pier section oriented perpendicular to the pier walkway. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.178 Feasible.

“Feasible” is defined in WAC 173-26-020(15) as now or hereafter amended; as of March 20, 2020, “feasible” means, for the purpose of this title, that an action, such as a development project, mitigation, or preservation requirement, meets all of the following conditions:

A. The action can be accomplished with technologies and methods that have been used in the past in similar circumstances, or studies or tests have demonstrated in similar circumstances that such approaches are currently available and likely to achieve the intended results;

B. The action provides a reasonable likelihood of achieving its intended purpose; and

C. The action does not physically preclude achieving the project’s primary intended legal use.

In cases where this title requires certain actions unless they are infeasible, the burden of proving infeasibility is on the applicant.

In determining an action’s infeasibility, the department may weigh the action’s relative public costs and public benefits, considered in the short- and long-term time frames. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.180 Fill.

“Fill” means the addition of soil, sand, rock, gravel, sediment, earth-retaining structure or other material to an area waterward of the ordinary high-water mark, in wetlands, or on shorelands in a manner that raises the elevation or creates dry land. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.185 Fish and wildlife habitats of importance.

“Fish and wildlife habitats of importance” means those habitat areas defined in KMC 18.55.500. Swamp Creek, the Sammamish River, and Lake Washington are all fish and wildlife habitats of importance. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.190 Float.

“Float” means a structure or device which floats on the surface of the water and which is moored, anchored, or otherwise secured in the waters of the City of Kenmore and which is not directly connected to or abutting the shoreline. A float which is directly connected to or abutting the shoreline is considered a dock. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.200 Floating home.

“Floating home” means a single-family dwelling unit constructed on a float that is moored, anchored, or otherwise secured in waters, and is not a vessel, even though it may be capable of being towed. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.210 Floodplain.

“Floodplain” is defined in WAC 173-26-020(19) as now or hereafter amended; as of March 20, 2020, “floodplain” is synonymous with “100-year floodplain” and means that land area susceptible to inundation with a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The limit of this area shall be based upon flood ordinance regulation maps, or a reasonable method which meets the objectives of the Shoreline Management Act.” [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.220 Floodway.

“Floodway” means those portions of the area of a river valley lying streamward from the outer limits of a watercourse upon which floodwaters are carried during periods of flooding that occur with reasonable regularity, although not necessarily annually; said floodway being identified, under normal conditions, by changes in surface soil conditions or changes in types or quality of vegetation ground cover condition. The floodway shall not include lands that can reasonably be expected to be protected from floodwaters by flood control devices maintained by or maintained under license from the federal government, the State, or the county. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.225 Geotechnical report or geotechnical analysis.

“Geotechnical report” or “geotechnical analysis” is defined in WAC 173-26-020(21) as now or hereafter amended; as of March 20, 2020, “geotechnical report” or “geotechnical analysis” means “a scientific study or evaluation conducted by a qualified expert that includes a description of the ground and surface hydrology and geology, the affected land form and its susceptibility to mass wasting, erosion, and other geologic hazards or processes, conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of the proposed development on geologic conditions, the adequacy of the site to be developed, the impacts of the proposed development, alternative approaches to the proposed development, and measures to mitigate potential site-specific and cumulative geological and hydrological impacts of the proposed development, including the potential adverse impacts to adjacent and down-current properties. Geotechnical reports shall conform to accepted technical standards and must be prepared by qualified professional engineers or geologists who have professional expertise about the regional and local shoreline geology and processes.” [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.230 Grading.

“Grading” means the addition, excavation, movement, or redistribution of soil, sand, rock, gravel, sediment or other material on a site in a manner that alters the natural contour of the land. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.235 Government services.

Repealed by Ord. 20-0506. [Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.240 Groin.

“Groin” means a barrier-type structure extending from the backshore into the water across the beach. The purpose of a groin is to interrupt sediment movement along the shore. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.250 Hatchery.

Repealed by Ord. 20-0506. [Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.260 Height.

“Height” is defined in WAC 173-27-030(9) as now or hereafter amended; as of March 20, 2020, “height” is measured from average grade level to the highest point of a structure; provided, that television antennas, chimneys, and similar appurtenances shall not be used in calculating height, except where such appurtenances obstruct the view of the shoreline of a substantial number of residences on areas adjoining such shorelines, or the applicable master program specifically requires that such appurtenances be included; provided further, that temporary construction equipment is excluded in this calculation.” [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.270 Jetty.

“Jetty” means an artificial barrier used to change the natural littoral drift to protect inlet entrances from clogging by excess sediment. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.275 Live-aboard.

“Live-aboard” means a licensed vessel that is used as a primary residence. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.280 Marina.

“Marina” means a marine retail sales and service use, in which a system of piers, buoys, docks or floats is used to provide moorage, primarily for pleasure craft, for sale or rent, usually on a monthly or yearly basis. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.285 No net loss.

Per WAC 173-26-201(2)(c), the concept of “no net loss” of shoreline ecological functions means that the Kenmore Shoreline Master Program provisions shall, to the greatest extent feasible, protect existing shoreline ecological processes and functions and avoid new adverse impacts to ecological processes and functions. The term “net,” as used herein, recognizes that any development has potential or actual short-term or long-term impacts and that, through application of appropriate development standards and employment of mitigation measures in accordance with the mitigation sequence, those impacts will be addressed in a manner necessary to assure that the end result will not diminish the shoreline resources and values as they currently exist. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1). Formerly 16.10.310.]


16.10.290 Nonconforming structure.

“Nonconforming structure” means a structure that was lawfully constructed prior to the effective date of these regulations, but which no longer conforms to the applicable regulations of the master program. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.300 Nonconforming use.

“Nonconforming use” means a use that was lawfully established prior to the effective date of these regulations, but which no longer conforms to the applicable regulations of the master program. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.320 Non-water-oriented uses.

“Non-water-oriented uses” means those uses that are not water-dependent, water-related or water-enjoyment. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.330 Normal protective bulkhead common to single-family residences.

Repealed by Ord. 20-0506. [Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.340 Open space, required.

Repealed by Ord. 20-0506. [Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.350 Ordinary high-water mark.

“Ordinary high-water mark” means the ordinary high-water mark as defined in Chapter 90.58 RCW as now or hereafter amended; as of March 20, 2020, “ordinary high-water mark” means “that mark that will be found by examining the bed and banks and ascertaining where the presence and action of waters are so common and usual, and so long continued in all ordinary years, as to mark upon the soil a character distinct from that of the abutting upland, in respect to vegetation as that condition exists on June 1, 1971, as it may naturally change thereafter, or as it may change thereafter in accordance with permits issued by a local government or the department: PROVIDED, that in any area where the ordinary high-water mark cannot be found, the ordinary high-water mark shall be the line of mean high water.” [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.355 Park/recreation recreational/cultural uses.

Repealed by Ord. 20-0506. [Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.360 Pier.

“Pier” means an over-water, stationary, pile-supported structure that does not float on the water’s surface and provides a location for boat moorage or other water-oriented or water-dependent use. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.370 Port.

Repealed by Ord. 20-0506. [Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.375 Ramp.

“Ramp” means a walkway connecting a pier, other shoreward structure or the shoreline to a float and providing access between the two. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.380 Recreational development.

“Recreational development” means a private or public development operated and devoted to facilities and equipment for recreational purposes, including but not limited to swimming pools, tennis courts, playgrounds, picnic areas, campgrounds, resorts and other similar uses, whether the use of such area is limited to those paying a fee or free to the public. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.390 Redesignation.

“Redesignation” means a change in the shoreline environment designation by the procedures provided in Chapter 16.75 KMC. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.395 Residential development.

Repealed by Ord. 20-0506. [Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.400 Restoration.

“Restoration” or “ecological restoration” means the reestablishment or upgrading of impaired ecological shoreline processes or functions. Restoration does not imply a requirement for returning the shoreline area to aboriginal or pre-European settlement conditions. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.410 Riprap.

Repealed by Ord. 20-0506. [Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.420 Sediment.

“Sediment” means material settled from suspension in a liquid medium. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.430 Shall.

Repealed by Ord. 20-0506. [Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.440 Shorelands.

“Shorelands” or “shoreland areas” means those lands extending landward for 200 feet in all directions as measured on a horizontal plane from the ordinary high-water mark; floodways and contiguous floodplain areas landward 200 feet from such floodways; and all associated wetlands and river deltas subject to the provisions of Chapter 90.58 RCW. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1). Formerly 16.10.450.]


16.10.445 Shoreline buffer.

“Shoreline buffer” means a required vegetation conservation area measured horizontally upland from and perpendicular to the ordinary high-water mark, as described in KMC 16.65.020. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.460 Shoreline environment.

“Shoreline environment” or “shoreline environment designation” means the categories of shorelines of the State established by the City of Kenmore shoreline management master program to differentiate between areas whose features imply differing objectives regarding their use and future development. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.470 Shoreline Master Program.

A. “Shoreline Master Program” consists of the following two elements:

1. Shoreline management goals and policies contained in the shoreline subelement of the Kenmore comprehensive plan. The shoreline management goals and policies constitute the official policy of Kenmore regarding areas of the City subject to shoreline management jurisdiction under Chapter 90.58 RCW;

2. The shoreline regulations specified in this chapter.

B. The following technical and planning information provides a foundation for shoreline policies and regulations, and is intended to aid in implementing and evaluating the Shoreline Master Program:

1. The shoreline protection and restoration plan;

2. The cumulative impacts analysis, which provides a mechanism for examining the success of meeting the requirement for no net loss of ecological functions;

3. The Shoreline Master Program checklist and public involvement process, which shows how Kenmore meets the procedural requirements for updating the Shoreline Master Program; and

4. The shoreline inventory and characterization, which includes data and analytic methods used to develop Kenmore’s shoreline inventory and shoreline characterization. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.480 Shoreline modifications.

“Shoreline modifications” means those actions that modify the physical configuration or qualities of the shoreline area, usually through the construction of a physical element such as a dike, breakwater, pier, fill, bulkhead, or other shoreline structure. Shoreline modifications can include other actions, such as clearing, grading, or application of chemicals. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.500 Shoreline stabilization.

“Shoreline stabilization” means actions taken to address erosion impacts to property and dwellings, businesses or structures caused by natural processes, such as current, flood, wind or wave action. These actions include installation or expansion of structures, such as bulkheads, jetties, groins or vegetation, and nonstructural methods, such as relocation of the structure to be protected, or groundwater management. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.510 Shorelines.

“Shorelines” means lakes greater than 20 acres and rivers and streams with a minimum of 20 cubic feet per second mean annual flow, including the entire water body waterward from the ordinary high-water mark from its centerline or point, all water below the surface and associated shorelands. Kenmore shorelines are shown on the adopted map entitled Kenmore Shoreline Environment Designations (attached to Ord. 20-0506 as Exhibit 2, and incorporated by reference). If there is a discrepancy between the map and the criteria established in this section, the criteria shall constitute the official Kenmore shoreline jurisdiction. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.520 Shorelines of statewide significance.

“Shorelines of statewide significance” means those shorelines described in RCW 90.58.030(2)(e) which are within the City of Kenmore. The Lake Washington shoreline is Kenmore’s only shoreline of statewide significance. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.530 Shorelines of the State.

“Shorelines of the State” means the total of all shorelines and shorelines of statewide significance within the City of Kenmore. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.540 Sign.

“Sign” means any letters, figures, design, symbol, light, structure, billboard, trademark or device intended or used to attract attention to any activity, service, place, subject, person, firm, corporation, public performance, article, machine, merchandise or thing. Excluded from definition and regulation by this title are official traffic signs or signals, official public notices, signs required by law, warning signs, the flag of a government or noncommercial institution such as schools and temporary signs worn or carried by people. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.560 Solid waste.

“Solid waste” means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid wastes including but not limited to garbage, ashes, industrial wastes, swill, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles or parts thereof and discarded commodities. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.570 Substantial development.

“Substantial development” means any development which requires a shoreline management substantial development permit, as defined in RCW 90.58.030(3)(e) as now or hereafter amended. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.575 Water access structure.

“Water access structure” means a pier, dock, buoy, float, boat launch, watercraft lift, or other improvement that facilitates physical access to the water. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.590 Water-dependent use.

“Water-dependent use” or “water-dependent development” means a use or portion of a use which cannot exist in a location that is not adjacent to the water and which is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operations. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.600 Water-enjoyment use.

“Water-enjoyment use” means a recreation use or other use that facilitates public access to the shoreline as a primary characteristic of the use; or a use that provides for recreational use or aesthetic enjoyment of the shoreline for a substantial number of people as a general characteristic of the use and which through location, design, and operation ensures the public’s ability to enjoy the physical and aesthetic qualities of the shoreline. The use must be open to the general public. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1). Formerly 16.10.610.]


16.10.610 Water-oriented use.

“Water-oriented use” means a use that is water-dependent, water-related, or water-enjoyment, or a combination of such uses. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1). Formerly 16.10.620.]


16.10.620 Water-related use.

“Water-related use” or “water-related development” means a use or portion of a use which is not intrinsically dependent on a waterfront location but whose economic viability is dependent on a waterfront location because:

A. The use has a functional requirement for a waterfront location such as the arrival or shipment of materials by water or the need for large quantities of water; or

B. The use provides a necessary service supportive of the water-dependent uses, and the proximity of the use to its customers makes its services less expensive and/or more convenient. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1). Formerly 16.10.600.]


16.10.630 Water transmission pipeline.

Repealed by Ord. 20-0506. [Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.10.640 Wetlands.

“Wetlands” means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. Wetlands do not include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland sites, including, but not limited to, irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and landscape amenities, or those wetlands created after July 1, 1990, that were unintentionally created as a result of the construction of a road, street, or highway. Wetlands may include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland areas to mitigate the conversion of wetlands. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 16.15 SHORELINE ENVIRONMENT DESIGNATIONS

Sections:

16.15.010    Purpose.

16.15.020    Names of shoreline environment designations.

16.15.030    Limits of shoreline environment designations.


16.15.010 Purpose.

A. The purpose of shoreline environment designations is to differentiate between areas whose geographical, hydrological, topographical or other features imply differing objectives regarding the use and future development of the shorelines of the State.

B. Each shoreline environment designation represents a particular emphasis in the type of uses, type of modifications, and the density and dimensions of development which should occur within it. The environment designation system is designed to encourage uses in each environment which enhance or are compatible with the character of the environment while at the same time requiring reasonable standards and restrictions on development so that the character of the environment is not adversely impacted. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.15.020 Names of shoreline environment designations.

In order to accomplish the goals, policies, and regulations of the Kenmore Shoreline Master Program, the following shoreline environment designations have been established:

A. Downtown Waterfront Environment.

B. Swamp Creek Commercial Environment.

C. Shoreline Residential Environment.

D. Urban Conservancy Environment.

E. Natural Environment.

F. Aquatic Environment. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.15.030 Limits of shoreline environment designations.

The shoreline environment designations are included on Map 1, entitled Shoreline Environment Designations Map. If there is a discrepancy between Map 1 and the criteria established in the Kenmore comprehensive plan for shoreline environment designations, the criteria shall constitute the official Kenmore shoreline environment designation. Any parcel of land included within the shoreline jurisdiction without a shoreline environment designation shall be considered Urban Conservancy Environment.

Map 1
[IMAGE]


[Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exhs. 1, 2); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exhs. 1, 2).]


Chapter 16.20 DOWNTOWN WATERFRONT ENVIRONMENT

Sections:

16.20.010    Purpose.

16.20.020    Designation criteria.


16.20.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the Downtown Waterfront Environment is to provide for mixed urban water-oriented uses, public access and recreation while protecting existing ecological functions. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.20.020 Designation criteria.

The shoreline along the contiguous downtown waterfront that is zoned regional business and waterfront commercial in KMC Title 18 and does not meet the requirement for other designations is to be assigned the Downtown Waterfront Environment designation. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 16.23 SWAMP CREEK COMMERCIAL ENVIRONMENT

Sections:

16.23.010    Purpose.

16.23.020    Designation criteria.


16.23.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the Swamp Creek Commercial Environment is to recognize existing and planned high-intensity commercial and residential uses while protecting existing ecological functions and restoring ecological functions in areas that have been previously degraded. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.23.020 Designation criteria.

A Swamp Creek Commercial Environment designation is to be assigned to shoreline areas adjacent to the west side of Swamp Creek if any of the following characteristics apply:

A. The shoreline currently supports high-intensity commercial or high-density residential uses, and is designated in the comprehensive plan and zoned to remain high-intensity; and

B. The shoreline does not meet the requirement for Urban Conservancy Environment or Shoreline Residential Environment designations. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 16.25 SHORELINE RESIDENTIAL ENVIRONMENT

Sections:

16.25.010    Purpose.

16.25.020    Designation criteria.


16.25.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the Shoreline Residential Environment is to accommodate residential development and appurtenant structures. An additional purpose is to provide appropriate public access and recreational uses within new multifamily developments or on public property. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.25.020 Designation criteria.

The Shoreline Residential Environment designation should be assigned to shoreline areas if they are predominantly developed with single-family or multifamily residential uses or are planned and platted for residential development, and the shoreline areas do not meet the criteria for other designations. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 16.30 URBAN CONSERVANCY ENVIRONMENT

Sections:

16.30.010    Purpose.

16.30.020    Designation criteria.


16.30.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the Urban Conservancy Environment is to protect and restore ecological functions of open space, streams, wetlands, and floodplains where they exist in urban and developed settings, including areas below the ordinary high-water mark in Swamp Creek, while allowing a variety of compatible uses. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.30.020 Designation criteria.

An Urban Conservancy Environment designation is assigned to shoreline areas appropriate and planned for development that is compatible with maintaining or restoring ecological functions. Public access and public recreation objectives should be implemented whenever feasible and significant ecological impacts can be mitigated. This designation should be applied when:

A. The shoreline is suitable for water-related or water-enjoyment uses;

B. The shoreline includes open space, floodplain or other sensitive areas that should not be more intensively developed;

C. The shoreline has been altered but retains important ecological functions;

D. The shoreline has potential for ecological restoration or is a restoration priority; or

E. The shoreline has potential for development that is compatible with ecological restoration. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 16.35 NATURAL ENVIRONMENT

Sections:

16.35.010    Purpose.

16.35.020    Designation criteria.


16.35.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the Natural Environment is to protect public shoreline areas that include ecologically intact or minimally altered shorelines. Only low-intensity uses are to be allowed in this environment to maintain existing ecological processes and functions. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1).; Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1)]


16.35.020 Designation criteria.

A Natural Environment designation is assigned to shoreline areas if any of the following characteristics apply:

A. A relatively large, contiguous area of the shoreline is in public ownership and ecologically intact or minimally altered;

B. The shoreline represents ecological processes or functions that provide educational or scientific opportunities; or

C. The shoreline is unable to support active uses or development without significant adverse impacts to ecological functions. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 16.40 AQUATIC ENVIRONMENT

Sections:

16.40.010    Purpose.

16.40.020    Designation criteria.


16.40.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the Aquatic Environment is to protect, restore, and manage the unique characteristics and resources of navigable areas waterward of the ordinary high-water mark on the Sammamish River and Lake Washington. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.40.020 Designation criteria.

Lake Washington and the Sammamish River below the ordinary high-water mark are to be designated as Aquatic Environment. In Lake Washington, the Aquatic Environment extends to the centerline of the lake. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 16.45 GENERAL SHORELINE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

Sections:

16.45.010    General shoreline development requirements.

16.45.020    Accessory uses.

16.45.030    Outdoor storage.

16.45.040    Parking.

16.45.050    Public access.

16.45.060    Historic properties.

16.45.070    Channel migration zone on Swamp Creek.


16.45.010 General shoreline development requirements.

A. Kenmore shall ensure that uses and modifications within the shoreline jurisdiction do not cause a net loss of shoreline ecological functions and processes. Mitigation for impacts resulting in uses and modifications shall follow the mitigation sequencing requirements of KMC 18.55.210 and consider the priorities specified in the shoreline restoration plan.

B. All shoreline uses and developments shall be subject to the following general development standards:

1. The location, design, construction and management of all shoreline developments and uses shall protect the quality and quantity of surface and groundwater on and adjacent to the lot and shall adhere to the guidelines, policies, standards and regulations of applicable water quality management programs and regulatory agencies. Best management practices such as fugitive dust controls and other good housekeeping measures to prevent contamination of land or water shall be required.

2. Solid and liquid wastes and untreated effluents shall not enter any bodies of water or be discharged onto the land.

3. Facilities, equipment and established procedures for the containment, recovery and mitigation of spilled petroleum products shall be provided at recreational marinas, commercial moorage, and vessel repair facilities.

4. The release of oil, chemicals or other hazardous materials onto or into the water shall be prohibited. Equipment for the transportation, storage, handling or application of such materials shall be maintained in a safe and leakproof condition. If there is evidence of leakage, the further use of such equipment shall be suspended until the deficiency has been satisfactorily corrected. The use of chemicals to control invasive aquatic weeds shall be limited to herbicides; provided, that the chemicals are applied by a licensed pesticide applicator and approved for aquatic use.

5. All shoreline developments and uses shall manage increases in surface runoff, and control, treat and release surface water runoff so that receiving water quality and shoreline properties and features are not adversely affected. Control measures may include, but are not limited to, permeable surfacing, dikes, catch basins, settling ponds, interceptor drains and planted buffers.

6. All shoreline developments and uses shall control erosion during project construction and operation.

7. All shoreline developments and uses shall be located, designed, constructed and managed to avoid disturbance of or minimize adverse impacts to protect fish and wildlife habitats of importance, including, but not limited to, spawning, nesting, rearing and habitat areas, and migratory routes. Where avoidance of adverse impacts is not practicable, the city manager may require that mitigation measures to protect species and habitat functions be developed in consultation with State resource management agencies and federally recognized tribes.

8. All shoreline developments and uses shall be located, designed, constructed and managed to minimize interference with or adverse impacts to beneficial natural shoreline processes such as water circulation, erosion and accretion.

9. All shoreline developments and uses shall be located, designed, constructed and managed in a manner that minimizes adverse impacts to surrounding land and water uses and is compatible with the affected area.

10. Land clearing, grading, filling and alteration of natural drainage features and landforms shall be limited to the minimum necessary for development. Surfaces cleared of vegetation and not to be developed shall be replanted. Surface drainage systems or substantial earth modifications shall be professionally designed to prevent maintenance problems or adverse impacts on shoreline features.

11. All shoreline development shall be located, constructed and operated so as to protect public health, safety and welfare.

12. All development activities shall be located and designed to minimize or prevent the need for shoreline defense and stabilization measures and flood protection works such as bulkheads, other bank stabilization, landfills, levees, dikes, groins, jetties or substantial site regrades.

13. All debris, overburden and other waste materials from construction shall be disposed of in such a way as to prevent their entry into any water body.

14. Navigation channels shall be kept free of hazardous or obstructing development or uses.

15. Heating and cooling equipment may not be placed in waters of the State.

16. A vegetation management strategy for any allowed uses in shoreline jurisdiction shall be developed that incorporates a site-specific plan for use of integrated pest management techniques, if applicable, identifying anticipated use of fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides. The strategy shall include methods of application that ensure that these materials will not enter the water. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.45.020 Accessory uses.

A. Conditional or prohibited uses may be permitted as accessory uses only if clearly incidental and necessary for the operation of a permitted principal use. For purposes of this section, air transportation service shall not be considered to be accessory to a principal use and shall only be permitted as provided in the applicable shoreline environment.

B. Unless specifically stated otherwise in the regulations for the applicable environment, accessory uses that are non-water-dependent and non-water-related, even if accessory to water-dependent or water-related uses, shall not be permitted over water unless either:

1. The overwater location is necessary for the operation of the water-dependent or water-related use; or

2. The lot has a depth of less than 50 feet of dry land.

C. Piers, floats, pilings, breakwaters, drydocks and similar accessory structures for moorage shall be permitted as accessory to permitted uses subject to the development standards unless specifically prohibited in the applicable shoreline environment.

D. Accessory uses shall be located on the same lot as the principal use; provided, that when the accessory use is also permitted as a principal use in the shoreline environment applicable to an adjacent lot, the accessory use may be located on that adjacent lot.

E. KMC 16.50.090 contains additional standards for residential accessory uses. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.45.030 Outdoor storage.

Outdoor storage is allowed only in the Downtown Waterfront Environment and is prohibited in all other environments. Such use shall be accessory to a permitted water-dependent use, shall be at least 20 feet from the ordinary high-water mark and shall meet the following standards:

A. Storage shall not be permitted in required setbacks and shall not be located between the building(s) and the primary street.

B. Storage shall be screened from view from the public right-of-way and adjacent residential zones using a minimum six-foot-high solid wood fence, masonry wall, or vegetation approved by the city manager.

C. Storage shall be maintained in a neat, orderly and safe manner and shall not include the exterior accumulation of broken, abandoned or discarded materials, junk, trash, rubbish, or debris.

D. Outdoor storage areas shall be graded and shall meet the requirements of the City’s Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual. Outdoor storage areas may be surfaced with permeable materials if adequate drainage and erosion and dust control are provided.

E. Lighting shall be directed away from adjacent residential zones and shall be shielded as necessary to reduce impacts. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.45.040 Parking.

A. Accessory parking facilities in the shoreline jurisdiction are not a preferred use and shall be allowed only as necessary to support an authorized use. Standalone parking is permitted as described in KMC 16.50.030. All parking is prohibited in the Natural Environment unless it supports a water-dependent use and complies with subsections B, C and D of this section.

B. In all shoreline environment designations, parking should be located outside the shoreline jurisdiction; if infeasible to locate outside of the shoreline jurisdiction, such facilities shall be located as far from the shoreline as is feasible unless there are overriding needs for safe ADA (Americans with Disabilities Act) access.

C. Proposed parking facilities shall be planned, located and designed where routes will have the least possible adverse effect on unique or fragile shoreline features and will not result in a net loss of shoreline ecological functions or adversely impact existing or planned water-dependent uses.

D. Lighting from parking areas shall be screened from illuminating fish and wildlife habitat areas and their buffers; provided, that lighting necessary for safe operation of a permitted water-dependent use may be allowed, but should be screened to the extent possible from illuminating fish and wildlife habitat areas and their buffers.

E. Parking shall not be permitted over water unless it is accessory to a water-dependent or water-related use located on a lot with a depth of less than 50 feet of dry land and the city manager determines that adequate on-site or off-site dry land parking within 800 feet is not reasonably available. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.45.050 Public access.

A. Public access to the shoreline shall be required for publicly funded projects and development on public lands; commercial, light manufacturing and institutional uses (KMC 16.50.075); boating facilities (KMC 16.50.050); multifamily development, including mixed use developments that contain multiple-family dwelling units (KMC 16.50.090(A)(1)); and land divisions of more than four lots.

B. For all development on private property, public access shall be required when such development would either generate or increase demand for public access and/or would impair existing legal access opportunities or rights.

C. The City adopts the following policies and plans as collectively constituting a shoreline public access plan for Kenmore:

1. Comprehensive plan downtown subelement;

2. Comprehensive plan transportation element;

3. Kenmore parks, recreation, and open space plan;

4. Other plans meeting the requirements of WAC 173-26-221(4) and developed through an open public process as provided in WAC 173-26-201(3)(b)(i).

D. Where public access is required, an applicant shall seek to provide physical public access consistent with the shoreline public access plan.

E. Where public access is required, it shall:

1. Connect to other public and private public access and recreation facilities on adjacent parcels along Lake Washington and the Sammamish River shorelines whenever feasible;

2. Be sited to ensure public safety;

3. Be open to the general public and accessible directly from a public right-of-way or by an easement granted to the City for public access;

4. Enhance access and enjoyment of the shoreline and provide features in scale with the development such as, but not limited to:

a. View points;

b. Places to congregate in proportion to the scale of the development;

c. Benches and picnic tables;

d. Beach or water access for boats; and

e. Pathways for pedestrians and bicycles.

F. Where public access is required, the area dedicated and improved for public access shall be roughly proportional to the scale and character of the proposed development and its impacts.

G. Where public access is required, the city manager shall first consider the principles of nexus and rough proportionality, the Act and all relevant constitutional and other legal limits on regulation of private property.

H. Public access improvements shall be designed to be compatible with the purpose and intent of the shoreline environment in which they are constructed.

I. The provisions of this section do not apply to the following:

1. Short plats of four or fewer lots; or

2. Where public access is demonstrated to be infeasible due to reasons of incompatible uses, safety, security, or impact to the shoreline environment. Where physical public access is not feasible, opportunities for visual access or other approaches to enhance public access to the shoreline shall be considered by the applicant. Alternative public access proposals shall be reviewed and approved by the city manager. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.45.060 Historic properties.

Historic properties, including historic buildings, sites, objects, districts and landscapes, prehistoric and historic archaeological resources, and traditional cultural places, shall be protected within shoreline environments as follows:

A. Known Historic Properties.

1. Known historic properties inventoried by King County and Washington Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation are subject to the procedures delineated in Chapter 2.20 KMC. Disturbance of known archaeological sites is also subject to State regulations, including Chapters 27.44, 27.53 and 68.80 RCW;

2. If a known archaeological site or traditional cultural place is affected by a development proposal, the city manager shall require a site inspection or evaluation by a professional archaeologist and inform and consult with the Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation and any concerned Native American tribes. To the extent feasible, the city manager shall coordinate county and State required permitting and compliance procedures and requirements to avoid substantial duplication of effort by permit applicants; and

3. In considering shoreline permits or shoreline exemptions, the department may attach conditions to provide sufficient time for the city manager to consult with the Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation and any concerned Native American tribes, and to ensure that historic properties are properly protected, or for appropriate agencies to contact property owners regarding purchase or other long-term stewardship and protection arrangements. Provision for the protection and preservation of historic properties shall be incorporated in permits and exemptions to the maximum extent practical.

B. Inadvertent Discovery.

1. Consistent with the definitions and requirements contained in Chapters 27.44, 27.53 and 68.80 RCW, whenever potentially significant historic properties or archaeological artifacts are discovered in the process of development on shorelines, work on that portion of the development site shall be stopped immediately and the find reported as soon as possible to the city manager and, if an archaeological site or artifacts have been discovered, the Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation, any concerned Native American tribes and other appropriate agencies;

2. The city manager shall require that a historic property assessment be conducted immediately by a professional archaeologist, ethnographer or historic preservation professional, as applicable, in consultation with State and tribal officials as appropriate, to determine the significance of the discovery and the extent of damage that may have occurred to the resource. The historic property assessment shall be provided to the city manager and, if an archaeological site, archaeological artifacts or a traditional cultural place has been discovered, the Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation, and any concerned Native American tribes to determine the significance of the discovery in accordance with Chapter 27.53 RCW and Chapter 25-48 WAC; and

3. Upon receipt of a positive determination of a property’s significance, or if available information suggests that a negative determination is erroneous, the city manager may require that a historic property management plan be prepared by a qualified professional archaeologist or other appropriate professional if such action is reasonable and necessary to implement related program objectives.

C. Public Access to Historic Properties.

1. If a private or publicly owned historic property is identified, public access shall be encouraged as appropriate for purposes of public education; provided, that:

a. The type or level of public access is consistent with the long-term protection of both historic resource values and shoreline ecological functions; and

b. An access management plan is developed in accordance with development site- and resource-specific conditions to address physical protection of the resource, hours of operation, interpretive or directional signage, lighting, pedestrian access, traffic, and parking, as appropriate, in consultation with the city manager and, if an archaeological site, archaeological artifacts or a traditional cultural place have been discovered, the Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation, any concerned Native American tribes, or other agencies, as appropriate; and

2. For archaeological sites and traditional cultural places, approval of proposed access measures by the Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation, any concerned Native tribes or other agencies, as appropriate, shall be required prior to provision of public access to a site. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.45.070 Channel migration zone on Swamp Creek.

A. Unless a site-specific study by a qualified professional concludes otherwise, the channel migration zone shall include:

1. The 500-year floodplain of Swamp Creek within shoreline jurisdiction; and

2. All area within 112.5 feet of Swamp Creek.

B. Within the channel migration zone:

1. There shall be no subdivision of land except for the purpose of creating permanent, nonbuildable open space tracts.

2. Fill shall not be allowed that impairs channel migration within the channel migration zone.

3. No new development is allowed where future stabilization, including bank stabilization as well as structural flood hazard reduction, would be necessary.

4. Existing structures can be protected but must use natural stabilization unless proven by a scientifically and technically valid study that the natural stabilization measures will not work.

5. Existing legal uses in the Swamp Creek floodplain can be repaired and maintained; provided, that such actions do not cause significant ecological impacts, increase flood hazards to other uses, and are consistent with other relevant laws.

6. Before new structural flood hazard reduction measures in shoreline jurisdiction can be approved, it must be demonstrated by a scientific and engineering analysis that they are necessary to protect existing development, that nonstructural measures are not feasible, that impacts on ecological functions and priority species and habitats can be successfully mitigated so as to assure no net loss of ecological function, and that appropriate vegetation conservation actions are undertaken.

C. A project proponent may have a channel migration zone study completed by a qualified professional hydrogeologist to be reviewed by the City. If the study demonstrates that the entirety of the development property is outside of the channel migration zone, then this section will not further apply to the project. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 16.50 SHORELINE USES

Sections:

16.50.010    General shoreline uses.

16.50.020    Interpretation of shoreline use table.

16.50.030    Shoreline use table and conditions.

16.50.040    Aquaculture.

16.50.050    Boating facilities.

16.50.060    Repealed.

16.50.070    Parks and commercial outdoor recreation.

16.50.075    Commercial, light manufacturing and institutional uses.

16.50.080    Utility facilities.

16.50.085    Transportation facilities.

16.50.090    Residential uses.

16.50.100    Repealed.


16.50.010 General shoreline uses.

A. All uses in the shoreline jurisdiction must comply with all City code provisions and with the Kenmore Shoreline Master Program. For a principal use to be permitted in the shoreline, it must be a permitted use in the underlying zone, and must be listed as a permitted or conditional use in KMC 16.50.030. This section may not authorize a land use that is not allowed by the underlying zoning, but may add restrictions or conditions or prohibit specific land uses within the shoreline jurisdiction.

B. Uses not specifically addressed in KMC 16.50.030 may be permitted as conditional uses in the shoreline jurisdiction, provided the use meets the criteria for a shoreline conditional use permit and is compatible with the underlying zoning.

C. When there is a conflict between permitted land uses, preference for shoreline uses shall first be given to water-dependent uses, then to water-related uses, then to water-enjoyment uses, and finally to non-water-oriented uses.

D. KMC 16.50.040 through 16.50.090 provide additional shoreline use requirements for specific uses as identified in the shoreline use table. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.50.020 Interpretation of shoreline use table.

A. The shoreline use table in KMC 16.50.030 indicates whether a specific use is allowed within each of the shoreline environment designations and whether it is permitted outright or allowed only as a shoreline conditional use. The process through which a use or development may be permitted is defined under procedures in Chapter 16.75 KMC.

B. In the table, shoreline environment designations are listed at the top of each column and the specific uses are listed along the left-hand side of each horizontal row. The cell at the intersection of a column and a row indicates whether a use may be allowed in a specific shoreline environment designation and whether additional use criteria apply. The table should be interpreted as follows:

1. If the letter “P” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use may be permitted within the shoreline environment designation if the underlying zoning also allows the use.

2. If the letter “C” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use may be allowed within the shoreline environment designation subject to the shoreline conditional use review procedures specified in Chapter 16.75 KMC, and only if the underlying zoning allows the use.

3. If the letter “X” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is prohibited in that shoreline environment designation. These uses may not be authorized through a conditional use, shoreline exemption, or shoreline variance.

4. If the letter “U” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the use is subject to the same review process and standards as the immediately adjacent upland shoreline environment designation.

5. If a number appears after the letter “P,” “C” or “U” in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, additional use criteria apply. The use may be permitted subject to the appropriate review process in this section only if the specific use criteria indicated with the corresponding number immediately following the table are satisfied, and only if the underlying zoning allows the use. If more than one number appears at the intersection of the column and row, both numbers apply.

6. Definitions of italicized uses in the table may be found in Chapter 18.20 KMC. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.50.030 Shoreline use table and conditions.

A. Shoreline Use Table.

Shoreline Use Table  

	KEY

P – Permitted Use

C – Shoreline Conditional Use

X – Prohibited Use

U – Same use allowances as in adjacent upland environment	DOWNTOWN WATERFRONT	SWAMP CREEK 

COMMERCIAL 	SHORELINE RESIDENTIAL	URBAN CONSERVANCY	NATURAL	AQUATIC

	Adult entertainment business	P2 	P2 	X 	X 	X 	X

	Air transportation service	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	C12

	Ambulatory surgery center	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 

	Animal kennel/shelter	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X

	Arts, entertainment, indoor	P2 	P2 	X 	P16 	X 	X

	Arts, entertainment, outdoor	P2 	P2 	X 	P2 	P6 	X

	Auction house	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X

	Automotive sales and service, marine	P2 	P2 	X 	X 	X 	U3

	Automotive sales and service, nonmarine	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X

	Business service, intensive	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X

	Business service, standard	P2 	P2 	X 	X 	X 	X

	Cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X

	College/university	P3 	P3 	P3 	P3 	X 	U

	Community residential facility	P2 	P2 	P2 	X 	X 	X

	Construction and trade	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X

	Day care	P2 	P2 	X 	X 	X 	X

	Eating and drinking place	P2 	P2 	X 	P16 	X 	X

	Educational service	P2 	P2 	P2 	P2 	X 	X

	Family child-care home	X 	X 	P17 	P17 	C17 	X

	Fire or police facility	P3 	P3 	P3 	C3 	X 	U

	Funeral home/crematory	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X

	Health care and social assistance	P2, 13 	P2, 13 	X 	P2, 13 	X 	X

	Hospital	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X

	Laboratory	P2 	P2 	X 	X 	X 	X

	Manufactured housing community	X 	X 	C14 	X 	X 	X

	Manufacturing, heavy	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X

	Manufacturing, light	P2 	P2 	X 	X 	X 	X

	Marijuana business	P2 	P2 	X 	X 	X 	X

	Marijuana cooperative	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X

	Mobile food service	P2 	P2 	X 	P2 	X 	P3

	Multiple-family dwelling	P17	P17	P17	P17	X	X

	Office	P2 	P2 	X 	P2 	X 	X

	Park, non-water-oriented	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X

	Park, water-oriented. See also KMC 16.50.050, 16.50.070, and 16.55.050.	P 	P 	P 	P 	P6 	P3

	Personal service	P2 	P2 	X 	P2 	X 	X

	Recreational facility, indoor, commercial. KMC 16.50.070 does not apply to this use.	P2 	P2 	X 	X 	X 	X

	Recreational facility, outdoor, commercial. See also KMC 16.50.050, 16.50.070, and 16.55.050.	P4, 15 	P4, 15 	P5, 15 	P5, 15 	P6 	P3

	Regional land use, except for airport and ferry terminal, which are described below.	C2, 7 	C2, 7 	X 	X 	X 	C3

	Airport	C12 	X 	X 	X 	X 	C12

	Ferry terminal	C 	X 	X 	X 	X 	C

	Religious institution	P2 	P2 	X 	X 	X 	X

	Resource land use, except for aquaculture, which is described below.	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X

	Aquaculture. See also KMC 16.50.040.	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	C1

	Retail sales	P2 	P2 	X 	P16 	X 	X

	Retail sales, bulk	X 	P2 	X 	X 	X 	X

	Secure facility	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X

	Single detached dwelling unit	X 	X 	P17 	P17 	C17 	P8

	Standalone parking	C11 	C11 	X 	C11 	X 	X

	Supportive living facility	P2 	P2 	P2 	X 	X 	X

	Temporary lodging	P2 	P2 	X 	X 	X 	X

	Transportation services	C2 	C2 	X 	X 	X 	X

	Transportation facilities	C9 	C9 	C9 	C9 	C9 	C9

	Utility facility. See also KMC 16.50.080.	P10 	P10 	P10 	P10 	P10 	P3, 10

	Vehicle or equipment rental	P3, 16 	X 	X 	P3, 16 	X 	P3, 16

	Vehicle refueling station	P2 	P2 	X 	X 	X 	C3

	Warehousing	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X

	Wholesale trade	P2 	P2 	X 	X 	X 	X

B. Shoreline Use Criteria (Footnotes to Shoreline Use Table in Subsection A of this section).

1. Aquaculture may be allowed only in Lake Washington and only under the following conditions:

a. Aquaculture operations are located at least 500 feet from the Shoreline Residential and Downtown Waterfront Environments.

b. Aquaculture operations waterward of the Natural Environment and Urban Conservancy Environment are limited to activities that do not require structures, facilities or mechanized harvest practices.

2. Only if consistent with KMC 16.50.075, Commercial, light manufacturing and institutional uses.

3. Only the water-dependent portion of the use shall be allowed in the shoreline environment.

4. Water-oriented recreational uses accessible to the public may be allowed together with accessory recreation facilities that provide water enjoyment for substantial numbers of persons. All other commercial outdoor recreational uses shall be prohibited.

5. In Urban Conservancy and Shoreline Residential Environments, boating facilities shall be allowed. Golf course shall be a conditional use in the Urban Conservancy Environment. All other commercial outdoor recreational uses shall be prohibited.

6. In the Natural Environment, only water-oriented passive and low-impact uses, including public access trails, shall be allowed.

7. Wastewater treatment facilities and municipal water production uses, except for in-water uses, shall be allowed only on Lake Washington shorelines and are prohibited on shorelines of the Sammamish River and Swamp Creek.

8. New overwater residences, including floating homes, are prohibited except for live-aboards. They may be allowed; provided, that:

a. They are for single-family use only;

b. They are located in a marina that provides shower and toilet facilities on land and there are no sewage discharges to the water;

c. Live-aboards do not exceed 10 percent of the total slips in the marina;

d. They are owner-occupied vessels; and

e. There are on-shore support services in proximity to the live-aboards.

9. Only if consistent with KMC 16.50.085, Transportation facilities.

10. Utility facilities may be located within the shoreline jurisdiction if there is no feasible alternate location, the alternative would result in unreasonable and disproportionate cost, or the facility is necessary to serve adjacent shoreline uses. In no case are propane/compressed natural gas/liquefied natural gas storage tanks serving multiple lots or uses from which fuel is distributed directly to individual users permitted.

11. Commuter parking only, and only if it is designed to serve a passenger ferry system or regional transit. The use must meet the standards in KMC 16.45.040.

12. Helistops and heliports are prohibited.

13. Veterinary clinics are prohibited.

14. Except for manufactured housing communities existing as of March 20, 2020, which are permitted outright.

15. Marinas are prohibited on shorelines of the Sammamish River and Swamp Creek.

16. Only when accessory to a park or recreational facility and related to water access or to water enjoyment for substantial numbers of persons.

17. Only if consistent with KMC 16.50.090, Residential uses. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.50.040 Aquaculture.

A. Any structure used for aquaculture that is placed waterward of the ordinary high-water mark shall be placed so as not to:

1. Be a significant hazard to navigation;

2. Cause significant damage to neighboring properties;

3. Be a significant hazard to divers and boaters who may frequent the area.

B. Any byproducts of the aquatic resources facility which are discharged into the water shall not degrade the quality of the recipient water body.

C. Aquaculture shall be installed with minimum disturbance to banks and channels and shall not cause extensive erosion or accretion along adjacent shorelines.

D. Aquaculture facilities should be designed and located so as not to spread disease to native aquatic life, establish new nonnative species which cause significant ecological impacts, or significantly impact the aesthetic qualities of the shoreline. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.50.050 Boating facilities.

Boating facilities shall meet the following standards:

A. The facility shall be designed and operated so that there is no net loss of ecological function in the shoreline;

B. The streets serving the proposed facility must be adequate to accommodate traffic generated by such a facility safely and conveniently;

C. The facility shall provide adequate parking in accordance with underlying zoning requirements. Long-term parking areas shall be located away from the water. Short-term loading areas, however, may be located near berthing areas;

D. All boating facilities shall be sited and designed to protect rights of navigation;

E. A marina must have provisions available for cleanup of accidental spills of contaminants;

F. Lavatory facilities connected to a sanitary sewer and adequate to serve the marina shall be provided;

G. Self-service sewage pumpout facilities or the best available method of disposing of sewage wastes and appropriate disposal facilities for bilge wastes shall be provided at marinas having in excess of 3,500 lineal feet of moorage or slips large enough to accommodate boats larger than 20 feet in length, and shall be located so as to be conveniently available to all boats. An appropriate disposal facility for removal of bilge wastes shall be either a vacuum apparatus, or oil-absorbent materials and waste receptacles;

H. Untreated sewage shall not be discharged into the water at any time. Treated sewage shall not be discharged while boats are moored;

I. Public access shall be provided in accordance with KMC 16.45.050;

J. The design shall be compatible with adjacent development;

K. Covered moorage may only be permitted for vessel repair facilities; and

L. Extended moorage on waters of the State without a lease or permission is prohibited. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.50.060 Public access.

Repealed by Ord. 20-0506. [Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.50.070 Parks and commercial outdoor recreation.

A. Permitted recreational development in all environments must meet the following standards:

1. Recreational development allowed in shoreline jurisdiction should be primarily related to water access or to enjoyment of the water by substantial numbers of persons. Non-water-oriented park and commercial outdoor recreational uses and modifications should be located outside of shoreline jurisdiction or, if accessory to a water-oriented recreational development, upland of water-oriented uses and modifications if a location outside of shoreline jurisdiction is not feasible.

2. Parks and commercial outdoor recreation facilities shall be located, designed and operated in a manner consistent with the purpose of the shoreline environment designation in which they are located and such that no net loss of shoreline ecological functions or ecosystem-wide processes results.

3. Vehicular access, parking and restrooms should be located outside the shoreline jurisdiction; if infeasible to locate outside of the shoreline jurisdiction, such facilities shall be located as far from the shoreline as is feasible.

4. Removal of native vegetation for recreational development and uses shall be the minimum necessary.

B. Water-dependent recreational development in all shoreline environments must meet the following standards:

1. The construction of water access structures waterward of the ordinary high-water mark shall be governed by the regulations relating to water access structure construction in KMC 16.55.050.

2. Swimming areas shall be separated from boat launch areas and marinas, to the maximum extent practical, consistent with KMC 16.55.050(C).

3. New or expanded swimming facilities shall only be permitted if there is an ongoing water quality testing program guided by a monitoring plan approved by the city manager to ensure public safety.

C. Public Access Trails.

1. Public access trails within shoreline buffers shall be regulated by the provisions of Chapter 18.55 KMC.

2. Trails shall be designed primarily for nonmotorized use and should be no wider than is necessary to accommodate expected pedestrian traffic.

D. Allowances for Water-Oriented Park and Commercial Outdoor Recreational Facilities in Shoreline Buffers. In recognition of the existing conditions of current and planned City shoreline parks and public or publicly accessible commercial outdoor recreational facilities, the following standards shall guide new development and redevelopment of water-oriented park and outdoor recreational facilities in shoreline buffers. For any allowed development or modification within a buffer, applicants shall submit a plan that addresses compliance with each of the following applicable standards. The City may review and condition the project to more fully implement the standards below:

1. Water-dependent park and commercial outdoor recreation facilities, such as water-access structures and swimming beaches, are allowed in buffers consistent with KMC 16.65.020(C)(1).

2. Certain uses and modifications may be allowed within buffers if they support water-oriented parks and commercial outdoor recreation facilities and demonstrate consistency with subsections (D)(3) through (5) of this section. The city manager has the discretion to decide if a proposed use or modification supports water-oriented public access and outdoor recreation, and shall consult the definition of water-oriented in KMC 16.10.610.

3. New or expanded water-oriented development and facilities that support water-enjoyment shall follow mitigation sequencing to protect existing riparian areas and other critical areas. Unavoidable impacts shall be mitigated consistent with the requirements in KMC 18.55.190 through 18.55.220, 18.55.330 and 18.55.430 such that there is no net loss of shoreline ecological processes or functions.

4. If parking improvements supporting water-oriented parks and commercial outdoor recreation facilities cannot comply with KMC 16.45.040, parking within buffers shall be limited to that necessary to provide vehicle access to boat launches. New or improved pollution-generating impervious surfaces shall provide water quality treatment consistent with the City’s adopted Surface Water Design Manual.

5. New and expanded recreational development in shoreline jurisdiction shall be located to avoid and minimize intrusion into riparian areas, as well as avoid tree and shrub removal. Necessary tree removal shall be mitigated at a 3:1 ratio, with an emphasis on use of native conifers placed to maximize ecological benefits to the shoreline water body.

E. In the Natural Environment, recreational development shall meet the following standards:

1. Trails shall be designed primarily for pedestrian access, including access by wheelchair where appropriate, and should be no wider than is necessary to accommodate expected pedestrian traffic;

2. Removal of native vegetation for recreational uses shall be the minimum necessary to provide pedestrian access and limited visual access to the shoreline; and

3. Public contact with unique and fragile areas shall be permitted where possible without destroying the natural character of the area. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.50.075 Commercial, light manufacturing and institutional uses.

A. Water-dependent and water-related commercial, light manufacturing and institutional uses shall be permitted subject to the applicable requirements and conditions of KMC 16.50.030(A) and (B). Non-water-dependent and non-water-related uses shall be permitted only if the use meets the standards of subsections (A)(1) and (2) of this section:

1. The use is:

a. Part of a mixed use development that includes a water-dependent use and in which at least 50 percent of the land area within the shoreline jurisdiction on the project site is in a water-dependent use or water-related use (including uses accessory to a water-dependent use that are fully incidental and subordinate to the water-dependent use), dedicated public access, or substantial shoreline habitat enhancement consistent with KMC 16.60.010; or

b. A new or expanding use in a commercial zone along the Swamp Creek shoreline north of Northeast Bothell Way, where the existing development does not conform with current shoreline buffer provisions of KMC 16.65.020 and where the proposed development would substantially increase the width and enhance the habitat quality of the buffer along Swamp Creek; or

c. On a site physically separated from the shoreline by another property or public right-of-way; or

d. At a shoreline location where navigability is severely limited and the use provides a significant public benefit per subsection (A)(2) of this section.

2. The development provides a significant public benefit to help achieve any of the following shoreline element goals:

a. Economic development for uses that are water-dependent;

b. Public access beyond that required by KMC 16.45.050;

c. Water-oriented recreation;

d. Multimodal, water-dependent transportation circulation;

e. Conservation or restoration of critical areas, scenic vistas, or fish and wildlife habitat; or

f. Preservation of historic properties.

B. Existing non-water-dependent uses may be expanded, provided the expansion complies with all development standards and the project includes ecological enhancement consistent with KMC 16.60.010.

C. Commercial, light manufacturing or institutional development proposals shall be designed or conditioned to ensure no net loss of shoreline ecological functions, and no significant adverse impact to other shoreline uses, resources and values provided for in RCW 90.58.020, such as navigation, recreation and public access.

D. Non-water-dependent commercial, light manufacturing or institutional uses should not be allowed over water except in existing structures or in the limited instances where they are accessory to and necessary in support of water-dependent uses. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.50.080 Utility facilities.

The following standards apply to utility uses within the shoreline environment:

A. Stormwater and sewage outfalls may be permitted in shoreline environments if upland treatment and infiltration to groundwater, streams or wetlands is not feasible per WAC 173-26-020 and there is no long-term adverse impact on salmon spawning, rearing or migration habitat;

B. Water intakes shall not be permitted near fish spawning, migration, or rearing areas;

C. Water intakes shall comply with Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife fish screening criteria, and to the maximum extent practical, intakes shall be placed at least 30 feet waterward of the ordinary high-water mark;

D. Cable crossings for telecommunications and power lines and pipelines for oil, gas, water and other utilities shall:

1. Use the best available technology to protect health, safety, and the environment;

2. Be routed through sites that are already free of vegetation, such as existing roadways, or attached to existing bridges, to the greatest extent feasible;

3. Avoid critical aquatic habitat to the greatest extent feasible;

4. If crossing beneath a streambed, utilities shall be designed to avoid streambed mobilization and adverse impacts on groundwater flow, be placed in a sleeve or conduit that allows replacement without need for additional excavation, and return grades to existing or better condition that provides for normal floodwater flow; and

5. Provide mitigation for impacts to shoreline ecological functions. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.50.085 Transportation facilities.

A. New highway and street construction is allowed in the shoreline environment only if:

1. There is no feasible alternate location;

2. Pedestrian, bicycle and public transport needs are addressed; and

3. When located in the Natural Environment, the use is low-intensity transportation infrastructure.

B. Highway and street infrastructure that must be located in water or over water, such as bridges and bridge supports, may be permitted; provided, that the priorities of the Kenmore shoreline restoration plan are considered in designing mitigation for impacts from the project.

C. Transportation facilities shall employ mitigation sequencing specified in Chapter 18.55 KMC to avoid and mitigate for impacts to critical areas.

D. Bridges, when necessary, should span open water and floodways.

E. Roadways and bridges should be designed to avoid placement of fill or structures that would restrict floodplain capacity or limit channel migration.

F. Construction of private bridges should be minimized, and shared access should be required whenever feasible, including when subdivision would create new lots requiring access by bridge.

G. Expansion of existing highways and streets in the shoreline jurisdiction shall be permitted without a conditional use permit only if the following criteria are met:

1. The expansion is included in the transportation element of the comprehensive plan, neighborhood transportation plan, transportation improvement program, ADA compliance plan, or target zero strategy implementation.

2. The expansion does not require acquisition of private property that was unanticipated in the plans under subsection (G)(1) of this section.

3. The expansion is located within existing rights-of-way or other City-managed land.

4. Alteration and/or fill is the minimum necessary to construct such facilities to meet established safety standards and all applicable SMP standards can be met.

5. Disturbed areas are restored immediately after the use of construction equipment.

If these criteria cannot be satisfied, expansion may only be permitted after approval of a conditional use permit. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.50.090 Residential uses.

A. Multiple-family dwellings shall be permitted in the Downtown Waterfront, Swamp Creek Commercial and Urban Conservancy Environments only if the use meets the standards of subsections (A)(1) and (2) of this section:

1. The use is:

a. Part of a mixed use development that includes a water-dependent use and in which at least 50 percent of the land area within the shoreline jurisdiction on the project site is in a water-dependent use or water-related use (including uses accessory to a water-dependent use that are fully incidental and subordinate to the water-dependent use), dedicated public access, or substantial shoreline habitat enhancement consistent with KMC 16.60.010; or

b. A new or expanding use in a commercial zone along the Swamp Creek shoreline north of Northeast Bothell Way, where the existing development does not conform with current shoreline buffer provisions of KMC 16.65.020 and where the proposed development would substantially increase the width and enhance the habitat quality of the buffer along Swamp Creek; or

c. On a site physically separated from the shoreline by another property or public right-of-way; or

d. At a shoreline location where navigability is severely limited and the use provides a significant public benefit per subsection (A)(2) of this section.

2. The development provides a significant public benefit to help achieve any of the following shoreline element goals:

a. Economic development for uses that are water-dependent;

b. Public access beyond that required by KMC 16.45.050;

c. Water-oriented recreation;

d. Multimodal, water-dependent transportation circulation;

e. Conservation or restoration of critical areas, scenic vistas, or fish and wildlife habitat; or

f. Preservation of historic properties.

Existing multiple-family dwellings may be expanded, provided the expansion complies with all development standards and the project includes ecological enhancement consistent with KMC 16.60.010.

B. Residential accessory uses must meet the following standards:

1. Non-water-dependent accessory structures other than below-grade swimming pools shall be limited to a 150-square-foot footprint.

2. Below-grade swimming pools shall be sited and designed so that they do not adversely affect the flow of groundwater or endanger unstable slopes.

3. Accessory structures shall be sited to preserve visual access to the shoreline from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way to the maximum extent practical.

4. Non-water-dependent accessory structures and facilities such as sheds, gazebos, swimming pools, and driveways shall not be located in vegetation conservation areas described in Chapter 16.60 KMC.

5. Foot ramps, stairs, and paths to provide pedestrian access to a dock, pier, boat launch, or beach may be allowed in the vegetation conservation areas described in Chapter 16.60 KMC, but shall be limited to a maximum width of five feet and shall avoid native vegetation removal to the maximum extent practicable. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.50.100 Channel migration zone on Swamp Creek.

Repealed by Ord. 20-0506. [Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 16.55 SHORELINE MODIFICATIONS

Sections:

16.55.010    General shoreline modifications.

16.55.020    Interpretation of shoreline modifications table.

16.55.030    Shoreline modifications table and conditions.

16.55.040    Shoreline stabilization.

16.55.050    Water access structures.

16.55.060    Grading, dredging, dredge material disposal and filling.


16.55.010 General shoreline modifications.

The shoreline modifications chapter shall not be used to authorize a shoreline modification that is not allowed by the underlying zoning, but may add additional restrictions or conditions or prohibit specific modifications within the shoreline jurisdiction. All shoreline modifications in the shoreline jurisdiction must comply with all relevant City code provisions and with the Kenmore Shoreline Master Program. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.55.020 Interpretation of shoreline modifications table.

The shoreline modifications table in KMC 16.55.030 determines whether a specific shoreline modification is allowed within each of the shoreline environments. The shoreline environment is located on the vertical column and the specific modification is located on the horizontal row of the table. The specific modifications generally are grouped by the shoreline modification categories in WAC 173-26-231. The table should be interpreted as follows:

A. If the letter “P” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the modification may be allowed within the shoreline environment only if the underlying zoning allows the modification.

B. If the letter “C” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the modification may be allowed within the shoreline environment subject to the shoreline conditional use review procedures specified in Chapter 16.75 KMC, and only if the underlying zoning allows the modification.

C. If the letter “U” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the modification is subject to the same review process and standards as in the immediately adjacent upland shoreline environment designation.

D. If a number appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the modification may be allowed subject to the appropriate review process indicated in this section, the specific development conditions indicated with the corresponding number immediately following the table, and only if the underlying zoning allows the modification. If more than one number appears at the intersection of the column and row, both numbers apply.

E. If the letter “X” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the modification is prohibited in that shoreline environment.

F. If “NA” appears in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, the modification is not applicable in that shoreline environment.

G. For purposes of interpreting the modifications table, “upland” means that the use or activity is landward of the shoreline water body’s ordinary high-water mark. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.55.030 Shoreline modifications table and conditions.

A. Shoreline Modifications Table.

Shoreline Modifications Table  

	KEY

P – Permitted Modification

C – Shoreline Conditional Use Required

X – Prohibited Modification

U – Same modification allowances as in adjacent upland environment

NA – Not applicable

Shoreline modifications are allowed only if the underlying zoning allows the modification	DOWNTOWNWATERFRONT 	SWAMP CREEK COMMERCIAL 	SHORELINE RESIDENTIAL 	URBAN CONSERVANCY 	NATURAL 	AQUATIC

	Shoreline stabilization. See also KMC 16.55.040.

	Shoreline stabilization, not including flood protection facilities 	P1 	P1 	P1 	C1 	C1 	C1

	Repair or maintenance of shoreline stabilization facilities 	P2 	P2 	P2 	P2 	P2 	P2

	Flood protection facilities 	P3 	P3 	P3 	P3 	C3 	P3

	Water access structures4. See also KMC 16.55.050.

	Boat launch – Soft-surface 	P 	X 	X 	C 	X 	U

	Boat launch – Residential (including community), hard-surface 	C 	X 	X 	X 	X 	U

	Boat launch – Public or commercial, hard-surface 	P 	X 	X 	P 	X 	U

	Dock or pier – Residential (including community) 	P 	X 	P 	C 	X 	U

	Dock or pier – Public 	P 	X 	P 	P 	C 	U

	Dock or pier – Commercial 	P 	X 	X 	X 	X 	U

	Floatplane lifts 	C9 	X 	C 	C 	X 	U

	Watercraft lifts (including jet ski lifts) 	P 	X 	P 	X 	X 	U

	Other floats and moorage buoys 	P 	X 	P 	P 	P8 	U

	Repair or replacement of existing water access structures	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P

	Fill. See also KMC 16.55.060.

	Upland outside of floodplain 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 	NA

	Upland inside of floodplain 	P 	C 	C 	C 	C 	NA

	Waterward of the ordinary high-water mark, restoration 	NA 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P

	Waterward of the ordinary high-water mark, 

non-restoration 	NA 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C

	Breakwaters, jetties, groins, and weirs

	Breakwaters, jetties, groins and weirs 	C5 	C5 	C5 	C5 	C5 	C5

	Grading and dredging. See also KMC 16.55.060.

	Dredging 	NA 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P

	Grading 	P 	P 	P 	P7 	C 	NA

	Disposal waterward of the ordinary high-water mark 	NA 	X 	X 	X 	X 	P

	Upland disposal outside of floodplain or channel migration zone 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 	NA

	Upland disposal inside of floodplain or channel migration zone 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	NA

	Shoreline habitat and natural systems enhancement projects

	Habitat and natural systems enhancement projects 	P6 	P6 	P6 	P6 	P6 	P6

B. Development Conditions (Footnotes for the Shoreline Modifications Table in Subsection A of This Section).

1. Shoreline stabilization, including bulkheads, shall be permitted only when it has been demonstrated that stabilization is necessary to protect existing legally established primary structures, public improvements, proposed or existing water-dependent development, or projects for the restoration of ecological functions or hazardous substance remediation, and must meet the standards in KMC 16.55.040. In the Aquatic Environment, stabilization requires conditional use approval, unless located adjacent to a Downtown Waterfront or Shoreline Residential Environment.

2. An existing shoreline stabilization structure may be replaced with a similar structure if there is a demonstrated need to protect principal uses or structures from erosion caused by currents or waves. Normal maintenance and repair is allowed; provided, that all work is conducted in a manner that does not cause a net loss of ecological functions.

3. Flood protection facilities must be consistent with the standards in Chapter 18.55 KMC and the Integrated Stream Protection Guidelines (Washington Departments of Fish and Wildlife, Ecology, and Transportation, 2003).

4. Water access structures shall meet the standards in KMC 16.55.050 and are allowed only for:

a. Water-dependent uses;

b. Public access;

c. Single detached residential units;

d. Joint use facilities for multiple-family dwelling unit developments; or

e. Water-related or water-enjoyment uses only as part of a mixed use development and only if auxiliary to and in support of a water-dependent use.

Water access structures are not allowed in Swamp Creek.

5. Breakwaters, jetties, groins and weirs are only allowed where necessary to support water-dependent uses, public access, approved shoreline stabilization, or other public uses, as determined by the city manager. Groins are only allowed as part of a restoration project sponsored or cosponsored by a public agency that has natural resource management as a primary function.

6. Shoreline habitat and natural systems enhancement projects may include shoreline modifications of vegetation, removal of nonnative or invasive plants, and shoreline stabilization, including the installation of large woody debris, dredging and filling, provided the primary purpose is clearly restoration of the natural character and ecological functions of the shoreline. Mitigation actions identified through biological assessments required by the NOAA Fisheries Service and applied to flood hazard mitigation projects may include shoreline modifications of vegetation, removal of nonnative or invasive plants, and shoreline stabilization, including the installation of large woody debris, dredging and filling.

7. Grading in the Urban Conservancy Environment is only permitted to support public access, restoration, or water-oriented uses. Otherwise, a conditional use permit shall be required.

8. Floats and moorage buoys are only permitted waterward of the Natural Environment designation in Lake Washington.

9. Except floatplane lifts associated with a regional land use such as Kenmore Air Harbor which are permitted outright. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.55.040 Shoreline stabilization.

Shoreline stabilization may be permitted subject to the standards in this chapter, provided:

A. The applicant has demonstrated the following in order to construct new shoreline stabilization, including additions to, or increases in size of, existing shoreline stabilization measures:

1. A geotechnical analysis demonstrates that erosion from waves or currents is imminently threatening a primary structure, including residences;

2. The erosion rate exceeds that which would normally occur in a natural condition;

3. The erosion is not caused by upland conditions, such as the loss of vegetation and drainage, on the project site;

4. The proposed shoreline stabilization is the least hardened solution that is feasible to protect the structures or improvements, including consideration of nonstructural alternatives such as slope drainage systems, vegetative growth stabilization, and gravel berms;

5. The proposal is the minimum necessary to protect existing legally established primary structures, new non-water-dependent development, existing water-dependent development or projects for the restoration of ecological functions or hazardous substance remediation;

6. The proposed shoreline stabilization does not interfere with fluvial hydrological and geomorphological processes normally acting in natural conditions; and

7. Adequate mitigation measures that maintain existing shoreline processes and critical fish and wildlife habitat will be provided that ensure no net loss or function of riparian habitat.

B. Shoreline stabilization to replace existing shoreline stabilization shall be placed landward of any existing shoreline stabilization, except that it may be placed waterward directly abutting the old structure only in cases where the existing bulkhead is protecting a residence that was occupied prior to January 1, 1992, and there are overriding safety or environmental concerns.

C. Geotechnical reports pursuant to this section that address the need to prevent potential damage to a primary structure shall address the necessity for shoreline stabilization by estimating time frames and rates of erosion and report on the urgency associated with the specific situation. As a general matter, hard armoring solutions should not be authorized except when a report confirms that there is a significant possibility that such a structure will be damaged within three years as a result of shoreline erosion in the absence of such hard armoring measures, or where waiting until the need is that immediate would foreclose the opportunity to use measures that avoid impacts on ecological functions. Thus, where the geotechnical report confirms a need to prevent potential damage to a primary structure, but the need is not as immediate as the three years, that report may still be used to justify more immediate authorization to protect against erosion using soft measures.

D. Shoreline stabilization shall minimize the adverse impact on the property of others to the maximum extent practical.

E. Shoreline stabilization shall not be used to create new lands. However, soft shoreline stabilization measures that provide restoration of shoreline ecological functions may be permitted waterward of the ordinary high-water mark.

F. Shoreline stabilization shall not interfere with surface or subsurface drainage into the water body.

G. Automobile bodies, tires or other junk or waste material which may release hazardous substances shall not be used for shoreline stabilization.

H. Shoreline stabilization shall be designed so as not to constitute a hazard to navigation and shall not substantially interfere with visual access to the water.

I. Shoreline stabilization shall be designed so as not to create a need for shoreline stabilization elsewhere.

J. Shoreline stabilization shall comply with the Integrated Stream Protection Guidelines (Washington Departments of Fish and Wildlife, Ecology, and Transportation, 2003) and shall be designed to allow for appropriate public access to the shoreline. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.55.050 Water access structures.

A. All water access structures, including docks, piers, moorage buoys, floats or launching facilities authorized by this chapter shall comply with the following general standards:

1. Any water access structure authorized by this chapter shall not interfere with navigation.

2. Existing habitat features (e.g., large and small woody debris, spawning gravel, etc.) shall be retained to the maximum extent practicable and new or expanded water access structures placed to avoid disturbance of such features. Mitigation is required where habitat features cannot be avoided or when habitat features are removed to address navigation or access requirements.

3. Invasive aquatic weeds may be removed by mechanical or manual methods, or controlled with herbicides; provided, that the chemicals are applied by a licensed applicator and approved for aquatic use.

4. In order to mitigate the impacts of new or expanded water access structures, the applicant shall develop a mitigation plan that contains one or more of the following measures as necessary to demonstrate no net loss of ecological functions:

a. Removal of any additional existing overwater and/or in-water structures that are not the subject of the application or are not otherwise required to be removed.

b. Planting of native vegetation along the shoreline immediately landward of the ordinary high-water mark consisting of trees and/or shrubs native to Puget Sound lowlands.

c. Removal or ecological improvement of hardened shoreline, including existing launch ramps or hard structural shoreline stabilization. Improvements may consist of softening the face and toe of the stabilization with soil, gravel and/or cobbles and incorporating vegetation or large woody debris.

d. Removal of manmade debris or other material waterward of the ordinary high-water mark that is detrimental to ecological functions and ecosystem-wide processes.

e. Participation in an approved mitigation banking or in-lieu-fee program.

5. No water access structure waterward of the ordinary high-water mark, including structures attached thereto, shall be closer than 12 feet to any adjacent property line except when there is a mutual agreement of adjoining property owners. Excepted from the requirements of this section are boat lifts or portions of boat lifts that do not exceed 30 inches in height measured from the ordinary high-water mark.

6. No covered water access structure is permitted waterward of the ordinary high-water mark, except as provided below:

a. Submerged, freestanding mechanical boat lifts associated with single detached residential docks or piers and recreational watercraft may be covered with a canopy, provided:

(1) No canopy shall be more than 25 feet in length or wider than 15 feet;

(2) No portion of the canopy shall exceed a height of 12 feet above the ordinary high-water mark;

(3) The canopy shall at no time have any side partly or wholly enclosed;

(4) The highest portion of the canopy shall be located below the lowest grade point on the waterward side of the existing homes on surrounding properties;

(5) Canopies shall be made out of nontoxic materials that allow light transmission;

(6) The total overwater coverage of the piers, floats, ramps, ells, and canopy for a single-family residence with a single-use moorage shall not exceed 600 square feet; and

(7) Only one boat lift canopy per single detached residence shall be allowed.

b. Covered moorage may be provided for commercial boat repair facilities. Applicants shall submit information demonstrating that the covered area is the minimum necessary to serve the proposed use.

7. Proposals to repair or replace existing legally established water access structures in the existing configuration and footprint are allowed, provided the following requirements are met, as applicable:

a. Materials used for pier and dock repairs shall meet the requirements established in subsection B of this section;

b. Any decking that is replaced shall be grated with material that has at least 40 percent open space to allow for light transmission, except on sections of floats where the decking overlays a float tub;

c. Any piles that are replaced shall be the minimum diameter and at the maximum spacing feasible to support the pier or dock configuration; and

d. Pier projects which replace 75 percent or more of the pier support piles shall be reviewed as new piers which must comply with all standards in this chapter.

8. No dwelling unit may be constructed on a dock or pier.

B. Any pier, dock, watercraft lift, or mooring buoy authorized by this chapter shall be subject to the following requirements:

	Element	Overwater Structure Dimensional and Design Standards 

	Lake Washington	Sammamish River

	General

	•    	No skirting is allowed on any structure.

	•    	When steel piles are installed, approved sound attenuation measures must be used.

	•    	Only one dock or pier may be permitted for each parcel developed with a single detached residential unit and only if the applicant demonstrates there is no other feasible option for shared-use facilities.

	•    	Only joint-use docks or piers are allowed on lots with less than 50 feet of waterfront except when lots abutting both sides of the subject lot already have a dock or pier.

	•    	Only joint-use boat lifts, docks, piers, moorage buoys, floats or launching facilities may be permitted for multiple-family dwelling unit development proposals.

	•    	Docks or piers serving boating facilities must also meet the standards in KMC 16.50.050.

	•    	All float tubs shall be fully encapsulated.

	Maximum Area: surface coverage of overwater structures, including any ramps and floats

	•    	Docks or piers shall not exceed the minimum size necessary to serve the use for which they are designed

	•    	480 sq. ft. for single residential unit

	•    	700 sq. ft. for joint-use facility used by 2 residential units

	•    	1,000 sq. ft. for joint-use facility used by 3 or more residential units

	•    	Docks or piers shall not exceed the minimum size necessary to serve the use for which they are designed

	•    	120 sq. ft. for single residential unit

	•    	240 sq. ft. for joint-use facility used by 2 residential units

	•    	360 sq. ft. for joint-use facility used by 3 residential units

	•    	480 sq. ft. for joint-use facility used by 4 residential units

	Maximum Width	Residential

	•    	4 ft. for pier or dock

	•    	4 ft. for ramp

	•    	6 ft. for ell and float

Public or Commercial

	•    	4 ft. for main walkway. If project-specific justification of need is provided, the width may be increased to 6 ft. without a variance.

	•    	5 ft. for perpendicular fingers or ells

	•    	5 ft. for ramp, including railings (travel width is effectively 4 ft.)

	•    	8 ft. for ell and float	Residential

	•    	4 ft. for ramp

	•    	6 ft. for float

Public or Commercial

	•    	5 ft. for ramp

	•    	6 ft. for float

	Maximum Length

	•    	26 ft. for ells

	•    	20 ft. for floats

	•    	In no case may any moorage facility extend more than 150 feet waterward of the ordinary high-water mark.

	•    	20 ft. per float per residential unit, and laid end-to-end. The maximum length is thus 20 ft., 40 ft., 60 ft., and 80 ft. for facilities serving one, two, three and four residential units, respectively. Floats may be perpendicular to shore only within existing embayments off of the main river channel.

	•    	Public or commercial docks should be no longer than 80 feet unless project-specific justification of need is provided.

	•    	Ramps shall be the minimum length necessary to provide safe access to the float and to position the float so that the float and a moored boat would not ground on the substrate or disturb the substrate by boat propeller action.

	Decking and Material Standards

	•    	Ramps and piers, including ells and perpendicular fingers, shall be fully grated.

	•    	Floats shall be fully grated on all deck surfaces not underlain by float tubs, with a maximum area of float tub of 70 percent of the total float area. The number and area of float tubs shall be minimized to the amount necessary based on design and engineering considerations.

	•    	Floats shall be fully grated on all deck surfaces not underlain by float tubs, with a maximum area of float tub of 70 percent of the total float area. The number and area of float tubs shall be minimized to the amount necessary based on design and engineering considerations.

	•    	Ramps shall be fully grated.



	•    	The grating must be either multidirectional grating with a minimum of 40 percent open space or rectangular grating with a minimum of 60 percent open space. Provide documentation to show percent of open area.

	Location

	•    	The only structures permitted in the first 30 feet waterward of the ordinary high- water mark are piers and ramps.

	•    	All floats and ells must be at least 30 feet waterward of the ordinary high-water mark.

	•    	Floats shall be located no less than five feet and no more than 10 feet from the ordinary high-water mark measured from the landward edge of the float. To avoid interfering with river navigation and public use of the water, private moorage facilities may extend no farther waterward than one-third the width of the river in the location of the proposed structure.

	•    	The city manager may allow floats to be positioned up to an additional 10 feet waterward from the ordinary high-water mark as needed to reach a sufficient boat moorage depth (greater than three feet).

	•    	Floats shall be located as far as feasible from the mouth of any named or numbered tributary entering the Sammamish River to reduce potential conflict with migrating salmon.

	Piles

	•    	The first (nearest shore) piling shall be steel, four-inch-diameter or the smallest diameter necessary to serve the specific structure as demonstrated by an engineer, and at least 18 feet waterward of the ordinary high-water mark.

	•    	Piling sets beyond the first are not required to be steel, shall be spaced at least 18 feet apart and shall not be greater than 12 inches in diameter unless required per project-specific engineering analysis.

	•    	No more than two anchor piles shall be allowed per private moorage facility (joint-use, public or commercial facilities may have two piles per 20 feet of float length, but the number of piling for such facilities shall be the minimum number given site-specific engineering and design considerations).

	•    	Anchor piles shall be the minimum size feasible given site-specific engineering and design considerations and shall not exceed 12 inches in diameter unless a larger size allows for a reduced number of piles.

	Materials

	•    	Any paint, stain or preservative applied to components of the overwater structure must be leach-resistant, completely dried or cured prior to installation.

	•    	Materials shall not be treated with pentachlorophenol, creosote, chromated copper arsenate (CCA) or comparably toxic compounds as outlined in the latest edition of the Western Wood Preservers Institute Best Management Practices for the Use of Treated Wood in Aquatic and Sensitive Areas.

	•    	If ACZA-treated pilings are proposed, the applicant will meet all of the best management practices, including a post-treatment procedure, as outlined in the amended best management practices of the Western Wood Preservers Institute.

	Floatplane Lifts

	•    	The deck of the lift shall be fully grated and shall be the minimum size necessary.

The following two standards do not apply to a regional land use such as Kenmore Air Harbor, but do apply to lifts associated with all other uses:

	•    	One platform lift serving a floatplane is allowed per lot.

	•    	Floatplanes may not be stored in the shoreline buffer. 

	•    	Prohibited

	Watercraft Lifts

	•    	One freestanding or floating boat lift with a canopy is allowed per detached dwelling unit.

	•    	Additional watercraft lifts, without a canopy, at a single residential use waterfront structure are allowed, not to exceed three and only two can be ground-based; all other lift(s) must be floating or suspended lift(s). 

	•    	One freestanding or floating boat lift with a canopy is allowed per detached dwelling unit OR 

Two Jet Ski lifts or one fully grated platform lift is allowed, per detached dwelling unit

	•    	Boat lifts shall be located on the waterward, upstream or downstream sides of the dock, not on the landward side of the dock.

	Mooring Buoys

	•    	No more than one mooring buoy is permitted per detached dwelling unit, in lieu of a dock or pier.

	•    	Mooring buoys shall not interfere with navigation.

	•    	The use of buoys for moorage of recreational and commercial vessels is preferred over pilings or float structures.

	•    	Buoys shall be located and managed in a manner that minimizes impacts to aquatic habitat.

	•    	No more than four buoys per acre of surface water are allowed.

	•    	Use of helical anchors with a midline float to prevent dragging on the river or lake bottom is the preferred method to secure buoys.

C. Any boat launch authorized by this chapter shall be subject to the following requirements:

1. Location Standards.

a. Boat launches shall be sited so that they do not significantly damage fish and wildlife habitats and shall not occur in areas with native emergent vegetation. Removal of native upland vegetation shall be minimized to the greatest extent feasible.

b. Boat launches shall not be approved in cases when it can be reasonably foreseen that the development or use would require maintenance dredging during the life of the development or use.

c. Boat launches anticipated to be used by motorized boats shall be separated from existing designated swimming areas and other water access structures on adjacent properties by a minimum of 25 feet.

d. Public and commercial boat launches shall be located only at sites with suitable transportation access. The applicant must demonstrate that the streets serving the boat launch can safely handle traffic generated by such a facility, and that parking for vehicles and attached trailers is sufficient.

e. Public and commercial boat launches shall be located farther than 50 feet from the outlet of a stream, including piped streams, when feasible.

2. Size. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed size of the boat launch is the minimum width and length below the ordinary high-water mark necessary to safely launch the intended craft.

3. Design Standards.

a. Soft-surface boat launches shall be constructed of gravel, vegetation-stabilized earth, or other similar natural material. When only vegetation, and not the ground surface or lake and river substrates, is modified to allow for hand-launch of nonmotorized watercraft, that modification is not considered a boat launch subject to these regulations.

b. Hard-surface boat launch designs, in order of preference, are:

(1) Open grid with minimum coverage of substrate.

(2) Seasonal ramps that can be removed and stored upland.

(3) Structures with segmented pads and flexible connections that leave space for natural substrate and can adapt to changes in shoreline profile.

4. Public or commercial boat launches shall provide trailer spaces, at least 10 feet by 40 feet, commensurate with projected demand. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.55.060 Grading, dredging, dredge material disposal and filling.

Grading, dredging, dredge material disposal and filling must be consistent with Chapter 18.55 KMC, Article XIX, Flood Hazard Areas, and may be permitted in shorelines only as follows:

A. Fill may be permitted below the ordinary high-water mark only:

1. When necessary to support a water-dependent use;

2. To provide for public access;

3. When necessary to mitigate conditions that endanger public safety, including flood risk reduction projects;

4. To allow for cleanup and disposal of contaminated sediments as part of an interagency environmental cleanup plan;

5. To allow for the disposal of dredged material considered suitable under, and conducted in accordance with, the dredged material management program of the Washington Department of Natural Resources;

6. For expansion or alteration of transportation or utility facilities currently located on the shoreline and then only upon demonstration that alternatives to fill are not feasible; or

7. As part of mitigation actions, environmental restoration projects and habitat enhancement projects.

B. Grading, dredging, and filling shall be located, designed, and constructed to protect shoreline ecological functions and ecosystem-wide processes, including channel migration, and mitigation shall employ the mitigation sequence in KMC 18.55.210.

C. Dredging and dredged material disposal below the ordinary high-water mark shall be permitted only:

1. When necessary for the operation of a water-dependent use;

2. When necessary to mitigate conditions that endanger public safety or fisheries resources;

3. For establishing, maintaining, expanding, relocating or reconfiguring navigation channels and basins when necessary to ensure safe and efficient accommodation of existing navigation uses when:

a. Significant ecological impacts are minimized;

b. Mitigation is provided, employing the mitigation sequence in KMC 18.55.210; and

c. Dredging is maintained to the existing authorized location, depth and width;

4. For restoration projects associated with implementation of the Model Toxics Control Act or the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act; or any enhancement or restoration project; or

5. For flood risk reduction projects conducted in accordance with Chapter 18.55 KMC, Article XIX, Flood Hazard Areas.

D. Dredging is not allowed waterward of the ordinary high-water mark for the primary purpose of obtaining fill material.

E. Disposal of dredged material shall be done only in approved upland disposal sites and is not allowed within critical areas or their buffers.

F. Stockpiling of dredged material in or under water is prohibited.

G. In order to ensure that operations involving dredged material disposal and maintenance dredging are consistent with the Shoreline Master Program as required by RCW 90.58.140(1), no dredging may commence in any shoreline environment without the responsible person having first obtained either a substantial development permit or a statement of exemption. A statement of exemption or shoreline permit is not required prior to emergency dredging needed to protect property from imminent damage by the elements if a statement of exemption or substantial development permit is subsequently obtained following the procedures in Chapter 16.75 KMC.

H. The removal of gravel for flood management is allowed only after a biological and geomorphological study shows that extraction has a long-term benefit to flood hazard reduction, does not result in a net loss of ecological functions, and is part of a comprehensive flood management solution. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 16.60 VEGETATION CONSERVATION IN BUFFERS

Sections:

16.60.010    Vegetation conservation areas.

16.60.020    Repealed.

16.60.030    Repealed.


16.60.010 Vegetation conservation areas.

A. Shoreline buffers shall be considered vegetation conservation areas in which existing native vegetation is retained, except in the following circumstances and when mitigation sequencing is demonstrated:

1. The activity is part of a permitted shoreline restoration or enhancement project;

2. The activity is an allowed water-dependent or water-enjoyment use or modification;

3. The activity implements a public access or recreation maintenance plan; or

4. The vegetation removal is otherwise specifically allowed under Chapter 16.50, 16.55, or 18.55 KMC.

Vegetation clearing shall occur only in the minimum shoreline area that is necessary to support the permitted use and shall be mitigated. Nonnative vegetation may be retained unless otherwise required to be replaced as part of an enhancement associated with development or expansion of development on the property.

B. The vegetation management standards established in Chapter 18.55 KMC for critical areas and their buffers shall apply within all shorelines.

C. Retention of forest communities along stream and river channels provides shade and a source of woody debris to the aquatic habitat. Only trees determined by the City to be hazardous or diseased may be removed, unless authorized under subsection A of this section. Selective pruning for safety and view protection is allowed, provided pruning is conducted in a manner that minimizes harm to the health of the trees being pruned.

D. Nonnative vegetation may be removed as part of a restoration or enhancement project if replacement plantings will provide greater benefit to shoreline ecological processes than would be provided by strict application of this chapter.

E. Landscaping plans for shoreline buffers associated with shoreline development regulated under the shoreline code must be prepared by a qualified professional with experience developing native lakefront or riverfront landscaping plans. Landscaping plans are not required for normal maintenance, including maintenance of existing nonconforming landscaping that complies with KMC 16.75.050.

F. Landscaping plans for shoreline buffers should avoid adverse impacts on existing public views of the shoreline.

G. Vegetation management in shorelines shall be consistent with the requirements for grading permits under Chapter 15.25 KMC. If there is a conflict between this chapter and Chapter 15.25 KMC, the more restrictive standards shall apply.

H. When considering compensatory habitat enhancement as mitigation for impacts from new structures, such as when a reduced buffer or shoreline setback or a non-water-dependent use is requested, the enhancement should:

1. Be proportional to the degree of impact of the new structure and associated alterations on shoreline ecological functions. For example, an approved buffer or setback reduction should be compensated with an equivalent area of native vegetation enhancement, including trees along the water’s edge, when feasible;

2. Take into account the degree to which the existing buffer has already been compromised;

3. Offset changes in surface water runoff rates and water quality (such as through increased impervious area), habitat structure (such as loss or alteration of vegetation), and habitat quality (such as from lighting, noise or activities) that are a result of the project; and

4. Focus on restoring ecological functions that are most critical and that have been most diminished in the Kenmore shoreline.

Enhancements may also focus on restoring other critical ecological functions in the shoreline that have been lost or diminished over time (such as placement of large woody debris in water or restoring shallow water habitat) at a subbasin or watershed scale. The city manager may determine whether an enhancement that provides a broader ecological benefit may be substituted for one that would offset the impacts of an individual project.

The city manager may deny a request to allow intrusion into a buffer or for development of a non-water-dependent use if the enhancement proposed does not fully mitigate the impacts of the project or provide a sufficient broader ecological benefit. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.60.020 Vegetation management within critical areas.

Repealed by Ord. 20-0506. [Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.60.030 Vegetation management within Lake Washington shoreline buffers.

Repealed by Ord. 20-0506. [Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 16.65 SHORELINE DENSITY AND DIMENSIONS

Sections:

16.65.010    Interpretation of shoreline density and dimensions table.

16.65.020    Shoreline density and dimensions table and development conditions.


16.65.010 Interpretation of shoreline density and dimensions table.

A. The shoreline density and dimensions table in KMC 16.65.020(A) establishes the shoreline standards within each of the shoreline environments. The shoreline environment is located on the vertical column and the density and dimensions standard is located on the horizontal row of the table. 

1. If the cell has a number in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, that number is the density or dimension standard for that shoreline environment.

2. If the cell has a parenthetical number in the box at the intersection of the column and the row, that parenthetical number identifies specific conditions listed in KMC 16.65.020(B) that are related to the density and dimension standard for that environment.

B. The density and dimensions enumerated in this section apply to any lot within the shoreline jurisdiction. If there is a conflict between the density and dimension standards in this section and the underlying zoning regulations, the more restrictive standard shall apply. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.65.020 Shoreline density and dimensions table and development conditions.

A. Shoreline Density and Dimensions Table.

Shoreline Density and Dimensions Table  

	 	DOWNTOWN

WATERFRONT 	SWAMP CREEK

COMMERCIAL 	SHORELINE

RESIDENTIAL 	URBAN

CONSERVANCY 	NATURAL 	AQUATIC

	 	Standards

	 	Shoreline Buffers from OHWM on Lake Washington

	Residential development1	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Single-family 	NA 	NA 	25 ft 	115 ft 	150 ft	– 

	Other 	50 ft 	NA 	75 ft 	115 ft 	NA	 

	Water-oriented parks and outdoor recreational facilities 	20 ft (3) 	NA 	25 ft (3) 	75 ft (3) 	150 ft (3)	– 

	Non-water-oriented parks and outdoor recreational facilities 	50 ft (1) 	NA 	75 ft 	115 ft 	150 ft	– 

	Other water-oriented uses 	20 ft 	NA 	100 ft 	150 ft 	150 ft	– 

	All other non-water-oriented uses 	50 ft (1) 	NA 	150 ft 	150 ft 	150 ft	– 

	 	Shoreline Buffers from OHWM on the Sammamish River

	Residential development1	75 ft 	NA 	Reach2:

B1 – 150 ft B2 – 100 ft B3 – (4)

B4 – 75 ft (6) 	150 ft 	150 ft	– 

	Water-oriented parks and outdoor recreational facilities 	50 ft (3) 	NA 	50 ft (3) 	100 ft (3) 	150 ft (3)	– 

	Non-water-oriented parks and outdoor recreational facilities 	100 ft 	NA 	150 ft 	150 ft 	150 ft	– 

	Other water-oriented uses 	75 ft 	NA 	50 ft 	100 ft	 150 ft	– 

	All other non-water-oriented uses 	100 ft 	NA 	150 ft 	150 ft 	150 ft	– 

	 	Shoreline Buffers from OHWM on Swamp Creek

	Residential development1	NA 	60 ft 	50 ft 	150 ft 	150 ft	– 

	Water-oriented parks and outdoor recreational facilities 	NA 	50 ft (3) 	50 ft (3) 	100 ft (3) 	150 ft (3)	– 

	Non-water-oriented parks and outdoor recreational facilities 	NA 	60 ft 	75 ft 	150 ft 	150 ft	– 

	Other water-oriented uses 	NA 	50 ft 	50 ft 	100 ft 	150 ft	– 

	All other non-water-oriented uses 	NA 	60 ft 	150 ft 	150 ft 	150 ft	– 

	 	Building Setback from the Shoreline Buffer (2)

	Single-family uses	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Lake Washington 	15 ft 	– 	25 ft 	15 ft 	15 ft 	Z

	Sammamish River/Swamp Creek 	15 ft 	15 ft 	15 ft 	15 ft 	15 ft 	Z

	All other uses 	15 ft 	15 ft 	15 ft 	15 ft 	15 ft 	Z

	 	Building Height

	Base height 	35 ft 	35 ft 	35 ft 	35 ft 	30 ft 	35 ft

	Additional height allowed when permitted in underlying zoning 	Yes (5) 	Yes (5) 	Yes (5) 	No 	No 	No

1Residential development means community residential facility, family child-care home, manufactured housing community, multiple-family dwelling, single detached dwelling unit, supportive living facility, and temporary lodging.

2Sammamish River reaches are shown on Map 1, Shoreline Environment Designations.

B. Development Conditions (Footnotes to Shoreline Density and Dimensions Table in Subsection A of This Section).

1. The buffer associated with water-oriented uses may be applied to non-water-oriented uses along the inner harbor portion of the Downtown Waterfront area at the northeast end of Lake Washington, only if:

a. The uses are developed in conjunction with a public access promenade adjacent to the water; and

b. The uses do not interfere with public access or preclude the use of the shoreline for water-dependent uses; and

c. Mitigation is provided consistent with the requirements in KMC 18.55.190 through 18.55.220, 18.55.330 and 18.55.430 such that there is no net loss of shoreline ecological processes or functions.

2. Building setbacks may be reduced to five feet if vegetation in the required buffer is reestablished or enhanced, according to the standards in KMC 16.60.010(H).

3. Public trails in critical areas and shoreline and critical area buffers are specifically addressed in Chapter 18.55 KMC. Other allowances for water-oriented parks and outdoor recreational facilities in shoreline buffers are addressed in KMC 16.50.070(D).

4. The shoreline buffer for residential development in the area designated on Map 1, Shoreline Environment Designations, as Reach B-3 shall be as follows:

a. On lots with an average depth of less than 100 feet measured upland from the ordinary high-water mark, the buffer shall be 25 feet.

b. On lots with an average depth of greater than 100 feet measured upland from the ordinary high-water mark, the buffer shall be the lesser of 50 feet or 30 percent of the average lot depth.

5. Additional height may be permitted in the Downtown Waterfront, Shoreline Residential and Swamp Creek Commercial environments under the following conditions:

a. The structures would not obstruct the view of a substantial number of residences; and

b. The structures are located in an area designated on Map 1, Shoreline Environment Designations (attached to Ord. 20-0506 as Exhibit 2, and incorporated by reference), as allowing these additional heights; and

c. The structure height complies with the allowable height of the underlying zone and the following additional height limits within the shoreline; and

d. The additional height of the structures would not impair the ecological functions of the stream, lake, wetland, or the required buffer. In particular, the effects of shading and light impacts on the viability of vegetation in the buffer shall be considered when making this determination; and

e. The structures are outside of the floodway in effect at the time of permit application; and

f. The structures would not be within a wetland or wetland buffer as regulated by Chapter 18.55 KMC.

Additional Height Allowances 

	Distance from Structure to Ordinary High-Water Mark	Maximum Height Allowed

Area H-1	Maximum Height Allowed

Area H-2	Maximum Height Allowed

Areas H-3 and H-4

	Less than 50 feet	35 feet	35 feet	35 feet

	50 to 100 feet	50 feet	45 feet	35 feet

	100 to 112.5 feet	50 feet	75 feet	35 feet

	112.5 to 200 feet	50 feet	75 feet	65 feet

The burden to demonstrate that the proposal meets the criteria of this section is on the applicant. The city manager may require technical studies as necessary to demonstrate compliance.

6. A shoreline buffer of 15 feet applies to the existing manufactured housing communities. The shoreline buffer of 75 feet shall apply to any proposed change of use, but may be reduced to 50 feet without a shoreline variance with implementation of (a) a buffer enhancement plan, consistent with KMC 16.60.010(H) and applicable provisions of Chapter 18.55 KMC, and (b) a public access plan, consistent with KMC 16.50.060.

C. Additional Shoreline Buffer Standards.

1. New water-dependent uses may be allowed within a shoreline buffer if the use is allowed per KMC 16.50.020 and if impacts are mitigated consistent with the requirements in Chapter 18.55 KMC such that there is no net loss of shoreline ecological processes or functions.

2. Underground utilities are allowed in the shoreline buffer. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).] 


Chapter 16.68 SIGNS

Sections:

16.68.010    Signs in the shoreline.


16.68.010 Signs in the shoreline.

Signs may be permitted subject to the provisions of the underlying zoning and provided:

A. Signs shall not be erected nor painted on trees, rocks or other natural features.

B. Glare from artificial lighting of signs shall be shielded or directed away from adjacent properties and the water.

C. Signs waterward of the ordinary high-water mark adjacent to the Downtown Waterfront Environment shall be permitted only to the extent necessary for the operation of a permitted water-dependent use, provided no such sign shall be larger than five square feet.

D. In the Shoreline Residential, Urban Conservancy and Natural Environments, signs are not allowed except for signs of not more than nine square feet within public parks or trails.

E. Signs to protect public safety or prevent trespass may be allowed and should be limited in size and number to the maximum extent practical. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 16.70 SUBDIVISIONS

Sections:

16.70.010    Subdivisions.


16.70.010 Subdivisions.

A. Any legally created, existing lot that does not comply with the density and dimensions standards of Chapter 16.65 KMC and KMC Title 18 and that is located wholly or partially within the shorelines of the State shall be subject to the following provisions:

1. If the adjoining property is not under the same ownership as such lot, then the lot shall be considered a separate building site; and

2. If the adjoining property is under the same ownership as such lot, then the lot shall not be considered a separate building site until the lot is combined with adjoining property under the same ownership in such a way as to comply with the density and dimensions standards of Chapter 16.65 KMC and KMC Title 18.

B. Submerged land within the boundaries of any waterfront parcel shall not be used to compute lot area, lot dimensions, yards, recreation space or other similar required conditions of land subdivision or development, except, where specifically authorized by ordinance, such lands may be used in area computations as an incentive to encourage common open space waterfront areas.

C. All newly created lots wholly or partially within the shoreline shall be of uniform size and dimension, whenever possible.

D. Subdivision of more than four lots shall provide an improved and maintained pedestrian easement to the shoreline that is of sufficient width to ensure usable public access. The public access to the shoreline shall be in conformance with the standards in KMC 16.50.060.

E. Subdivisions should be designed to locate structures outside the shoreline jurisdiction whenever feasible. When lots are located within the shoreline jurisdiction, the size and shape of the lots should allow for the construction of residential units that are outside of required buffers and setbacks and that do not require shoreline stabilization.

F. Subdivision of a waterfront lot for the purposes of creating a lot for a non-water-dependent use that would not otherwise be allowed is prohibited. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 16.75 PROCEDURES

Sections:

16.75.003    Interpretation.

16.75.005    Additional administrative procedures.

16.75.010    Substantial development – Permit required – Exemption.

16.75.015    Developments not requiring shoreline permits or local reviews.

16.75.020    Permits – Prerequisite to other permits.

16.75.025    Permits – Reasonable accommodation.

16.75.030    Permits – Variance.

16.75.040    Permits – Conditional use.

16.75.045    Public agency or utility maintenance plans.

16.75.050    Alteration or reconstruction of nonconforming use or development.

16.75.055    Relief from Shoreline Master Program development standards and use regulations.

16.75.060    Permits – Combined hearing authority.

16.75.070    Permits – Approval or disapproval – Notification – Additional conditions – Limitations.

16.75.080    Appeals.

16.75.090    Rules of city manager.

16.75.100    Enforcement.

16.75.110    Shoreline environment redesignation.

16.75.120    Redesignation applications.

16.75.130    Redesignation initiated by motion.

16.75.140    Frequency of consideration of shoreline redesignations.

16.75.150    Shoreline redesignation and site-specific land use map amendment or zone reclassification.

16.75.160    Criteria for hearing examiner review.


16.75.003 Interpretation.

The city manager shall make administrative interpretations of this Shoreline Master Program and the Shoreline Management Act in accordance with Chapter 18.10 KMC. The city manager shall consult with the Washington State Department of Ecology to ensure that any formal written interpretations are consistent with the purpose and intent of Chapter 90.58 RCW and Chapter 173-26 WAC. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.75.005 Additional administrative procedures.

In addition to the requirements of Chapter 19.25 KMC, the following administrative procedures apply to development in the shoreline jurisdiction. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.75.010 Substantial development – Permit required – Exemption.

A. No development shall be undertaken by any person within the shoreline jurisdiction unless such development is consistent with the policies of RCW 90.58.020 and the Shoreline Master Program. Development within the shoreline jurisdiction shall conform to the Shoreline Master Program whether or not the development requires a permit from the City of Kenmore.

B. A substantial development permit shall be required for all proposed uses and modifications unless the proposal is specifically exempt from the definition of substantial development in RCW 90.58.030 and WAC 173-27-040 or is exempted by RCW 90.58.140, WAC 173-27-044 or WAC 173-27-045.

C. Any person claiming exception from the permit requirements of this chapter as a result of the exemptions described in subsection B of this section may be required to submit an application to the city manager for such an exemption in the manner prescribed by the city manager. A person requesting an exemption shall provide a written statement of exemption for activities that are exempt from the substantial development permit requirement in subsection B of this section when:

1. WAC 173-27-040 applies; or

2. The activity will occur waterward of the ordinary high-water mark.

D. Whether or not a written statement of exemption under WAC 173-27-050 is required, all permits and approvals issued for development activities within the shoreline jurisdiction shall include a record of review indicating compliance with the City of Kenmore Shoreline Master Program.

E. Conditions of approval may be attached to the approval of substantial development permits, statements of exemptions, or exempted developments as necessary to ensure consistency of the project with the City of Kenmore Shoreline Master Program. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.75.015 Developments not requiring shoreline permits or local reviews.

A. Requirements to obtain a substantial development permit, conditional use permit, variance, letter of exemption, or other review to implement the Shoreline Management Act do not apply to the following:

1. Remedial actions. Pursuant to RCW 90.58.355, any person conducting a remedial action at a facility pursuant to a consent decree, order, or agreed order issued pursuant to Chapter 70.105D RCW, or to the Department of Ecology when it conducts a remedial action under Chapter 70.105D RCW.

2. Boatyard improvements to meet NPDES permit requirements. Pursuant to RCW 90.58.355, any person installing site improvements for stormwater treatment in an existing boatyard facility to meet requirements of a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System stormwater general permit.

3. WSDOT facility maintenance and safety improvements. Pursuant to RCW 90.58.356, Washington State Department of Transportation projects and activities meeting the conditions of RCW 90.58.356 are not required to obtain a substantial development permit, conditional use permit, variance, letter of exemption, or other local review.

4. Projects consistent with an environmental excellence program agreement pursuant to RCW 90.58.045.

5. Projects authorized through the Energy Facility Site Evaluation Council process, pursuant to Chapter 80.50 RCW. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.75.020 Permits – Prerequisite to other permits.

In the case of development subject to the permit requirements of this title, Kenmore shall not issue any other permit for such development until such time as approval has been granted pursuant to this title. Any development subsequently authorized by Kenmore shall be subject to the same terms and conditions which apply to the development authorized pursuant to this title, in addition to any other terms or conditions required for the subsequent authorization. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.75.025 Permits – Reasonable accommodation.

The Federal Fair Housing Act and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) require that reasonable accommodations be made in rules, policies, practices, or services, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford handicapped people equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling or structure. The city manager is therefore authorized to make accommodations in the provisions of this title when the city manager determines that such accommodations reasonably may be necessary in order to comply with such Acts. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.75.030 Permits – Variance.

A. The city manager is authorized to grant a variance from the performance standards of the City of Kenmore Shoreline Master Program only under the conditions enumerated in WAC 173-27-170 (Review Criteria for Variance Permits) and using the procedures outlined in Chapter 19.25 KMC. Shoreline variance permits are also subject to review and approval by the Washington Department of Ecology (RCW 90.58.140(10)). The purpose of a variance permit is limited to granting relief from development standards set forth in the City of Kenmore Shoreline Master Program where there are extraordinary circumstances relating to the physical character or configuration of property such that the strict implementation of the City of Kenmore Shoreline Master Program will impose unnecessary hardships on the applicant or thwart the policies set forth in RCW 90.58.020.

B. A variance from City zoning code requirements shall not be construed to mean a variance from the City of Kenmore Shoreline Master Program use or development regulations and vice versa.

C. Shoreline variances may not be used to permit a use that is specifically prohibited in Chapter 16.50 KMC.

D. The burden of proving that a proposed variance meets the requirements of subsections A through C of this section shall be on the applicant; absence of such proof shall be grounds for denial of the application.

E. The fee which shall accompany an application for a shoreline variance shall be as adopted by resolution. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.75.040 Permits – Conditional use.

A. The city manager is authorized to issue shoreline conditional use permits only under the conditions enumerated in RCW 90.58.140 and 90.58.143 and WAC 173-27-160 and using the procedures outlined in Chapter 19.25 KMC. Conditional use permits are also subject to review and approval by the Washington Department of Ecology (RCW 90.58.140(10)).

B. The burden of proving that a proposed shoreline conditional use meets the criteria enumerated in WAC 173-27-160 shall be on the applicant. Absence of such proof shall be grounds for denial of the application; provided, however, that the city manager is authorized to determine and impose, on a case-by-case basis, those conditions and standards which may be required to enable any proposed shoreline conditional use to satisfy the criteria established in WAC 173-27-160. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.75.045 Public agency or utility maintenance plans.

A. To simplify the future review of maintenance activities that are or will be ongoing in association with new or existing public parks, utilities, streets, or other public agency or utility facilities, the city manager may approve a five-year maintenance plan that establishes best management practices or protocols to assure no net loss of shoreline ecological functions.

The maintenance plan shall contain, as applicable:

1. A description of proposed maintenance activities, including the area of disturbance and type, methods and frequency of maintenance activities;

2. Best management practices for maintenance activities;

3. A description of in-stream or in-lake habitat protection measures;

4. A description of riparian and wetland protection measures;

5. A description of site-appropriate water use management activities, including using less water-dependent landscaping, maximizing the efficiency of the water application system, and reducing the area irrigated;

6. A description of stormwater management practices to treat stormwater runoff to reduce both water quantity and water quality impacts;

7. A description of erosion and sediment control practices that prevent off-site movement of sediment from stored soils and potential surface erosion areas;

8. A description of revegetation or restoration activities following maintenance; 

9. A description of chemical and nutrient use and containment practices that demonstrate minimization of overall inputs of these contaminants, restrict the type of inputs, and develop an acceptable method of application through a comprehensive management program, such as integrated pest management (IPM);

10. Specific performance standards for subsections (A)(3) through (9) of this section, as applicable, and corrective actions that will be implemented if the performance standard(s) is not met; and

11. Demonstration that the proposed work qualifies for a shoreline exemption and that the work complies with the City of Kenmore Shoreline Master Program. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.75.050 Alteration or reconstruction of nonconforming use or development.

A. The review of applications for the modification of a nonconforming use or development shall be subject to the regulations enumerated in KMC 18.100.020 through 18.100.060, and 18.100.080 through 18.100.087, except that a nonconforming bulkhead may be replaced with a new bulkhead; provided, that:

1. The reconstructed bulkhead does not create new dry land; and

2. At least 40 percent of the bulkhead is replaced with a pocket cove or beach; and

3. The proposed reconstruction would substantially reduce the impacts of the existing structure on shoreline ecological functions; and

4. The project would not cause adverse impacts on adjacent shoreline uses.

B. Existing legal uses as defined under KMC 18.20.965 are considered existing legal uses within the shoreline jurisdiction.

C. Expansion of a nonconforming use or structure may be approved through the provisions of KMC 16.75.040 when the applicant demonstrates the following:

1. The project would substantially reduce the impacts of the existing use or structure on shoreline ecological functions; and

2. The proposed expansion would not cause adverse impacts on adjacent shoreline uses.

3. For a nonconforming structure located on land, any waterward expansion of the structure into the required setback would be offset by removal of another nonconforming structure of equal or greater footprint area in the shoreline setback, and the shoreline setback area would be restored with native riparian vegetation.

D. Expansion of a nonconforming dock or pier may be allowed by the city manager when the applicant demonstrates the following:

1. The existing nonconformance results from noncompliance with the standards in KMC 16.55.050(B); and

2. The proposed expansion meets all other applicable standards in KMC 16.55.050; and

3. The proposed expansion would not increase the overwater coverage of the dock or pier to more than the existing condition or above the limits established in KMC 16.55.050(B), whichever is greater; and

4. The project would reduce the impacts of the existing dock or pier on critical fish habitat as demonstrated through the habitat management plan for the development; and

5. The proposed expansion would not cause adverse impacts on adjacent shoreline uses. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.75.055 Relief from Shoreline Master Program development standards and use regulations.

A. Purpose of Section. This section incorporates statutory direction from RCW 90.58.580. In adopting RCW 90.58.580, the legislature found that restoration of degraded shoreline conditions is important to the ecological function of our waters. However, restoration projects that shift the location of the shoreline can inadvertently create hardships for property owners, particularly in urban areas. Hardship may occur when a shoreline restoration project shifts shoreline jurisdiction into areas that had not previously been regulated under the act or shifts the location of required shoreline buffers. The intent of this section is to provide relief to property owners in such cases, while protecting the viability of shoreline restoration projects.

B. Conditions and Criteria for Providing Relief. The City may grant relief from standards and use regulations in this title when the following apply:

1. A shoreline restoration project causes or would cause a landward shift in the ordinary high-water mark, resulting in the following:

a. Land that had not been regulated under this title prior to construction of the restoration project is brought under shoreline jurisdiction; or

b. Additional regulatory requirements apply due to a landward shift in required shoreline buffers or other regulations of the Kenmore SMP and this title; and

c. Application of this title would preclude or interfere with use of the property permitted by local development regulations, thus presenting a hardship to the project proponent.

2. The proposed relief meets the following criteria:

a. The proposed relief is the minimum necessary to relieve the hardship;

b. After granting the proposed relief, there is net environmental benefit from the restoration project;

c. Granting the proposed relief is consistent with the objectives of the shoreline restoration project and consistent with the Kenmore Shoreline Master Program and this title; and

d. Where a shoreline restoration project is created as mitigation to obtain a development permit, the project proponent required to perform the mitigation is not eligible for relief under this section.

3. The application for relief must be submitted to the Washington State Department of Ecology for written approval or disapproval. This review must occur during Ecology’s normal review of a shoreline substantial development permit, conditional use permit, or variance. If no such permit is required, then Ecology shall conduct its review when the City provides a copy of a complete application and all supporting information necessary to conduct the review.

a. Ecology shall provide at least 20 days’ notice to parties that have indicated interest to Ecology in reviewing applications for relief under this section, and post the notice on its website.

b. Ecology shall act within 30 calendar days of the close of the public notice period, or within 30 days of receipt of the proposal from the City if additional public notice is not required.

C. A substantial development permit is not required on land that is brought under shoreline jurisdiction due to a shoreline restoration project creating a landward shift in the ordinary high- water mark. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.75.060 Permits – Combined hearing authority.

A. In those cases when proposed development under the jurisdiction of this title also requires a Type 3 or Type 4 decision and a public hearing before the hearing examiner is required, the department shall issue a recommendation on the proposal, and the examiner shall conduct a public hearing to receive evidence relating to the issuance of a substantial development permit or exemption therefrom, a shoreline management conditional use permit and/or a shoreline management variance, if applicable.

B. The examiner shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 19.30 KMC and shall exercise the powers therein.

C. The decision of the examiner shall be the decision of the city manager and shall be the final decision of the City with regard to shoreline management. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.75.070 Permits – Approval or disapproval – Notification – Additional conditions – Limitations.

A. In granting or extending a permit, the city manager may attach thereto conditions, modifications, or restrictions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed development and related development and activity outside of the shoreline as necessary to make the permit compatible with the criteria set forth in KMC 16.05.030 and 16.75.010. Such conditions may include a requirement to post a performance bond assuring compliance with permit requirements, terms and conditions.

B. Issuance of a substantial development permit does not constitute approval pursuant to any other federal, State or City laws or regulations. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.75.080 Appeals.

A. Appeals from the final decision of the City with regard to shoreline management shall be governed solely by the provisions of RCW 90.58.180, which shall prevail over any conflicting appeal procedures set forth in Chapter 19.25 KMC.

B. After all local permit decisions are complete and the permit documents are amended to incorporate any resulting changes, the city manager shall mail the permit using return receipt requested mail to the Department of Ecology regional office and the Office of the Attorney General. Projects that require both conditional use permits and/or variances shall be mailed simultaneously with any substantial development permits for the project.

1. The permit and documentation of the final local decision will be mailed together with the complete permit application; a findings and conclusions letter; a permit data form (cover sheet); and applicable SEPA documents.

2. Consistent with RCW 90.58.140(6), the State’s Shorelines Hearings Board 21-day appeal period starts with the date of filing, which is defined below:

a. For projects that only require a substantial development permit (SDP): the date that Ecology receives the City decision.

b. For a conditional use permit (CUP) or variance: the date that Ecology’s decision on the CUP or variance is transmitted to the applicant and City.

c. For SDPs simultaneously mailed with a CUP or variance to Ecology: the date that Ecology’s decision on the CUP or variance is transmitted to the applicant and the City.

C. The effective date of the City’s decision shall be the date of filing with the Department of Ecology as defined in RCW 90.58.140.

D. When a hearing and decision have occurred pursuant to KMC 16.75.060 and the examiner’s recommendation with regard to disposition of a proposed development pursuant to KMC Titles 18 and 19 requires city council action, the final decision of the City pursuant to this title shall be effective on the date of filing as defined in RCW 90.58.140 for the purposes of appeal as provided in RCW 90.50.140. However, no development may occur until the city council has taken final action on the examiner’s recommendation required by KMC Titles 18 and/or 19. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.75.090 Rules of city manager.

The city manager is authorized to adopt such rules as are necessary and appropriate to implement this chapter. The city manager may prepare and require the use of such forms as are necessary to its administration. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.75.100 Enforcement.

A. The city manager is authorized to enforce the provisions of this title, the ordinances and resolutions codified in it, and any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder pursuant to the enforcement and penalty provisions of Chapter 1.20 KMC.

B. The city manager shall bring such injunctive, declaratory, or other actions as are necessary to ensure that no uses are made of the shorelines of the State in conflict with the provisions of this title or Chapter 90.58 RCW or in conflict with the Shoreline Master Program, or rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and to otherwise enforce the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 90.58 RCW.

C. Any person subject to the regulatory provisions of this title who violates any provision of this title or the provisions of a permit issued pursuant thereto shall be liable for all damage to public or private property arising from such violation, including the cost of restoring the affected area, within a reasonable time, to its condition prior to such violation. The city manager shall bring suit for damages under this subsection on behalf of the City. Private persons shall have the right to bring suit for damages under this subsection on their own behalf and on behalf of all persons similarly situated. The court on its discretion may award attorney’s fees and costs of the suit to the prevailing party. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.75.110 Shoreline environment redesignation.

A. Shoreline environments designated by the Shoreline Master Program may be redesignated by the city council upon finding that such a redesignation will be consistent with the standards in KMC 16.75.160 and the requirements of WAC 173-26-100 and 173-26-110. A shoreline redesignation may be initiated by an applicant or by motion of the city council and requires Department of Ecology approval.

B. A redesignation initiated by an applicant shall be made on forms and processed in a manner prescribed in KMC 16.75.120. A redesignation initiated by the city council shall follow the process in KMC 16.75.130.

C. The fee which shall accompany an application for a shoreline redesignation shall be as adopted by resolution. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.75.120 Redesignation applications.

A. A redesignation initiated by an applicant, as described in KMC 16.75.110(B), must follow the procedures in Chapters 19.25 and 19.30 KMC for shorelines redesignations and must include the following information in addition to the requirements in Chapter 19.25 KMC:

1. Applicant information, including signature, telephone number and address;

2. The applicant’s interest in the property, such as owner, buyer or consultant;

3. Property owner concurrence, including signature, telephone number and address;

4. A property description, including parcel number, property street address and nearest cross street;

5. A county assessor’s map outlining the subject property;

6. Related or previous permit activity;

7. A description of the proposed shorelines redesignation;

8. A mitigation plan providing for significant enhancement of the first 100 feet adjacent to the shoreline and improved habitat for species declared as endangered or threatened under the Endangered Species Act, to the extent that the impacts of development can be determined at the time of the proposed shoreline redesignation; and

9. A discussion of how the proposed shoreline redesignation meets the criteria in KMC 16.75.160.

B. The hearing examiner shall make a recommendation to the city council based on the criteria for review in KMC 16.75.160. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.75.130 Redesignation initiated by motion.

A. A city council motion initiating a shoreline redesignation, as described in KMC 16.75.110(B), must be accompanied by the following information:

1. A description of the shoreline and a property description, including parcel numbers, property street addresses and nearest cross streets, for all properties that the shoreline runs through or is adjacent to;

2. A county assessor’s map outlining the subject property or properties; and

3. A description of the proposed shorelines redesignation.

B. If the motion proposes site-specific redesignation, as “site” is defined in KMC Title 18, the redesignation shall be referred to the hearing examiner for consideration following the procedures of KMC 16.75.120 for consideration of redesignation applications. Any other redesignation proposal initiated by motion shall be referred to the city manager for consideration as part of the process for amendment of comprehensive plan or development regulations as outlined in Chapter 19.20 KMC.

C. A motion initiating a site-specific redesignation must identify the resources and the work program required to provide the same level of review accorded to an applicant-generated shoreline redesignation. Before adoption of the motion, the city manager shall have the opportunity to provide an analysis of the motion’s fiscal impact. If the city manager determines that additional funds are necessary to complete the work program, the city manager may transmit an ordinance requesting the appropriation of supplemental funds. The city council may consider the supplemental appropriation ordinance concurrently with the proposed motion referring the shorelines redesignation proposal to the hearing examiner.

D. The departmental report and recommendation regarding an application for a site-specific redesignation initiated by city council motion shall be forwarded to the hearing examiner for consideration.

E. A site-specific redesignation initiated by motion shall follow the procedures in Chapters 19.25 and 19.30 KMC for shorelines redesignations with regard to the information to be provided and the notice and hearing processes, and shall meet the submittal requirements of KMC 16.75.120. The hearing examiner shall make a recommendation to the city council based on the criteria for review in KMC 16.75.160. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.75.140 Frequency of consideration of shoreline redesignations.

A shorelines redesignation may not be initiated unless at least three years have elapsed since the city council’s prior consideration of the current designation for the property. The city manager or the city council may waive this time limit if the proponent establishes that there exists either an obvious technical error or a change in circumstances justifying the need for earlier consideration of the shorelines redesignation. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1).; Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1)]


16.75.150 Shoreline redesignation and site-specific land use map amendment or zone reclassification.

A site-specific shorelines redesignation may be accompanied by a related proposal for a site-specific land use map amendment or zone reclassification, or both, in which case City review of the two applications must be consolidated to the extent practical, consistent with this title and Chapter 19.25 KMC. The city council’s consideration of a subarea or comprehensive plan shorelines redesignation is a legislative decision that must be determined before and separate from the city council’s final consideration of a zone reclassification or site-specific shorelines redesignation, which is a quasi-judicial decision. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


16.75.160 Criteria for hearing examiner review.

A shorelines redesignation referred to the hearing examiner for a public hearing shall be reviewed based upon the requirements of comprehensive plan policies and City shorelines management goals and objectives and the following additional standards:

A. The proposed change implements and supports the goals of the State Shoreline Management Act and City of Kenmore Shoreline Master Program requested;

B. The impacts of development allowed by the proposed change will not permanently impair any habitat critical to endangered or threatened species; and

C. The impacts of development allowed by the proposed change are adequately addressed in a mitigation plan providing significant enhancement of the first 100 feet adjacent to the stream and improved habitat for species declared as endangered or threatened under the Endangered Species Act, to the extent those impacts may be determinable at the time of the shorelines redesignation. A full mitigation plan shall accompany each application, as provided in KMC 16.75.120 and 16.75.130. [Ord. 20-0506 § 3 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Title 17 LAND DIVISION

Chapters:

17.05    Purpose

17.10    Definitions

17.15    General

17.20    Subdivisions and Short Subdivisions

17.25    Final Plat and Final Short Plat

17.30    Binding Site Plans

17.40    Boundary Line Adjustments


Chapter 17.05 PURPOSE

Sections:

17.05.010    Purpose.


17.05.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this title is to:

A. Establish the authority and procedures for segregating land in the City.

B. Define and regulate divisions of land that are exempt from the short subdivision or subdivision requirements.

C. Ensure consistency with and implement the City comprehensive plan as amended in accordance with the Washington State Growth Management Act, RCW 36.70A.120.

D. Require uniform monumenting of land subdivisions and conveyance by accurate legal description.

E. Protect and preserve the public health, safety and general welfare in accordance with the standards established by the City and the State of Washington.

F. Ensure consistency with Chapter 58.17 RCW. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 17.10 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

17.10.005    Scope of chapter.

17.10.010    Acre.

17.10.020    Alteration.

17.10.030    Applicant.

17.10.040    Binding site plan.

17.10.050    Building envelope.

17.10.060    Building site.

17.10.065    City.

17.10.067    City manager.

17.10.070    Civil engineer.

17.10.080    Condominium.

17.10.090    Dedication.

17.10.100    Department.

17.10.110    Development engineer.

17.10.130    Easement.

17.10.150    Financial guarantee.

17.10.160    General site plan.

17.10.180    Improvements.

17.10.190    Innocent purchaser.

17.10.200    Land surveyor.

17.10.210    Lot.

17.10.220    Nonbuilding lot.

17.10.230    Ownership interest.

17.10.240    Parent parcel.

17.10.250    Plat, final.

17.10.260    Plat, preliminary.

17.10.270    Revision.

17.10.280    Segregation.

17.10.290    Short plat, final.

17.10.300    Short plat, preliminary.

17.10.310    Short subdivision.

17.10.320    Subdivision.

17.10.330    Tract.


17.10.005 Scope of chapter.

This chapter contains definitions of technical and procedural terms used throughout this title. Defined terms are shown in italics in the text of the title. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.010 Acre.

“Acre” means an area of land equal to 43,560 square feet. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.020 Alteration.

“Alteration” means the modification of a previously recorded plat, short plat, binding site plan, or any portion thereof, that results in modifications to conditions of approval, the addition of new lots or more land, or the deletion of existing lots or the removal of plat or lot restrictions or dedications that are shown on the recorded plat. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.030 Applicant.

“Applicant” means a property owner, or a public agency or public or private utility that owns a right-of-way or other easement or has been adjudicated the right to such easement pursuant to RCW 8.12.090, or any person or entity designated or named in writing by the property or easement owner to be the applicant, in an application for a development proposal, permit or approval. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.040 Binding site plan.

“Binding site plan” means a plan drawn to scale processed in accordance with KMC 17.30.010 through 17.30.060 and Chapter 58.17 RCW. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.050 Building envelope.

“Building envelope” means the area of a lot that delineates the limits of where a building may be placed on a lot. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.060 Building site.

“Building site” means a parcel, consisting of one or more lots or portions thereof, that is capable of being developed under current federal, State, and local statutes, including zoning and use provisions, dimensional standards, minimum lot area for construction, minimum lot width, shoreline master program provisions, critical area provisions, and health and safety provisions. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.065 City.

“City” means the City of Kenmore. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.067 City manager.

“City manager” means the City of Kenmore city manager or his or her designee(s). [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.070 Civil engineer.

“Civil engineer” means an individual registered and licensed as a professional civil engineer pursuant to Chapter 18.43 RCW. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.080 Condominium.

“Condominium” means real property, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of those portions as defined in Chapters 64.32 and 64.34 RCW. Real property is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the unit owners and unless a declaration, survey map and plans have been recorded pursuant to Chapter 64.32 or 64.34 RCW. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.090 Dedication.

“Dedication” means the deliberate conveyance of land by an owner for any general and public uses, reserving no rights other than those that are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses for which the property has been conveyed. The intention to dedicate shall be evidenced by the owner by the presentment for filing of a final plat, final short plat or binding site plan showing the dedication thereon or quit claim deed. The acceptance by the public shall be evidenced by the approval of such plat, short plat, binding site plan or quit claim deed for filing by the City. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.100 Department.

“Department” means the City department or outside agency assigned by the city manager to administer a portion of the City code. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.110 Development engineer.

“Development engineer” means the city manager, authorized to oversee the review, conditioning, inspection and acceptance of right-of-way use permits, street and drainage projects constructed pursuant to permits administered by the department and required pursuant to this title. The city manager or his or her designee acting as the development engineer shall be a professional civil engineer registered and licensed pursuant to Chapter 18.43 RCW. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.130 Easement.

“Easement” means a right granted by a property owner to specifically named parties or to the public for the use of certain land for specified purposes that may include, but are not limited to, street access, pedestrian or bicycle pathways, minerals, utility easements, drainage and open space. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.150 Financial guarantee.

“Financial guarantee” means a form of financial security posted to ensure timely and proper completion of improvements, compliance with this code or to warrant materials, workmanship of improvements, and design. Financial guarantees include assignments of funds, cash deposits, surety bonds, and other forms of financial security acceptable to the city manager. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.160 General site plan.

“General site plan” means a site plan approved pursuant to this title that is not based on a building permit, an as-built site plan for developed sites or a site plan review. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.180 Improvements.

“Improvements” means constructed appurtenances, including but not limited to street and drainage construction, utility installation, recreational features, lot grading prior to a building permit, plat monument signs, and survey monuments. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.190 Innocent purchaser.

“Innocent purchaser” means an individual who has purchased real property for value and states under oath that he or she had no knowledge at any time prior to or during the sale that the lot had been or is being created in violation of the provisions of this title. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.200 Land surveyor.

“Land surveyor” means an individual licensed as a land surveyor pursuant to Chapter 18.43 RCW. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.210 Lot.

“Lot” means a physically separate and distinct parcel of property that has been created pursuant to the provisions of this title, or pursuant to any previous laws governing the subdivision, short subdivision or segregation of land. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.220 Nonbuilding lot.

“Nonbuilding lot” means a lot created, defined as a nonbuilding lot on the face of the plat or short plat, for which improvements for the purpose of human habitation or occupancy are prohibited. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.230 Ownership interest.

“Ownership interest” means having property rights as a fee owner or contract purchaser. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.240 Parent parcel.

“Parent parcel” means each existing lot that is located within the perimeter of a proposed boundary line adjustment application. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.250 Plat, final.

“Final plat” means the final drawing of the subdivision and dedication prepared for filing with the City and containing all elements and requirements set forth in this title and in Chapter 58.17 RCW. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.260 Plat, preliminary.

“Preliminary plat” means a neat and approximate drawing of a proposed subdivision showing the general layout of streets, alleys, lots, blocks and other elements of a subdivision required by this title and Chapter 58.17 RCW. The preliminary plat shall be the basis for the approval or disapproval of the general layout of a subdivision. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.270 Revision.

“Revision” means a change prior to recording of a previously approved preliminary plat, preliminary short plat or binding site plan that may include, but is not limited to, the addition of new lots, tracts or parcels. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.280 Segregation.

“Segregation” means a division of land by any of the following means: subdivisions, short subdivisions, and binding site plans. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.290 Short plat, final.

“Final short plat” means the final drawing of the short subdivision and dedication prepared for filing with the City and containing all elements and requirements set forth in this title and in Chapter 58.17 RCW. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.300 Short plat, preliminary.

“Preliminary short plat” means a neat and approximate drawing of a proposed short subdivision showing the general layout of streets, alleys, lots, blocks and other elements of a short subdivision required by this title and Chapter 58.17 RCW. The preliminary short plat shall be the basis for the approval or disapproval of the general layout of a subdivision. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.310 Short subdivision.

“Short subdivision” means a division or redivision of land into nine or fewer lots, tracts, parcels or sites for the purpose of sale, lease or transfer of ownership. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.320 Subdivision.

“Subdivision” means a division or redivision of land into 10 or more lots, tracts or parcels for the purpose of sale, lease or transfer of ownership. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.10.330 Tract.

“Tract” means land reserved for specified uses including, but not limited to, reserve tracts, recreation, open space, critical areas, surface water retention, utility facilities and access. Tracts are not considered lots or building sites for purposes of residential dwelling construction. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 17.15 GENERAL

Sections:

17.15.010    Scope of chapter.

17.15.020    Adverse possession lawsuit – Consent or judgment required.

17.15.030    Transfer of land or granting of an easement to a public agency.

17.15.040    Exemptions – Subdivision and short subdivision.

17.15.050    Recording map and legal descriptions.

17.15.060    Review for conformity with other codes, plans and policies.

17.15.070    Determining and maintaining legal status of a lot.

17.15.080    Removing limitations on nonbuilding lots.

17.15.090    Determining innocent purchaser status.

17.15.120    Affidavit of correction.

17.15.130    Vertical and horizontal survey controls.

17.15.140    Financial guarantees.

17.15.150    Application requirements for preliminary plats, preliminary short plats and preliminary binding site plans.

17.15.170    Violations and enforcement.

17.15.190    Rules.


17.15.010 Scope of chapter.

This chapter contains provisions general to the administration of land segregation. Any segregation of land is subject to the provisions of this title except as stated herein. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.15.020 Adverse possession lawsuit – Consent or judgment required.

Applications for segregation allowed by this title concerning lands on which there is a pending lawsuit for adverse possession will not receive final approval without the consent of the adverse possession claimant or until a trial court judgment settling the lawsuit is entered. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.15.030 Transfer of land or granting of an easement to a public agency.

The transfer of land or granting of an easement to a public agency for street and utility purposes shall not be considered a segregation of land. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.15.040 Exemptions – Subdivision and short subdivision.

The subdivision and short subdivision provisions of this title shall not apply to:

A. Divisions of lands for cemeteries and other burial plots while used for that purpose.

B. Divisions of land into lots or tracts that are one-one-hundred-twenty-eighth of a section, or five acres or larger only for the purpose of allowing fee simple purchase or deeding of such lots or tracts to public agencies.

C. Divisions of land made by testamentary provisions or laws of descent.

D. Divisions of land into lots or tracts consistent with RCW 58.17.040(7), for which a condominium binding site plan has been recorded in accordance with the binding site plan provisions set forth in this title.

E. An adjustment of boundary lines in accordance with the provisions of this title.

F. Divisions of land for the purpose of lease when no residential structures other than mobile homes are permitted to be placed upon the land and for which a binding site plan for the use of the land as a mobile home park has been approved by the city manager.

G. Divisions of land by binding site plan into lots or tracts classified for industrial or commercial use consistent with the binding site plan provisions of this title.

H. Divisions of land by a public roadway or freeway, as defined by the adopted roadway functional classification system, that is planned, established, financed and constructed by a State or City agency after January 1, 2000. 

I. A division for purposes of leasing land for facilities providing personal wireless services while used for that purpose as described in RCW 58.17.040(8).

J. A division of land into lots or tracts of less than three acres to be used for the purpose of establishing a site for construction and operation of consumer-owned or investor-owned electric utility facilities as defined in RCW 58.17.040(9). [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.15.050 Recording map and legal descriptions.

The final recording map and legal description of a plat, short plat, boundary line adjustment or binding site plan shall be prepared by a land surveyor in accordance with Chapter 58.09 RCW and Chapter 332-130 WAC, Surveys and Recording, and be recorded with the King County office of records and elections as required by this title. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.15.060 Review for conformity with other codes, plans and policies.

Applications for approvals pursuant to this title shall be reviewed in accordance with the applicable procedures of any combination of this title and Chapters 19.25 and 19.30 KMC. Furthermore, applications for subdivisions, short subdivisions and binding site plans may be approved, approved with conditions or denied in accordance with the following adopted rules, regulations, plans and policies including, but not limited to:

A. Chapter 43.21C RCW (SEPA);

B. Chapter 58.17 RCW (Subdivisions);

C. Chapters 36.70A and 36.70B RCW (Growth Management and Project Review);

D. Chapter 1.20 KMC (Code Enforcement);

E. KMC Title 12 (Streets and Bridges);

F. KMC Title 13, Division I (Water and Sewer Systems);

G. KMC Title 13, Division II (Surface and Stormwater Utility);

H. KMC Title 15 (Buildings and Construction);

I. KMC Title 16 (Environment);

J. KMC Title 18 (Zoning);

K. Chapter 19.35 KMC (Environmental Procedures);

L. Administrative rules adopted;

M. Seattle/King County public health rules and regulations;

N. City comprehensive plan;

O. County-wide planning policies;

P. This title. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.15.070 Determining and maintaining legal status of a lot.

A. A property owner may request that the department determine whether a lot was legally segregated. The property owner shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the department that a lot was created in compliance with applicable State and local land segregation statutes or codes in effect at the time the lot was created, including, but not limited to, demonstrating that the lot was created:

1. Prior to June 9, 1937, and the lot has been:

a. Provided with approved sewage disposal or water systems or streets; or

b. Conveyed as an individually described parcel to separate, noncontiguous ownerships through a fee simple transfer or purchase prior to October 1, 1972;

c. Recognized prior to October 1, 1972, as a separate tax lot by the county assessor;

2. Through a review and approval process recognized by the City for the creation of four lots or less from June 9, 1937, to October 1, 1972, or the subdivision process on or after June 9, 1937;

3. Through the short subdivision process on or after October 1, 1972; or

4. Through the following alternative means allowed by the State statute or City code:

a. For the raising of agricultural crops or livestock, in parcels greater than 10 acres, between September 3, 1948, and August 11, 1969;

b. For cemeteries or other burial plots, while used for that purpose, on or after August 11, 1969;

c. At a size five acres or greater, recorded between August 11, 1969, and October 1, 1972, and did not contain a dedication;

d. At a size 20 acres or greater, recognized prior to the effective date of this title; provided, however, for remnant lots not less than 17 acres and no more than one per quarter section;

e. Upon a court order entered between August 11, 1969, and July 1, 1974;

f. Through testamentary provisions or the laws of descent after August 10, 1969;

g. Through an assessor’s plat made in accordance with RCW 58.18.010 after August 10, 1969;

h. As a result of deeding land to a public body after April 3, 1977, and that is consistent with the City zoning code, access and Seattle/King County public health requirements so as to qualify as a building site pursuant to KMC 17.10.060; or

i. By a partial fulfillment deed pursuant to a real estate contract recorded prior to October 1, 1972, and no more than four lots were created per the deed.

B. In requesting a determination, the property owner shall submit evidence, deemed acceptable to the department, such as:

1. Recorded subdivisions or division of land into four lots or less;

2. King County or City documents indicating approval of a short subdivision;

3. Recorded deeds or contracts describing the lot or lots either individually or as part of a conjunctive legal description (e.g., Lot 1 and Lot 2); or

4. Historic tax records or other similar evidence, describing the lot as an individual parcel. The department shall give great weight to the existence of historic tax records or tax parcels in making its determination.

C. Once the department has determined that the lot was legally created, the department shall continue to acknowledge the lot as such, unless the property owner re-aggregates or merges the lot with another lot or lots in order to:

1. Create a parcel of land that would qualify as a building site; or

2. Implement a deed restriction or condition, a covenant or court decision.

D. The department’s determination shall not be construed as a guarantee that the lot constitutes a building site as defined in KMC 17.10.060.

E. Re-aggregation of lots after January 1, 2000, shall only be the result of a deliberate action by a property owner expressly requesting a permanent merger of two or more lots. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.15.080 Removing limitations on nonbuilding lots.

Limitations placed on a nonbuilding lot may be removed and the lot recognized by the City as a building lot by approval of a subdivision, short subdivision, binding site plan or alteration of a plat, short plat or binding site plan. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.15.090 Determining innocent purchaser status.

A. An innocent purchaser of a parcel divided in violation of City subdivision requirements who files a notarized affidavit of innocent purchase with the department on forms approved by the city manager may seek to establish the parcel’s eligibility for City development approvals and for lawful future conveyance; provided, that nothing herein is intended to exempt development on innocent purchaser lots from compliance with development standards of the City’s zoning code.

B. All contiguous parcels divided in violation of this title that are under common ownership at the time of application for innocent purchaser status shall be recognized only as a single lot.

C. Innocent purchaser status shall not be granted to any individual or group more than once. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.15.120 Affidavit of correction.

A. Any map page or document on file with the records and elections division under the provisions of this title that contains an error in fact or omission may be amended by an affidavit of correction. The following types of errors may be corrected by affidavit:

1. Any courses, distances or elevations omitted from the recorded document;

2. An error in any courses, distances or elevations shown on the recorded document;

3. An error in the description of the real property shown on the recorded document;

4. An error in the field location of any shown easement; or

5. Any other error or omission where the error or omission is ascertainable from the data shown on the recorded document.

B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit changes in courses, distances or elevations for the purpose of redesigning lot or tract configurations.

C. The affidavit of correction shall contain the seal and signature of the land surveyor making the correction.

D. The affidavit of correction shall set forth in detail the corrections made and show the names of the present fee owners of the property materially affected by the correction. The notarized signatures of the owners shall be required, if deemed necessary by the department.

E. The affidavit of correction form, as provided by the department, shall be submitted to the department for review and approval and shall include signatures of the development engineer, the city manager, and the King County assessor. After department approval, the affidavit shall be recorded with the records and elections division. Submittals shall include payment of fees as authorized by KMC Title 20. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.15.130 Vertical and horizontal survey controls.

A. Vertical Requirements. The vertical datum on all engineering plans, plats, binding site plans and short plats shall be the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88) and shall be tied to at least one City survey control network benchmark. The benchmark will be shown on the plans. If a City survey control network benchmark does not exist within one-half mile of the subject property, or 250 feet or greater of total vertical difference exist between the starting benchmark and the project, an alternate vertical datum may be used.

B. Horizontal Requirements. The horizontal component of all plats, binding site plans and short plats shall have the North American Datum of 1983 (2007) as its coordinate base and basis for bearings. All horizontal control for these projects shall be referenced to a minimum of two City survey horizontal control monuments. If two horizontal control monuments do not exist within one mile of these projects, an alternate coordinate base and basis of bearings may be used. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.15.140 Financial guarantees.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, the city manager is authorized to require all applicants issued permits or approvals under the provisions of this title to post financial guarantees consistent with the provisions of KMC Title 21. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.15.150 Application requirements for preliminary plats, preliminary short plats and preliminary binding site plans.

The applicant shall file the following information with the department in addition to those application requirements described in KMC 19.25.040:

A. A complete permit application, with supporting affidavits, on forms provided by the department;

B. Information requested on the application checklist provided by the department; and 

C. Any additional information or materials that the department specifies at the pre-application meeting. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.15.170 Violations and enforcement.

Any person or entity that violates any provision of this title shall, in addition to any remedies and sanctions provided for under State law, be subject to the enforcement provisions of Chapter 1.20 KMC. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.15.190 Rules.

The city manager is authorized to adopt rules to implement the provisions of this title. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 17.20 SUBDIVISIONS AND SHORT SUBDIVISIONS

Sections:

17.20.010    Purpose.

17.20.020    Preliminary subdivision – Approval time.

17.20.030    Revisions of preliminary subdivisions.

17.20.040    Preliminary short subdivision – Approval time.

17.20.050    Limitations for short subdivisions.

17.20.060    Revisions of preliminary short subdivisions.

17.20.070    Traffic analysis required.

17.20.080    Adequacy of access.

17.20.100    Public street rights-of-way.

17.20.105    Street signage.

17.20.107    Street lighting.

17.20.110    Limitations within future street corridors.

17.20.120    General layout standards.

17.20.125    Lot segregations – Zero-lot-line development.

17.20.130    Lot segregations – Clustered development.

17.20.140    Maintenance of private streets, tracts, easements and utilities required.

17.20.150    Preliminary subdivision and short subdivision approval.


17.20.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to specify additional requirements for the segregation of land into short subdivisions, which are nine or fewer lots, and subdivisions, which are 10 or more lots, in accordance with applicable Washington State and City laws, rules and regulations, including permit processing procedures required by Chapter 19.25 KMC. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.20.020 Preliminary subdivision – Approval time.

A. A preliminary subdivision approval issued on or before December 31, 2014, shall be effective for a period of seven years, and a preliminary subdivision approval issued on or after January 1, 2015, shall be effective for a period of five years; provided, that a preliminary subdivision approval issued on or before December 31, 2007, that is not expired as of July 28, 2013, and that is not subject to the Shoreline Master Program, shall be effective for a period of 10 years. 

B. Preliminary subdivision approval shall be considered the basis upon which the applicant may proceed toward development of the subdivision and preparation of the final plat subject to all the conditions of the preliminary approval.

C. If the final plat is being developed in divisions, and final plats for all of the divisions have not been recorded within the time limits provided in this section, preliminary subdivision approval for all unrecorded divisions shall become void. The preliminary subdivision for any unrecorded divisions must again be submitted to the department with a new application, subject to the fees and regulations applicable at the time of submittal. [Ord. 14-0378 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 12-0344 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.20.030 Revisions of preliminary subdivisions.

Applications to revise subdivisions that have received preliminary approval shall comply with the following:

A. Revisions that result in any substantial changes as determined by the department shall be treated as a new application for purposes of vesting and shall be reviewed as a Type 3 land use decision pursuant to KMC 19.25.020. For the purpose of this section, substantial change always includes the creation of additional lots, the elimination of open space or significant changes to conditions of approval on an approved preliminary subdivision. Other factors to be considered by the department when identifying substantial change include:

1. Street impacts, such as a change in access location(s) of internal streets; change from a public to a private street; relocation of a street within the subdivision; request for a street standards variance; and/or elimination of a right-of-way dedication;

2. A reorientation of lots that would change impacts to neighboring properties;

3. Changes in proposed housing types;

4. Changes to critical area impacts; and/or

5. Changes to utility locations that would result in new impacts on neighboring properties.

B. Approval of the following modifications by the department shall not be considered revisions:

1. Engineering design, unless the proposed design alters or eliminates features specifically required as a condition of preliminary subdivision approval or that results in a substantial change as described in subsection A of this section;

2. Changes in lot dimensions that are consistent with KMC Title 18;

3. A decrease in the number of lots to be created so long as the decrease allows for future compliance with the minimum density provisions of KMC Title 18, if applicable. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.20.040 Preliminary short subdivision – Approval time.

A preliminary short subdivision approval issued on or before December 31, 2014, shall be effective for a period of seven years, and a preliminary short subdivision approval issued on or after January 1, 2015, shall be effective for a period of five years; provided, that a preliminary short subdivision approval issued on or before December 31, 2007, that is not expired as of July 28, 2013, and that is not subject to the Shoreline Master Program, shall be effective for a period of 10 years. [Ord. 14-0378 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 12-0344 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.20.050 Limitations for short subdivisions.

A. A maximum of nine lots may be created by a single application.

B. An application for further segregation may not be submitted within a period of five years after recording, except through the filing of a subdivision application, or unless the short plat contains fewer than four lots, in which case an alteration application may be submitted to create a cumulative total of up to four lots within the original short plat boundary. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.20.060 Revisions of preliminary short subdivisions.

Applications to revise short subdivisions that have received preliminary approval shall comply with the following:

A. Revisions that result in any substantial changes as determined by the department shall be treated as a new application for purposes of vesting and shall be reviewed as a Type 2 land use decision pursuant to KMC 19.25.020. For the purpose of this section, substantial change always includes the creation of additional lots, the elimination of open space or significant changes to conditions of approval on an approved preliminary short subdivision. Other factors to be considered by the department when identifying substantial change include:

1. Street impacts, such as a change in access location(s) of internal streets; change from a public to a private street; relocation of a street within the short subdivision; request for a street standards variance; and/or elimination of a right-of-way dedication;

2. A reorientation of lots that would change impacts to neighboring properties;

3. Changes in proposed housing types;

4. Changes to critical area impacts; and/or

5. Changes to utility locations that would result in new impacts on neighboring properties.

B. Approval of the following modifications by the department shall not be considered revisions:

1. Engineering design, unless the proposed design alters or eliminates features specifically required as a condition of preliminary short subdivision approval or results in a substantial change as described in subsection A of this section;

2. Changes in lot dimensions that are consistent with KMC Title 18;

3. A decrease in the number of lots to be created so long as the decrease allows for future compliance with the minimum density provisions of KMC Title 18, if applicable. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.20.070 Traffic analysis required.

All subdivision applications, excluding short subdivisions of four lots or less, shall include a traffic analysis in a format prescribed by the department. The city manager may, upon review of the applicant’s proposal, waive or modify this requirement. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.20.080 Adequacy of access.

Each lot within a subdivision or short subdivision shall have acceptable access to a street conforming to City street standards or to a different level of improvement acceptable to the development engineer. The circulation system of a proposed subdivision or short subdivision shall intersect with existing and anticipated streets abutting the site at safe and convenient locations, as determined by the department and the development engineer. Individual lots may be served by access panhandles established either by fee ownership or easement, subject to approval of the development engineer. In order to assure safe and adequate access, the development engineer:

A. May approve private streets, provided the private street requirements contained in the City street standards of Chapter 12.50 KMC are met;

B. May limit direct access to certain streets and require on-site public or private streets in lieu of individual driveways or access panhandles, in accordance with the City street standards;

C. Shall require off-site improvements to public or private streets needed to provide access from the subdivision or short subdivision to an acceptable street; and

D. Shall assure that the number of lots to be served by the street system complies with the street standards. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.20.100 Public street rights-of-way.

As a result of the impact created by a proposed development, dedication or deeding to the City of right-of-way or a portion thereof for public streets in accordance with City street standards shall be required within or along the boundaries of all subdivisions and short subdivisions or of any lot or lots within them:

A. Where the six-year capital improvement plan indicates the necessity of a new right-of-way or portion thereof for street purposes;

B. Where necessary to extend or to complete the existing or future neighborhood street pattern as shown on the City street map (see KMC Title 12);

C. Where necessary to provide additions of right-of-way to existing City right-of-way;

D. Where necessary to conform to City street standards or City street improvement projects; or

E. Where necessary to provide a public transportation system that supports future development of abutting property consistent with the City comprehensive plan. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.20.105 Street signage.

Street signage is required for all new short subdivisions and subdivisions unless otherwise approved by the city manager. The city manager will determine the appropriate location, size and type of motor vehicle and pedestrian traffic signs, as well as street name signs, for every public or private street associated with a short subdivision or subdivision. The City or its designee will manufacture and install such signs, at the cost and expense of the applicant. The applicant shall reimburse the City for the cost of these signs prior to final plat or final short plat approval. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.20.107 Street lighting.

Street lighting is required for all new short subdivisions or subdivisions unless otherwise approved by the city manager. The city manager will determine the appropriate location, size and type of street lighting for every public or private street associated with a short subdivision or subdivision. The City or its designee will design, procure materials and install such lighting, at the cost and expense of the applicant. The applicant will be invoiced directly for the design, materials and installation costs associated with these lights by the City or its designee. The applicant shall pay the invoice(s) prior to final plat or final short plat approval. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.20.110 Limitations within future street corridors.

In order to allow for the development of future street corridors that would complete the public circulation system or that would provide a sole source of access for an abutting property, the City may limit improvements within specific areas of a proposed subdivision or short subdivision. These limitations may preclude the construction of buildings, driveways, drainage facilities or other improvements within specified areas as identified in KMC 17.20.100(A) through (E). [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.20.120 General layout standards.

For residential developments in the R zones:

A. The maximum length of blocks shall be 1,320 feet; and

B. Except for corner lots, lots for single detached dwellings shall not have street frontage along two sides unless one of said streets is a neighborhood collector street or an arterial street. 

C. Lots shall be designed to avoid unusual configurations or narrow extensions that could make use difficult or confusing for future property owners. No portion of a lot shall be narrower than 25 feet, with the exception of cul-de-sac lots at the street frontage or an access panhandle approved by the development engineer. The lot width standards in KMC Title 18 also apply. Exceptions for unusual conditions may be considered on a case-by-case basis by the city manager. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.20.125 Lot segregations – Zero-lot-line development.

In any R zone or in the NB zone, interior setbacks may be modified during subdivision or short subdivision review as follows:

A. If a building is proposed to be located within a normally required interior setback:

1. An easement shall be provided on the abutting lot of the subdivision that is wide enough to ensure a 10-foot separation between the walls of structures on adjoining lots, except as provided for common wall construction;

2. The easement area shall be free of permanent structures and other obstructions that would prevent normal repair and maintenance of the structure’s exterior;

3. Buildings utilizing reduced setbacks shall not have doors that open directly onto the private yard areas of abutting property. Windows in such buildings shall not be oriented toward such private yard areas unless they consist of materials such as glass block, textured glass, or other opaque materials, and shall not be capable of being opened, except for clerestory-style windows or skylights; and

4. The final plat or short plat shall show the approximate location of buildings proposed to be placed in a standard setback area.

B. In the R zones, setbacks on existing individual lots may be modified; provided, that the standards set forth in subsection (A)(1) of this section are met. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.20.130 Lot segregations – Clustered development.

When residential lot clustering is proposed, the following provisions shall be met:

A. Any open space resulting from lot clustering shall not be altered or disturbed except as specified on recorded documents creating the open space. Such open spaces may be retained under ownership by the subdivider, conveyed to residents of the development, or conveyed to a third party. When access to the open space is provided, the access shall be located in a separate tract;

B. In the R-1 zone, open space tracts created by clustering required by KMC 18.21.030 shall be located and configured to create urban separators and greenbelts as required by the comprehensive plan or open space functional plans; to connect and increase protective buffers for critical areas; to connect and protect wildlife habitat corridors designated by the comprehensive plan; and to connect existing or planned public parks or trails. The City may require open space tracts created under this subsection to be dedicated to an appropriate managing public agency or qualifying private entity such as a nature conservancy;

C. Open spaces created through lot clustering are encouraged to include retained native vegetation;

D. Landscape-based stormwater management practices may be located within open spaces created through lot clustering, provided they are not located within critical areas. [Ord. 16-0428 § 12 (Att. H); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.20.140 Maintenance of private streets, tracts, easements and utilities required.

As a condition of subdivision and short subdivision approval, all private streets, tracts, easements, community utilities and properties shall be maintained by the owners of the property served by them and kept in good repair at all times. In order to ensure continued good repair, it must be demonstrated to the department at the time of plat recording that:

A. There will be a workable organization to guarantee maintenance with a committee or group to administer the organizational functions; and

B. There is a means for assessing maintenance costs equitably to property owners served by the private streets, tracts, easements, community utilities and properties. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.20.150 Preliminary subdivision and short subdivision approval.

A proposed subdivision or short subdivision shall not be approved unless the decisionmaker makes written findings that:

A. Appropriate provisions are made for the public health, safety, and general welfare and for such open spaces, drainage ways, streets or roads, alleys, other public ways, transit stops, potable water supplies, sanitary wastes, parks and recreation, playgrounds, schools and school grounds and all other relevant facts, including sidewalks and other planning features that assure safe walking conditions for students who only walk to and from school; and

B. The public use and interest will be served by the platting of such subdivision or short subdivision. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 17.25 FINAL PLAT AND FINAL SHORT PLAT

Sections:

17.25.010    Purpose.

17.25.020    Phased development.

17.25.022    Final plat and final short plat engineering plan review requirements.

17.25.024    Subdivision and short subdivision improvements.

17.25.030    Final plat and final short plat review.

17.25.070    Alterations of final plats.

17.25.080    Alterations of final short plats.

17.25.090    Vacations of a final plat or final short plat.


17.25.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to specify provisions that must be satisfied prior to the final approval and recording of final plat and final short plat maps for preliminarily approved subdivisions and short subdivisions. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.25.020 Phased development.

Portions of an approved preliminary subdivision may be processed separately by the department for the purpose of recording divisions. All divisions shall be approved within the prescribed time limits for the preliminary subdivision, and all conditions of approval for each particular division must be met. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.25.022 Final plat and final short plat engineering plan review requirements.

A. Engineering plans for streets, drainage controls and other proposed or conditioned improvements shall be reviewed for approval by the development engineer prior to the commencement of on-site clearing or construction activities.

The applicant shall file the following information with the department:

1. A complete permit application, with supporting affidavits, on forms provided by the department; and

2. Information requested on the application checklist provided by the department.

B. Approval of the engineering details of the proposed sanitary sewer and water systems by the development engineer and the Northshore Utility District will be required prior to the approval of the engineering plans.

C. Prior to approval of engineering plans, the applicant shall post financial guarantees consistent with the provisions of KMC Title 21, and shall pay all applicable fees set forth in KMC Title 20. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.25.024 Subdivision and short subdivision improvements.

A. With the exception of street and replacement tree installation, prior to final recording of a plat or short plat, the required improvements shall be constructed or installed and receive final approval from the development engineer, consistent with the approved engineering plans. All required financial guarantees shall be posted prior to final recording. The city manager may allow posting of additional financial guarantees in the event that extraordinary circumstances prevent the construction or installation of the required improvements.

B. The city manager shall have right of entry onto any lot, tract, easement or parcel that is part of the final plat or final short plat to ensure compliance with the subdivision improvements required in subsection A of this section. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.25.030 Final plat and final short plat review.

A. Following submittal of the engineering plans and installation of the required improvements, a final short plat, surveyed and signed by a land surveyor, shall be submitted to the department for review and approval by the development engineer prior to recording. A final plat shall be submitted to the department for review and recommendation, with final approval by the city council. The applicant shall file the following information with the department:

1. A complete permit application, with supporting affidavits, on forms provided by the department; and

2. Information requested on the application checklist provided by the department;

B. Upon approval by the department or city council, the final plat or short plat shall be recorded with the county records and elections division; and

C. A typewritten copy of protective deed covenants shall accompany the final plat or short plat, if applicable. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.25.070 Alterations of final plats.

A. Alterations shall be processed in accordance with RCW 58.17.215 through 58.17.218 and shall comply with regulations in effect at the time the alteration application was submitted. Alteration applications and recording documents shall contain the signatures of the majority of those persons having an ownership interest in lots, tracts, parcels or divisions in the subject subdivision to be altered or any portion to be altered.

B. If the subdivision is subject to restrictive covenants that were filed at the time of the approval of the subdivision, and the application for alteration would result in the violation of a covenant, the application shall contain an agreement signed by all parties subject to the covenants providing that the parties agree to terminate or alter the relevant covenants to accomplish the purpose of the alteration of the subdivision or portion thereof.

C. Notice of alterations shall comply with the notice provisions of KMC Title 19. Mailing notification shall also include owners of each lot or parcel of property within the subdivision to be altered.

D. An application shall be processed as a Type 3 permit pursuant to Chapter 19.25 KMC and KMC 19.30.040. The application may be approved if the proposed alteration is consistent with the required findings of KMC 19.30.230.

E. After approval of an alteration, the applicant shall produce a revised drawing of the approved alteration of the final plat, to be processed in the same manner as set forth for final plats in this title. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.25.080 Alterations of final short plats.

A. Alterations that result in a substantial change as determined by the department shall be treated as a new application and shall be accomplished by following the same procedure and satisfying the same laws, rules and conditions as required for a new short plat application, as set forth in this chapter. For purposes of this section, substantial change includes, but is not limited to, the creation of additional lots or a significant reorientation of lots; changes in proposed housing types; change from a nonbuilding lot to a building lot; changes to critical area impacts; the elimination of open space; any modification to a public dedication; significant changes to streets; or changes to utility locations that would result in significant new impacts on neighboring properties.

B. Alteration of a final short plat may be approved by the department if not a substantial change.

C. Alteration applications and recording documents shall contain the signatures of the majority of those persons having an ownership interest in lots, tracts, parcels or divisions in the subject short plat to be altered or any portion to be altered.

D. If the short subdivision is subject to restrictive covenants that were filed at the time of the approval of the short subdivision, and the application for alteration would result in the violation of a covenant, the application shall contain an agreement signed by all parties subject to the covenants providing that the parties agree to terminate or alter the relevant covenants to accomplish the purpose of the alteration of the short subdivision or portion thereof.

E. Notice of alterations shall comply with the notice provisions of KMC Title 19. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.25.090 Vacations of a final plat or final short plat.

A. Plat and short plat vacations shall be processed as follows and in accordance with the provisions of RCW 58.17.212.

B. All plat and short plat vacation applications shall be referred to the hearing examiner for public hearing and consideration pursuant to KMC 19.30.050. Following the public hearing the hearing examiner shall determine if the proposed vacation is consistent with the required findings of KMC 19.30.230. If the proposal is found to serve such purposes, the hearing examiner may recommend that the city council approve the application.

C. Applications for vacations of City streets may be processed pursuant to this chapter only when such street vacations are proposed in conjunction with the vacation of the plat. Vacations limited to City streets shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 35.79 RCW. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 17.30 BINDING SITE PLANS

Sections:

17.30.010    Purpose.

17.30.020    Applicability.

17.30.030    Requirements and limitations.

17.30.040    Alterations.

17.30.050    Vacations.

17.30.060    Recording.


17.30.010 Purpose.

The purposes of this chapter are:

A. To provide an alternative method for division of land for commercial zoned property, mobile home parks, trailer parks or condominiums; and

B. To specify administrative requirements for binding site plans in addition to the procedural requirements of Chapter 19.25 KMC and in accordance with applicable Washington State and City rules and regulations. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.30.020 Applicability.

A. Any person seeking the use of a binding site plan process to divide property for the purpose of sale, lease or transfer of ownership of commercial zoned property, lease of mobile homes or travel trailers or creation of condominium units is required to have an approved binding site plan prior to any property division, as provided for in Chapter 58.17, 64.32 or 64.34 RCW, and as required by this chapter. A binding site plan shall be based on a building permit, an as-built site plan for developed sites, a site plan review, or a general site plan showing the anticipated development plan for the entire site.

B. The site that is subject to the binding site plan shall consist of one or more contiguous lots.

C. The site that is subject to the binding site plan may be reviewed independently for developed sites, concurrently with or subsequent to a site development permit application for undeveloped land or concurrently with or subsequent to a building permit application.

D. The binding site plan process creates or alters lot lines and does not authorize substantial improvements or changes to the property or the uses thereon. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.30.030 Requirements and limitations.

A. The binding site plan shall ensure that the collective lots continue to function as one site with respect to, but not limited to, lot access, interior circulation, open space, landscaping, drainage facilities, facility maintenance and parking.

B. The binding site plan shall:

1. Identify the areas and locations of all streets, improvements, utilities, open spaces, critical areas, parking areas, landscaped areas, surveyed topography for preliminary map, water bodies and drainage features and building envelopes;

2. Contain inscriptions or attachments setting forth such limitations and conditions for the use of the land as are established by the city manager or the hearing examiner; and

3. Contain provisions requiring any development or division of land to be in conformance with the approved site plan.

C. Conditions of use, maintenance and restrictions on redevelopment of shared open space, parking, access and other improvements shall be identified and enforced by covenants, easements or other similar mechanisms. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.30.040 Alterations.

A. Alteration of a binding site plan shall be accomplished by following the same process required for a new application as set forth in this chapter.

B. Changes to a building permit, site plan review or general site plan within a binding site plan area shall also require alteration of the binding site plan unless the city manager determines that such changes are consistent with the approved binding site plan. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.30.050 Vacations.

A. Vacation of a binding site plan shall be accomplished by following the same procedure and satisfying the same laws, rules and conditions as required for a new binding site plan application, as set forth in this chapter. If a portion of a binding site plan is vacated, the property subject to the vacated portion shall constitute one lot unless the property is subsequently divided by an approved subdivision or short subdivision or another binding site plan.

B. If a building permit, site plan review or general site plan is revised or expires, then the binding site plan shall be vacated unless the city manager determines that the revision or expiration is consistent with the approved binding site plan. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.30.060 Recording.

A. Plat certificates or owner’s duplicate certificates for registered land pursuant to Chapter 65.12 RCW shall be provided to the department by the owner along with a copy of the last real estate transaction for all adjoining unplatted parcels.

B. Prior to recording, the approved binding site plan shall be surveyed and the final recording forms shall be prepared by a land surveyor. A final binding site plan shall be prepared on forms 18 inches by 24 inches in size, allowing for a two-inch border on one of the 18-inch sides, to allow for binding, and one-half-inch borders on the other three sides. The two-inch border will typically be on the top or left side depending on the configuration of the drawing.

C. The approved binding site plan recording documents shall include the following:

1. Except for a binding site plan for a condominium, identification of lots by number on a binding site plan containing more than one lot. Tracts shall be similarly designated and each tract shall be clearly identified with the ownership and purpose;

2. Signature and stamp of the land surveyor who prepared the binding site plan in accordance with Chapter 332-130 WAC and Chapter 58.09 RCW;

3. Reference to the recording number of the completed survey if the boundaries have been previously surveyed;

4. Reference to all agreements or covenants required as a condition of approval;

5. Notarized signatures of all parties having an ownership interest in the land being divided;

6. The binding site plan limitations and conditions, including irrevocable dedications of property, and a provision stating that any development of the site shall be in conformity with the approved binding site plan;

7. Approval of the development engineer;

8. Approval of the city manager;

9. Recording certificate required for signature of the city manager;

10. City file number; and

11. Approval of the King County assessor.

D. Lots, parcels or tracts created through the binding site plan procedure shall be legal lots of record. All provisions, conditions and requirements of the binding site plan shall be legally enforceable on the purchaser or any other person acquiring a lease or other ownership interest of any lot, parcel, or tract created pursuant to the binding site plan.

E. No person shall sell, transfer or lease any lot, tract or parcel created pursuant to the binding site plan that does not conform to the requirements of the binding site plan or without binding site plan approval. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 17.40 BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENTS

Sections:

17.40.010    Purpose.

17.40.020    Procedures and limitations of the boundary line adjustment process.

17.40.030    Final approval and recording required.

17.40.040    Conceptual review.


17.40.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide procedures and criteria for the review and approval of minor adjustments to boundary lines of legal lots or building sites in order to rectify defects in legal descriptions, to allow the enlargement or merging of lots to improve or qualify as a building site, to achieve increased setbacks from property lines or critical areas, to correct situations wherein an established use is located across a lot line, or for other similar purposes. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.40.020 Procedures and limitations of the boundary line adjustment process.

Adjustment of boundary lines between adjacent lots shall be consistent with the following review procedures and limitations:

A. Applications for boundary line adjustments shall be reviewed as a Type 1 permit as provided in Chapter 19.25 KMC. The review shall include examination for consistency with KMC Title 18, Zoning; KMC Title 16, Environment; applicable Seattle/King County public health regulations and, for developed lots, Uniform Fire and Building Codes;

B. Any adjustment of boundary lines must be approved by the department prior to the transfer of property ownership between adjacent legal lots;

C. A boundary line adjustment proposal shall not:

1. Result in the creation of an additional lot;

2. Result in a lot that does not qualify as a building site pursuant to this title;

3. Relocate an entire lot from one parent parcel into another parent parcel;

4. Reduce the overall area in a plat or short plat devoted to open space;

5. Be inconsistent with any restrictions or conditions of approval for a recorded plat or short plat; or

6. Involve lots which do not have a common boundary;

D. The elimination of lines between two or more lots for the purpose of creating a single lot that meets requirements as a building site in all cases shall be considered a minor adjustment of boundary lines and shall not be subject to the subdivision and short subdivision provisions of this title;

E. Recognized lots in an approved site plan for a conditional use permit, special use permit, or site plan review shall be considered a single site and no lot lines on the site may be altered by a boundary line adjustment to transfer density or separate lots to another property not included in the original site plan of the subject development;

F. Lots that have been subject to a boundary line adjustment process that resulted in the qualification of an additional building site shall not be permitted to utilize the boundary line adjustment process again for five years to create an additional building site. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.40.030 Final approval and recording required.

A. A title insurance certificate updated not more than 30 days prior to recording of the adjustment, which includes all parcels within the adjustment, must be submitted to the department with boundary line adjustment final review documents. All persons having an ownership interest within the boundary line adjustment shall sign the final recording document in the presence of a notary public.

B. Prior to final approval, documentation authorizing the transfer of property ownership shall be placed on the original boundary line map along with the legal descriptions of those portions of land being transferred when lots are under separate ownership. Lot lines within lots under the same ownership will be adjusted upon the recording of the boundary line adjustment.

C. A final record-of-survey document must be prepared by a land surveyor in accordance with Chapter 332-130 WAC and Chapter 58.09 RCW. The document must contain a land surveyor’s certificate and a recording certificate.

D. The final map page shall contain the following approval blocks:

1. The King County assessor and deputy assessor; and

2. The City, to be signed by the city manager. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


17.40.040 Conceptual review.

Prior to proceeding through the boundary line adjustment process, an applicant may request an optional preapplication meeting. At that time the department will perform a conceptual review based upon the information brought in by the applicant. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Title 18 ZONING

Chapters:

18.05    Adoption

18.10    Authority, Purpose, Interpretation and Administration

18.15    Zones, Maps and Designations

18.20    Technical Terms and Land Use Definitions

18.21    Residential Zones

18.22    Neighborhood Business Zone

18.23    Community Business Zone

18.24    Downtown Residential Zone

18.25    Downtown Commercial Zone

18.25A    Urban Corridor Zone

18.25B    Waterfront Commercial Zone

18.26    Regional Business Zone

18.27    Public and Semi-Public Zone

18.28    Parks Zone

18.28A    Golf Course Zone

18.29    Transit Oriented Development (TOD) District Overlay

18.30    Development Standards – General

18.35    Development Standards – Landscaping

18.40    Development Standards – Parking and Circulation

18.42    Development Standards – Signs

18.45    Development Standards – Adequacy of Public Facilities and Services

18.47    Property-Specific Development Standards/Special District Overlays

18.50    Development Standards – Design Requirements for Specific Uses

18.52    Downtown Design Standards

18.55    Critical Areas

18.57    Tree Management and Protection

18.60    Wireless Communication Facilities

18.70    Animals

18.73    Accessory Dwelling Units, Home Occupation, Home Industry

18.77    Affordable Housing

18.80    Residential Density Incentives and Transfer of Density

18.100    General Provisions – Nonconformance, Existing Legal Uses, and Temporary Uses

18.105    Site Plan Review

18.110    Development Agreements

18.115    Variance, Conditional Use, Special Use, and Zone Reclassification Permits and Modifications

18.120    Master Plans

18.125    Enforcement


Chapter 18.05 ADOPTION

Sections:

18.05.010    Zoning code adopted.

18.05.040    Drawings.


18.05.010 Zoning code adopted.

Under the provisions of Article XI, Section 11 of the Washington State Constitution, this zoning code is adopted and declared to be the zoning code for the City until amended, repealed or superseded. This code also is hereby enacted to be consistent with and implement the comprehensive plan in accordance with Chapter 36.70A RCW. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.05.040 Drawings.

The department is hereby authorized after the date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter to incorporate drawings as necessary for the purpose of illustrating concepts and regulatory standards contained in this title; provided, that the adopted provisions of the code shall control over such drawings. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 18.10 AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, INTERPRETATION AND ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

18.10.010    Title.

18.10.030    Purpose.

18.10.040    Conformity with this title required.

18.10.050    Minimum requirements.

18.10.055    City manager authority.

18.10.060    Interpretation – General.

18.10.070    Written interpretation of this code.

18.10.073    Interpretation of land uses.

18.10.075    Interpretation of unclassified uses.

18.10.078    Interpretation of land use groupings.

18.10.080    Interpretation – Zoning maps.

18.10.085    Classification of right-of-way.


18.10.010 Title.

This title shall be known as the zoning code, hereinafter referred to as “this title.” [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.10.030 Purpose.

The general purposes of this title are:

A. To encourage land use decisionmaking in accordance with the public interest and applicable laws of the State of Washington;

B. To protect the general public health, safety, and welfare;

C. To implement the comprehensive plan’s policies and objectives through land use regulations;

D. To provide for the economic, social, and aesthetic advantages of orderly development through harmonious groupings of compatible and complementary land uses and the application of appropriate development standards;

E. To provide for adequate public facilities and services in conjunction with development;

F. To promote general public safety by regulating development of lands containing physical hazards and to minimize the adverse environmental impacts of development; and

G. To minimize uses of land that impose negative externalities on persons or properties outside of the property on which the negative externalities are generated. [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.10.040 Conformity with this title required.

A. No use or structure shall be established, substituted, expanded, constructed, altered, moved, maintained, or otherwise changed except in conformance with this title.

B. Creation of or changes to lot lines shall conform with the use provisions, dimensional and other standards, and procedures of this title and KMC Title 17, Land Division.

C. All land uses and development authorized by this title shall comply with all other regulations and/or requirements of this title as well as any other applicable local, State or federal law. Where a difference exists between this title and other City regulations, the more restrictive requirements shall apply, except for special event permits approved and permitted in accordance with Chapter 8.40 KMC.

D. Where more than one part of this title applies to the same aspect of a proposed use or development, the more restrictive requirement shall apply. [Ord. 12-0335 § 6; Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.10.050 Minimum requirements.

In interpretation and application, the requirements set forth in this title shall be considered the minimum requirements necessary to accomplish the purposes of this title. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.10.055 City manager authority.

The city manager shall have the authority and discretion to administer the provisions of this title, to make determinations with regard to the applicability of the regulations, to interpret unclear provisions, to require additional information to determine the level of detail and appropriate methodologies for required analysis, to prepare application and informational materials as required, to promulgate procedures and rules for unique circumstances not anticipated within the standards and procedures contained within this title, and to enforce requirements. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.10.060 Interpretation – General.

A. In case of inconsistency or conflict, regulations, conditions or procedural requirements that are specific to an individual land use shall supersede regulations, conditions or procedural requirements of general application.

B. A land use includes the necessary structures to support the use unless specifically prohibited or the context clearly indicates otherwise.

C. In case of any ambiguity, difference of meaning, or implication between the text and any heading, caption, or illustration, the text and the permitted use information in Chapters 18.21 through 18.28A KMC shall control. All applicable requirements shall govern a use whether or not they are cross-referenced in a text section.

D. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, words in the present tense shall include past and future tense, and words in the singular shall include the plural, or vice versa. Except for words and terms defined in this code, all words and terms used in this code shall have their customary meanings. 

E. Except for other agencies with authority to implement specific provisions of this code, the department may issue interpretations of this code. 

F. An interpretation of this code will be enforced as if it is part of this code. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.10.070 Written interpretation of this code.

A. The city manager may, acting on his/her own initiative or in response to an inquiry, issue written interpretations of any of the provisions of this code. The city manager shall base his/her interpretations on:

1. The defined or common meaning of the words of the provision; and

2. The general purpose of the provision as expressed in the provision; and

3. The logical or likely meaning of the provision viewed in relation to the comprehensive plan.

B. Written interpretations shall include references to affected code sections.

C. All written interpretations of this code, filed sequentially, shall be available for public inspection and copying in the department during regular business hours.

D. A written interpretation of this code may be appealed to the hearing examiner, as provided for in Chapter 19.30 KMC. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.10.073 Interpretation of land uses.

Definitions of land uses are provided in Chapter 18.20 KMC. However, to help with administrative interpretations of land uses, the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) land use codes and exceptions to them have been included with the definitions to provide general guidance. Strict compliance with NAICS is not mandatory. All references to NAICS are to the titles and descriptions found in the 2012 U.S. NAICS Manual prepared by the United States Office of Management and Budget, as amended. NAICS categorizes each land use under a two- through six-digit hierarchical classification system. Each digit in the code is part of a series of progressively narrower categories, and more digits in the code signify greater classification detail. [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.10.075 Interpretation of unclassified uses.

Upon inquiry by an applicant, an administrative interpretation shall be made by the city manager to determine if a proposed use not specifically classified is allowed utilizing the criteria below. Should interpretation be made that a proposed, unclassified use not be allowed in a specific zoning district, the city manager shall indicate with which zone, if any, the use is consistent. If the city manager’s interpretation indicates that an unclassified use is not consistent with the permitted, conditional or accessory uses in any district, or if the applicant does not concur with the permit type applied to a use, a Type 2 appeal may be made pursuant to Chapter 19.30 KMC. 

A. Criteria for Unclassified Uses. To determine whether an unclassified use is permitted, conditionally permitted or accessory, the city manager shall determine the use is:

1. In keeping with the purpose and intent of the zone, and consistent with the Kenmore comprehensive plan policies;

2. Similar in nature to, and no more intense than, a specifically listed permitted, conditional or accessory use; 

3. Similar to the physical characteristics, supporting structures, scale, traffic, hours of operation, and other features of specifically listed permitted, conditional or accessory uses; and

4. If determined to be permissible as an accessory use, the accessory use shall be incidental, necessary and commonly found with the permitted or conditionally permitted use and consistent with the definition of accessory uses or structures in Chapter 18.20 KMC. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.10.078 Interpretation of land use groupings.

Several land use groupings have been devised for purposes of Chapters 18.35 and 18.40 KMC: KMC 18.20.1203, General services land uses; 18.20.1233, Government/business services land uses; 18.20.1678, Manufacturing land uses; 18.20.2232, Recreational/cultural land uses; 18.20.2275, Regional land uses; 18.20.2325, Residential land uses; 18.20.2327, Resource land uses; and 18.20.2362, Retail land uses. Within these groupings, both the general classified land use terms and more specific terms for uses that fall under the general classified land use terms may appear. For example, the general classified land use term recreational facility, outdoor is included in the recreational/cultural land uses land use grouping, but stable, which is a more specific type of outdoor recreational facility, is included in the general services land uses land use grouping. In cases where both the general classified land use term and a more specific term are used in the land use groupings, the general classified land use term should be assumed to not include the more specific term. [Ord. 17-0438 § 3 (Att. B).]


18.10.080 Interpretation – Zoning maps.

Where uncertainties exist as to the location of any zone boundaries, the following rules of interpretation, listed in priority order, shall apply:

A. Where boundaries are indicated as paralleling the approximate centerline of the street right-of-way, the zone shall extend to each adjacent boundary of the right-of-way. Non-street-related uses by adjacent property owners, if allowed in the right-of-way, shall meet the same zoning requirements regulating the property owners’ lot;

B. Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, the actual lot lines shall be considered the boundaries;

C. Where boundaries are indicated as following lines of ordinary high water, or government meander line, the lines shall be considered to be the actual boundaries. If these lines should change, the boundaries shall be considered to move with them; and

D. If none of the rules of interpretation described in subsections A through C of this section apply, then the zoning boundary shall be determined by map scaling. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.10.085 Classification of right-of-way.

A. Except when such areas are specifically designated on the zoning map as being classified in one of the zones provided in this title, land contained in rights-of-way for streets or alleys shall be considered unclassified.

B. Within street or alley rights-of-way, uses shall be limited to street purposes as defined by law.

C. Where such right-of-way is vacated, the vacated area shall have the zone classification of the adjoining property with which it is first merged. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 18.15 ZONES, MAPS AND DESIGNATIONS

Sections:

18.15.010    Zones and map designations established.

18.15.020    Zone and map designation purpose.

18.15.040    Residential zones.

18.15.045    Neighborhood business zone.

18.15.050    Community business zone.

18.15.055    Downtown residential zone.

18.15.065    Downtown commercial zone.

18.15.067    Urban corridor zone.

18.15.069    Waterfront commercial zone.

18.15.070    Regional business zone.

18.15.080    Public and semi-public zone.

18.15.090    Parks zone.

18.15.100    Golf course zone.

18.15.110    Map designation – Property-specific development or P-suffix standards.

18.15.120    Map designation – Special district overlay.

18.15.150    Zoning maps and boundaries.


18.15.010 Zones and map designations established.

In order to accomplish the purposes of this title, the following zoning designations and zoning map symbols are established:

	ZONING DESIGNATIONS	MAP SYMBOL

	Residential	R (base density in dwellings per acre)

	Manufactured Housing Community	MHC

	Neighborhood Business	NB

	Community Business	CB

	Downtown Residential	DR

	Downtown Commercial	DC

	Urban Corridor	UC

	Waterfront Commercial	WC

	Regional Business	RB

	Public and Semi-Public	PSP

	Parks	P

	Golf Course	GC

	Property-Specific Development Standards	P-suffix

	Special District Overlay	SO

[Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.15.020 Zone and map designation purpose.

The purpose statements for each zone and map designation set forth in the following sections shall be used to guide the application of the zones and designations to all lands in Kenmore. The purpose statements also shall guide interpretation and application of land use regulations within the zones and designations, and any changes to the range of permitted uses within each zone through amendments to this title. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.15.040 Residential zones.

A. The purpose of the residential zones (R and MHC) is to implement comprehensive plan goals and policies for housing quality, diversity and affordability, and to efficiently use residential land, public services and energy. These purposes are accomplished by: 

1. Providing, in the R-1 through R-6 zones, for a mix of predominantly single detached dwelling units, with a variety of densities and sizes in locations appropriate for residential use; 

2. Providing, in the R-12 through R-48 zones, for a mix of predominantly apartment and townhouse dwelling units, with a variety of densities and sizes in locations appropriate for residential use;

3. Providing, in the MHC zone, for continuation of existing manufactured housing communities;

4. Allowing only those accessory and complementary nonresidential uses that are compatible with residential communities; and 

5. Establishing density designations to facilitate advanced area-wide planning for public facilities and services, and to protect environmentally critical sites from overdevelopment. 

B. Use of this zone is appropriate as follows: 

1. The R-1 zone on or adjacent to lands with area-wide environmental constraints where development is required to cluster away from critical areas; 

2. The R-4 through R-6 zones on lands that are predominantly environmentally unconstrained and are served at the time of development by adequate public sewers, water supply, streets and other needed public facilities and services; 

3. The R-12 through R-48 zones next to commercial centers, in areas that are served at the time of development by adequate public sewers, water supply, streets and other needed public facilities and services; and

4. The MHC zone on existing manufactured housing communities planned for either short-term or long-term preservation. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.15.045 Neighborhood business zone.

A. The purpose of the neighborhood business zone (NB) is to provide convenient daily retail and personal services for a limited service area, to minimize impacts of commercial activities on nearby properties, and to provide for limited residential development. These purposes are accomplished by:

1. Limiting nonresidential uses to those uses which can serve the everyday needs of a surrounding urban residential area;

2. Allowing for automotive service uses, subject to approval of a conditional use permit;

3. Allowing for mixed use (housing and retail/service) developments and for townhouse developments as a sole use on properties; and

4. Excluding industrial and regional business-scaled uses.

B. Use of this zone is appropriate in neighborhood business centers on sites which are served at the time of development by adequate public sewers, water supply, streets and other needed public facilities and services. [Ord. 18-0454 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.15.050 Community business zone.

A. The purpose of the community business zone (CB) is to provide retail and personal services for local service areas which exceed the daily convenience needs of adjacent neighborhoods but which cannot be served conveniently by larger activity centers. These locations are not appropriate for extensive outdoor storage or industrial uses. Automotive service businesses may be appropriate in the Juanita subarea of this zone subject to approval of a conditional use permit. In the west subarea, auto-related uses are not appropriate and are prohibited. These purposes of the zone are accomplished by:

1. Providing for offices as well as a wide range of small-scale retail, educational, and personal service uses;

2. Allowing residential use, with a focus on mixed use (housing and retail/service/office) developments; and

3. Excluding commercial uses with extensive outdoor storage, as well as automotive sales and industrial uses.

B. Use of this zone is appropriate in areas that are designated by the comprehensive plan and that are served at the time of development by adequate public sewers, water supply, streets and other needed public facilities and services. [Ord. 18-0454 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.15.055 Downtown residential zone.

The downtown residential zone provides higher density residential development in support of the downtown commercial zone. Limited retail and office uses are also allowed as part of mixed use developments. The zone represents an opportunity to provide a range of housing types in the community with attention to appearance and scale. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.15.065 Downtown commercial zone.

A. The downtown commercial zone features a mix of private and public uses designed to create a small-town feel and pedestrian-friendly environment. Public places, sidewalks, extensive landscaping, transit orientation, shared or structured parking, protection of critical areas, and high quality design and signage are key features. Permitted uses emphasize mixed or multiple use developments, and include high-density housing, civic and governmental offices, small-scale commercial and retail, and locally oriented professional and personal services. 

B. Uses not compatible with the downtown commercial zone intent such as those which require vehicle or materials storage, service bays, wide curb cuts, expanses of exterior product display or storage, or produce little customer or visitor activity are not permitted. Park-and-ride/transit centers are promoted along SR-522, particularly in the northwest quadrant of the 68th Avenue NE/SR-522 intersection. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.15.067 Urban corridor zone.

The purpose of the urban corridor zone (UC) is to convert SR-522 from a commercial strip, focused on the automobile, to a more pedestrian- and transit-friendly urban corridor. West of downtown, the north side of the highway would continue to be a mix of restaurant, retail and service uses, with additional opportunities for office and mixed use multifamily development. The south side of the highway in this area would convert to office and multifamily development, taking advantage of lake views and proximity to transit.

East of downtown, an “enterprise zone” west of 80th Avenue NE would allow for a wide range of commercial uses, including bulk retail, as well as standalone multifamily development. Farther to the east, near the city limits, office and multifamily uses are envisioned.

New auto-oriented uses are not compatible with the intent of the urban corridor zone. [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.15.069 Waterfront commercial zone.

 The purpose of the waterfront commercial zone (WC) is to support water-dependent uses while allowing eating and drinking places, temporary lodging and other uses complementary to marina and air harbor development. Compatible light manufacturing is appropriate. Office and mixed use multifamily development are desirable for the future. [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.15.070 Regional business zone.

The purpose of the regional business zone (RB) is to provide for the broadest mix of retail sales, office, wholesale, and service uses, with compatible storage and light manufacturing uses, serving regional market areas and offering significant employment opportunities. These purposes are accomplished by supporting existing businesses and encouraging compact and mixed use development that is supportive of transit and pedestrian travel for the future. [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.15.080 Public and semi-public zone.

The public and semi-public zone (PSP) is applied to properties currently owned or operated by a public entity or private institution. The purpose of the public and semi-public zone is to recognize that public and semi-public facilities and institutions provide necessary services to the community and have their own unique set of circumstances. The public and semi-public zone is applied to lands designated as public and private facilities on the comprehensive plan land use map. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.15.090 Parks zone.

The parks zone (P) provides for parks, recreational, open space, and resource uses within publicly owned lands, and establishes standards that allow for such uses to continue or be established while ensuring compatibility with surrounding uses. The parks zone is applied to lands used for public parks, recreation, and open space purposes and designated as public and private facilities on the comprehensive plan land use map. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.15.100 Golf course zone.

The golf course zone (GC) provides for golf course activities and the protection and preservation of open space qualities of lands that are developed for golf course uses. The golf course zone is applied to lands used for golf course related purposes and designated as public and private facilities on the comprehensive plan land use map. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.15.110 Map designation – Property-specific development or P-suffix standards.

The purpose of the property-specific development standards or P-suffix designation is to indicate that conditions beyond the minimum requirements of this title have been applied to development on the property, including but not limited to increased development standards, limits on permitted uses or special conditions of approval. Property-specific development standards are maintained by the department and are available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.15.120 Map designation – Special district overlay.

The purpose of the special district overlay or SO designation is to carry out comprehensive plan and subarea or neighborhood plan policies that identify special opportunities for achieving public benefits by allowing or requiring alternative uses and development standards that differ from the general provisions of this title. Special district overlays are generally applied to a group of individual properties or entire subarea or neighborhood planning areas. Special district overlay development standards are maintained by the department and are available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.15.150 Zoning maps and boundaries.

A. The location and boundaries of the zones defined by this chapter shall be shown and delineated on zoning maps adopted by ordinance.

B. Changes in the boundaries of the zones shall be made by ordinance adopting or amending a zoning map.

C. The zoning map labeled “Official Zoning Map of the City of Kenmore,” dated March 2019, and as subsequently amended, is hereby adopted as the official zoning map and shall be kept on file by the City and will be on display for public review at Kenmore City Hall. [Ord. 18-0454 § 3; Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 18.20 TECHNICAL TERMS AND LAND USE DEFINITIONS

Sections:

18.20.010    Scope of chapter.

18.20.020    Abandoned vehicle.

18.20.030    Accessory living quarters.

18.20.035    Accessory use.

18.20.040    Repealed.

18.20.045    Repealed.

18.20.050    Repealed.

18.20.060    Repealed.

18.20.090    Adult entertainment business.

18.20.095    Adult family home.

18.20.098    Affordable housing unit.

18.20.100    Repealed.

18.20.105    Air transportation service.

18.20.120    Repealed.

18.20.130    Repealed.

18.20.140    Alley.

18.20.145    Alteration.

18.20.147    Alternative transmission support structure.

18.20.149    Amateur (ham) radio facility.

18.20.150    Ambulatory surgery center.

18.20.155    Repealed.

18.20.160    Repealed.

18.20.165    Anadromous fish.

18.20.168    Animal kennel/shelter.

18.20.170    Animal, small.

18.20.180    Antenna.

18.20.190    Applicant.

18.20.195    Arbor.

18.20.200    Arcade.

18.20.205    Architectural elements.

18.20.206.1    Area of special flood hazard.

18.20.207    Articulation.

18.20.210    Repealed.

18.20.212    Repealed.

18.20.214    Arts, entertainment, indoor.

18.20.215    Arts, entertainment, outdoor.

18.20.216    Assisted living.

18.20.220    Auction house.

18.20.224    Automotive sales and service, marine.

18.20.227    Automotive sales and service, nonmarine.

18.20.228    Bankfull width.

18.20.230    Base flood.

18.20.240    Base flood elevation.

18.20.243    Base station.

18.20.245    Basement.

18.20.250    Repealed.

18.20.260    Beehive.

18.20.270    Berm.

18.20.272    Best available science.

18.20.274    Best management practices (BMPs).

18.20.280    Billboard.

18.20.290    Billboard face.

18.20.300    Biologist.

18.20.302    Blank walls.

18.20.305    Repealed.

18.20.308    Bonus unit.

18.20.310    Repealed.

18.20.320    Broadleaf tree.

18.20.330    Buffer.

18.20.340    Building.

18.20.350    Building envelope.

18.20.360    Building facade.

18.20.370    Repealed.

18.20.380    Bulk gas storage tank.

18.20.390    Business service, intensive.

18.20.394    Business service, standard.

18.20.395    Caliper.

18.20.400    Repealed.

18.20.410    Capacity, school.

18.20.420    Capital facilities plan, school district.

18.20.422    Repealed.

18.20.425    Categorically excluded.

18.20.430    Cattery.

18.20.440    Cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum.

18.20.450    Channel relocation and stream meander areas.

18.20.453    Channel width and gradient.

18.20.460    Repealed.

18.20.465    City.

18.20.468    City manager.

18.20.470    Classrooms, school.

18.20.480    Clearing.

18.20.485    Clustered.

18.20.490    Cogeneration.

18.20.492    College/university.

18.20.494    Collocation.

18.20.495    Commercial nursery or tree farm.

18.20.498    Repealed.

18.20.500    Repealed.

18.20.510    Repealed.

18.20.520    Community residential facility (CRF).

18.20.530    Commuter parking lot.

18.20.540    Compensatory storage.

18.20.550    Conditional use permit.

18.20.560    Conference center.

18.20.570    Confinement area.

18.20.580    Repealed.

18.20.590    Construction and trade.

18.20.610    Courtyard.

18.20.612    Critical areas.

18.20.614    Critical area tract.

18.20.630    Critical facility.

18.20.632    Critical root zone (CRZ).

18.20.633    Crown.

18.20.635    Repealed.

18.20.640    Daily care.

18.20.650    Day care.

18.20.655    Debris flow.

18.20.660    Deciduous.

18.20.665    Degraded wetland buffer.

18.20.670    Density credit, transfer of (TDC).

18.20.680    Department.

18.20.690    Repealed.

18.20.695    Designated manufactured home.

18.20.700    Repealed.

18.20.710    Developer.

18.20.715    Development.

18.20.730    Development agreement.

18.20.735    Development permit.

18.20.740    Development proposal.

18.20.750    Development proposal site.

18.20.752    Diameter at breast height (d.b.h.).

18.20.755    Differential settlement.

18.20.760    Distributed antenna system (DAS).

18.20.772    Repealed.

18.20.775    Domiciliary care.

18.20.780    Repealed.

18.20.785    Drive-through service.

18.20.790    Repealed.

18.20.800    Repealed.

18.20.805    Durable materials.

18.20.810    Dwelling unit.

18.20.820    Dwelling unit, accessory.

18.20.830    Dwelling unit, microhousing.

18.20.835    Dwelling, multiple-family.

18.20.840    Dwelling unit, single detached.

18.20.860    Repealed.

18.20.863    Eating and drinking place.

18.20.865    Repealed.

18.20.867    Educational service.

18.20.870    Effective radiated power.

18.20.880    Electrical substation.

18.20.885    Emergent wetland.

18.20.890    Emergency.

18.20.900    Repealed.

18.20.910    Enhancement.

18.20.920    Equipment, heavy.

18.20.930    Erosion.

18.20.940    Erosion hazard areas.

18.20.950    Evergreen.

18.20.965    Existing legal uses.

18.20.967    FAA.

18.20.970    Repealed.

18.20.1000    Repealed.

18.20.1010    Family.

18.20.1012    Family child-care home.

18.20.1015    FCC.

18.20.1020    Repealed.

18.20.1040    Fence.

18.20.1050    Financial guarantee.

18.20.1051    Fire or police facility.

18.20.1052    First floor facades.

18.20.1055    Fish habitat.

18.20.1057    Flood or flooding.

18.20.1059    Flood elevation study.

18.20.1060    Repealed.

18.20.1070    Flood hazard areas.

18.20.1080    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM).

18.20.1090    Flood insurance study (FIS).

18.20.1100    Flood protection elevation.

18.20.1110    Floodplain.

18.20.1120    Floodproofing.

18.20.1125    Floodway.

18.20.1130    Repealed.

18.20.1135    Floor area ratio (FAR).

18.20.1140    Repealed.

18.20.1150    Forest practice.

18.20.1160    Repealed.

18.20.1170    Repealed.

18.20.1185    Functions and values.

18.20.1187    Funeral home/crematory.

18.20.1190    Repealed.

18.20.1200    Repealed.

18.20.1202    Repealed.

18.20.1203    General services land uses.

18.20.1205    Geologically hazardous areas.

18.20.1210    Geologist.

18.20.1230    Repealed.

18.20.1233    Government/business services land uses.

18.20.1235    Repealed.

18.20.1240    Grade span.

18.20.1250    Grading.

18.20.1260    Grazing area.

18.20.1270    Ground cover.

18.20.1272    Ground floor.

18.20.1273    Grove.

18.20.1275    Hazard areas.

18.20.1280    Hazardous household substance.

18.20.1290    Hazardous liquid and gas transmission pipelines.

18.20.1300    Hazardous substance.

18.20.1302    Health care and social assistance.

18.20.1305    Repealed.

18.20.1307    Hearing examiner.

18.20.1310    Heavy equipment and truck repair.

18.20.1320    Helistop.

18.20.1330    Historic resource.

18.20.1340    Historic structure.

18.20.1350    Repealed.

18.20.1360    Home industry.

18.20.1370    Home occupation.

18.20.1372    Hospital.

18.20.1375    Hotel.

18.20.1380    Household pets.

18.20.1381    Human-scaled elements.

18.20.1382    Hydraulic project approval (HPA).

18.20.1390    Hydroelectric generation facility.

18.20.1400    Impervious surface.

18.20.1420    Repealed.

18.20.1430    Infiltration rate.

18.20.1435    In-kind.

18.20.1440    Repealed.

18.20.1470    Repealed.

18.20.1480    Repealed.

18.20.1490    Repealed.

18.20.1500    Joint use driveway.

18.20.1510    Kennel.

18.20.1520    Kitchen or kitchen facility.

18.20.1525    Laboratory.

18.20.1530    Repealed.

18.20.1540    Landscape water features.

18.20.1550    Landscaping.

18.20.1560    Landslide.

18.20.1570    Landslide hazard areas.

18.20.1575    Lattice tower.

18.20.1580    Level of service (LOS).

18.20.1590    Light equipment.

18.20.1600    Livestock.

18.20.1610    Livestock, large.

18.20.1620    Livestock, small.

18.20.1630    Repealed.

18.20.1640    Loading space.

18.20.1650    Repealed.

18.20.1660    Lot.

18.20.1670    Lot line, interior.

18.20.1671    Low impact development (LID).

18.20.1673    Lowest floor.

18.20.1675    Manufactured home.

18.20.1675.1    Manufactured housing community.

18.20.1676    Manufacturing, heavy.

18.20.1677    Manufacturing, light.

18.20.1678    Manufacturing land uses.

18.20.1679.1    Marijuana.

18.20.1679.2    Marijuana business.

18.20.1679.2.5    Marijuana cooperative.

18.20.1679.3    Marijuana processor.

18.20.1679.4    Marijuana producer.

18.20.1679.4.5    Marijuana researcher.

18.20.1679.5    Marijuana retailer.

18.20.1680    Marina.

18.20.1683    Mass wasting.

18.20.1685    Master plan.

18.20.1690    Median income.

18.20.1695    Repealed.

18.20.1700    Repealed.

18.20.1705    Repealed.

18.20.1710    Mitigation.

18.20.1720    Mitigation bank.

18.20.1730    Mitigation banking.

18.20.1740    Mixed use development.

18.20.1745    Repealed.

18.20.1747    Mobile food service.

18.20.1750    Mobile home.

18.20.1760    Repealed.

18.20.1761    Mobility unit.

18.20.1762    Repealed.

18.20.1765    Modulation.

18.20.1770    Monitoring.

18.20.1775    Repealed.

18.20.1785    Motel.

18.20.1790    Repealed.

18.20.1800    Repealed.

18.20.1810    Mulch.

18.20.1820    Repealed.

18.20.1830    Native vegetation.

18.20.1835    Natural waters.

18.20.1840    Negative externality.

18.20.1850    Net buildable area.

18.20.1860    Nonconformance.

18.20.1870    Nonhydroelectric generation facility.

18.20.1875    Nonindigenous.

18.20.1880    Nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER).

18.20.1890    Noxious weed.

18.20.1900    Repealed.

18.20.1905    Office.

18.20.1910    Open space.

18.20.1920    Open-work fence.

18.20.1930    Ordinary high water mark.

18.20.1940    Repealed.

18.20.1945    Outdoor retail display/sidewalk sale.

18.20.1960    Park.

18.20.1995    Parking management plan.

18.20.2000    Parking space.

18.20.2030    Peak hour.

18.20.2035    Pedestrian walkway.

18.20.2040    Permanent school facilities.

18.20.2050    Repealed.

18.20.2055    Personal service.

18.20.2060    Repealed.

18.20.2070    Repealed.

18.20.2102    Practical alternative.

18.20.2104    Priority habitat.

18.20.2110    Private.

18.20.2120    Private stormwater management facility.

18.20.2130    Professional office.

18.20.2135    Repealed.

18.20.2140    Public agency.

18.20.2150    Repealed.

18.20.2160    Public agency archive.

18.20.2170    Public agency or utility office.

18.20.2180    Public agency or utility yard.

18.20.2190    Repealed.

18.20.2195    Public space/public open space.

18.20.2202    Public view.

18.20.2205    Qualified professional.

18.20.2207    Qualified tree protection professional.

18.20.2210    Radio frequency.

18.20.2220    Reasonable use.

18.20.2230    Receiving site.

18.20.2231    Reclassification.

18.20.2232    Recreational/cultural land uses.

18.20.2234    Recreational facility, indoor.

18.20.2237    Recreational facility, outdoor.

18.20.2240    Recreational vehicle (RV).

18.20.2250    Repealed.

18.20.2260    Recyclable material.

18.20.2265    Regional land use.

18.20.2275    Regional land uses.

18.20.2280    Repealed.

18.20.2290    Regional utility corridor.

18.20.2295    Religious institution.

18.20.2310    Relocatable facility.

18.20.2320    Relocation facilities.

18.20.2325    Residential land uses.

18.20.2326    Resource land use.

18.20.2327    Resource land uses.

18.20.2330    Restoration.

18.20.2350    Repealed.

18.20.2362    Retail land uses.

18.20.2364    Retail sales.

18.20.2365    Retail sales, bulk.

18.20.2367    Repealed.

18.20.2370    Retaining wall.

18.20.2375    Riparian.

18.20.2410    Salmonid.

18.20.2415    Satellite dish.

18.20.2420    School bus base.

18.20.2430    School district.

18.20.2440    Repealed.

18.20.2450    Repealed.

18.20.2460    Repealed.

18.20.2461    Seasonal low flow and seasonal low water.

18.20.2462    Section 404 permit.

18.20.2465    Secure community transition facilities (SCTF).

18.20.2468    Secure facility.

18.20.2470    Seismic hazard areas.

18.20.2480    Self-service storage.

18.20.2490    Sending site.

18.20.2500    Senior citizen.

18.20.2524    Repealed.

18.20.2527    Repealed.

18.20.2530    Setback.

18.20.2540    Shelters for temporary placement.

18.20.2550    Repealed.

18.20.2560    Sign.

18.20.2570    Sign, awning.

18.20.2580    Sign, changing message center.

18.20.2590    Sign, community bulletin board.

18.20.2600    Sign, directional.

18.20.2610    Sign, freestanding.

18.20.2620    Sign, fuel price.

18.20.2630    Sign, incidental.

18.20.2640    Sign, indirectly illuminated.

18.20.2650    Sign, monument.

18.20.2660    Sign, off-premises directional.

18.20.2670    Sign, on-premises.

18.20.2680    Sign, permanent residential development identification.

18.20.2690    Sign, portable.

18.20.2700    Sign, projecting.

18.20.2710    Sign, time and temperature.

18.20.2720    Sign, wall.

18.20.2730    Significant tree.

18.20.2740    Site.

18.20.2750    Site area.

18.20.2765    Small cell.

18.20.2782    Social card game.

18.20.2784    Social services.

18.20.2790    Repealed.

18.20.2810    Special use permit.

18.20.2820    Specialized instruction school.

18.20.2822    Species.

18.20.2824    Species, endangered.

18.20.2826    Species, threatened.

18.20.2840    Repealed.

18.20.2850    Sports club.

18.20.2860    Stable.

18.20.2865    Standalone parking.

18.20.2870    Standard of service, school districts.

18.20.2875    Start of construction.

18.20.2884    Repealed.

18.20.2887    Storage, outdoor.

18.20.2890    Stream functions.

18.20.2900    Stream.

18.20.2910    Street.

18.20.2920    Street frontage.

18.20.2925    Street tree.

18.20.2930    Structure.

18.20.2945    Subdrainage basin or sub-basin.

18.20.2955    Substantial damage.

18.20.2960    Substantial improvement.

18.20.2963    Supportive living facility.

18.20.2965    Repealed.

18.20.2968    Temporary lodging.

18.20.2970    Repealed.

18.20.2980    Repealed.

18.20.2990    Tower.

18.20.3000    Trails.

18.20.3010    Repealed.

18.20.3020    Transit bus base.

18.20.3023    Transit center.

18.20.3030    Transitional housing facilities.

18.20.3040    Repealed.

18.20.3060    Repealed.

18.20.3065    Recodified.

18.20.3067    Repealed.

18.20.3070    Repealed.

18.20.3075    Transportation.

18.20.3077    Transportation concurrency.

18.20.3082    Tree.

18.20.3084    Tree, hazard.

18.20.3088    Tree, remove or removal.

18.20.3090    Tree windthrow.

18.20.3095    Unavoidable impact.

18.20.3110    Use.

18.20.3111    Uses, classified.

18.20.3112    Uses, permitted.

18.20.3114    Uses, prohibited.

18.20.3117    Uses, unclassified.

18.20.3118    Utility.

18.20.3120    Utility facility.

18.20.3130    Vactor waste.

18.20.3140    Vactor waste receiving facility.

18.20.3150    Variance.

18.20.3155    Repealed.

18.20.3160    Vegetation.

18.20.3165    Vehicle or equipment rental.

18.20.3168    Vehicle refueling station.

18.20.3170    Vocational school.

18.20.3180    Warehousing.

18.20.3190    Repealed.

18.20.3200    Repealed.

18.20.3220    Water-dependent use.

18.20.3225    Water resource inventory area (WRIA).

18.20.3227    Weather protection.

18.20.3240    Wetland edge.

18.20.3250    Wetland, forested.

18.20.3260    Wetland functions.

18.20.3280    Wetlands.

18.20.3290    Wholesale trade.

18.20.3300    Repealed.

18.20.3305    Wind-firm.

18.20.3306    Wireless communication facility (WCF).

18.20.3307    Repealed.

18.20.3310    Repealed.

18.20.3320    Wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle.

18.20.3330    Repealed.

18.20.3340    Zero-lot-line development.


18.20.010 Scope of chapter.

This chapter contains definitions of technical and procedural terms used throughout this title. Defined terms are shown in italics in the text of the title. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.020 Abandoned vehicle.

“Abandoned vehicle” means any vehicle left upon the property of another without the consent of the owner of such property for a period of 24 hours or longer, except that a vehicle shall not be considered abandoned if its owner or operator is unable to remove it from the place where it is located and so notifies law enforcement officials and requests assistance. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.030 Accessory living quarters.

“Accessory living quarters” means living quarters in an accessory building for the use of the occupant or persons employed on the premises, or for temporary use of guests of the occupant. Such quarters have no kitchen and are not otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.035 Accessory use.

“Accessory use” means a use typically subordinate in size to the principal use; that would not contribute significantly to traffic generation, noise, or nuisance; and that supports the primary use operation without displacing it. An accessory use may appear as an otherwise permitted, conditional or prohibited use in the use allowances for a given zone. Accessory uses are typically located upon the same lot occupied by a principal use. Examples of accessory uses include: equipment rental (bikes or skis) at a retail bike and ski shop, a secure facility required at an airport, and boat parking at a marina. [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.040 Accessory use, commercial/industrial.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.045 Accessory use, parks.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.050 Accessory use, residential.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.060 Accessory use, resource.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.090 Adult entertainment business.

“Adult entertainment business” means a sexually oriented business engaging in adult entertainment, such as an adult cabaret, adult retail business or an adult panoram, as those terms are defined in KMC Title 5. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.095 Adult family home.

“Adult family home” means a residential home in which a person or persons provide personal care, special care, room, and board to more than one but not more than six adults who are not related by blood or marriage to the person or persons providing the services, or as otherwise defined in Chapter 70.128 RCW. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.098 Affordable housing unit.

“Affordable housing unit” means housing reserved for occupancy by eligible households and having monthly housing expenses less than or equal to 30 percent of the monthly household income described in the subsections below, adjusted for household size. (Housing expenses for ownership housing include mortgage and mortgage insurance, property taxes, property insurance, and homeowner’s dues. Housing expenses for rental housing include rent and appropriate utility allowance.)

A. For rental housing:

1. A “moderate-income affordable housing unit” is affordable at 70 percent of median income, adjusted for household size;

2. A “low-income affordable housing unit” is affordable at 50 percent of median income, adjusted for household size;

3. A “very low-income affordable housing unit” is affordable at 35 percent of median income, adjusted for household size.

B. For ownership housing:

1. A “moderate-income affordable housing unit” is affordable at 80 percent of median income, adjusted for household size;

2. A “low-income affordable housing unit” is affordable at 65 percent of median income, adjusted for household size;

3. A “very low-income affordable housing unit” is affordable at 50 percent of median income, adjusted for household size.

Pursuant to the authority of RCW 36.70A.540, the City finds that the higher income levels specified in the definition of “affordable housing” under this section, rather than those stated in the definition of “low-income households” in RCW 36.70A.540, are needed to address local housing market conditions in the City. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A).]


18.20.100 Agricultural product sales.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.105 Air transportation service.

“Air transportation service” means a helipad, private landing field, or other similar facility for personal or business-related air transportation. Air transportation service does not include an airport, which is classified as a regional land use.

May include NAICS 481 (Air Transportation) and 4881 (Support Activities for Transportation). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.120 Aircraft, ship and boat building.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.130 Airport/heliport.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.140 Alley.

“Alley” means an improved thoroughfare or right-of-way, whether public or private, usually narrower than a street, that provides vehicular access to an interior boundary of one or more lots, and is not designed for general traffic circulation. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.145 Alteration.

“Alteration” means any human-induced change in an existing condition of a critical area or its buffer. Alterations include, but are not limited to, grading, filling, channelizing, dredging, clearing (vegetation), construction, compaction, excavation or any other activity that changes the character of the critical area. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.147 Alternative transmission support structure.

“Alternative transmission support structure” means structures not specifically designed or intended to support antennas and related communication equipment, but that may be used for that purpose, including clock towers, bell towers, church steeples, water towers, light poles, utility structures, elevated roadways, bridges, flagpoles, and buildings. [Ord. 16-0426 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1). Formerly 18.20.3065.]


18.20.149 Amateur (ham) radio facility.

“Amateur (ham) radio facility” means a wireless communication facility operated for personal use and without pecuniary interest by an individual licensed by the FCC. Amateur (ham) radio facilities use small shared frequency bands assigned by the FCC. [Ord. 16-0426 § 4 (Att. B).]


18.20.150 Ambulatory surgery center.

“Ambulatory surgery center” means an establishment with medical staff primarily engaged in providing outpatient medical, diagnostic and surgical treatment services.

May include NAICS 621493 (Freestanding Ambulatory Surgical and Emergency Centers). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.155 Amusement and recreation services.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.160 Amusement arcade.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.165 Anadromous fish.

“Anadromous fish” means fish that spawn and rear in freshwater and mature in the marine environment. While Pacific salmon die after their first spawning, adult char (bull trout) can live for many years, moving in and out of saltwater and spawning each year. The life history of Pacific salmon and char contains critical periods of time when these fish are more susceptible to environmental and physical damage than at other times. The life history of salmon, for example, contains the following stages: upstream migration of adults, spawning, intergravel incubation, rearing, smoltification (the time period needed for juveniles to adjust their body functions to live in the marine environment), downstream migration, and ocean rearing to adults. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.168 Animal kennel/shelter.

“Animal kennel/shelter” means any outdoor or indoor facility which houses four or more animals (that number not including one unweaned litter) for periods longer than 24 hours as a commercial venture, as a nonprofit organization, or for a governmental purpose. The facility may either be a separate business or an accessory use. [Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.170 Animal, small.

“Small animal” means any animal other than livestock or animals considered to be predatory or wild which are kept outside a dwelling unit all or part of the time. Animals considered predatory or wild shall be considered small animals when they are taken into captivity for the purposes of breeding, domestication, training, or exhibition. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.180 Antenna.

“Antenna” means any system of poles, panels, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency signals. For purposes of Chapter 18.60 KMC, “antenna” does not include an amateur (ham) radio facility. [Ord. 16-0426 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.190 Applicant.

“Applicant” means a person who files an application for a permit under this chapter and who is either the owner of the land on which that proposed activity would be located, a contract purchaser, or the authorized agent of such a person. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.195 Arbor.

“Arbor” means a shelter of vines or branches or of latticework covered with climbing shrubs or vines. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.200 Arcade.

“Arcade” means a series of arches supported by columns, piers, or pillars, often attached to a wall to form a roofed passageway or gallery. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.205 Architectural elements.

“Architectural elements” means building elements which add detail and finely scaled features to a building facade, such as belt courses, braces, brackets, brick coursing, columns, corbelled brick, cornices, frame elements, window openings, piers, plinths, and sills. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.206.1 Area of special flood hazard.

“Area of special flood hazard” means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the FIRM. After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the flood insurance rate map, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, or V1-30, VE, or V. For purposes of these regulations, the term “special flood hazard area” is synonymous in meaning with the phrase “area of special flood hazard.” [Ord. 19-0488 § 4 (Exh. 2).]


18.20.207 Articulation.

“Articulation” means shifts in wall planes such as stepbacks, reveals, overhangs, and architectural elements and details which are used to create variations in a building facade. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.210 Artist studio.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.212 Arts and crafts schools/studios.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.214 Arts, entertainment, indoor.

“Indoor arts, entertainment” means an establishment that provides facilities or services for cultural and entertainment uses inside a building. Indoor arts, entertainment includes such uses as performing arts establishments, artist studios, theaters, museums, libraries, fraternal lodges, tour operators, and arcades, but specifically excludes adult entertainment facilities.

May include NAICS 512 (Motion Picture and Sound Recording Industries), 515 (Broadcasting), and 51912 (Libraries and Archives). May include 56152 (Tour Operators) and 56159 (Other Travel Arrangement and Reservation Services). May include Sector 71 (Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation), except the following: 711211 (Sports Teams and Clubs), 711212 (Racetracks), 713110 (Amusement and Theme Parks), 7132 (Gambling Industries), and 7139 (Other Amusement and Recreation Industries). May include 8134 (Civic and Social Organizations). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.215 Arts, entertainment, outdoor.

“Outdoor arts, entertainment” means an establishment that provides facilities or services for cultural and entertainment uses outside of a building. Outdoor arts, entertainment includes such uses as outdoor performance facilities, public gardens, and arboretums.

May include NAICS 512 (Motion Picture and Sound Recording Industries) and 515 (Broadcasting). May include 56152 (Tour Operators). May include Sector 71 (Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation), except the following: 711211 (Sports Teams and Clubs), 711212 (Racetracks), 713110 (Amusement and Theme Parks), 7132 (Gambling Industries), and 7139 (Other Amusement and Recreation Industries). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.216 Assisted living.

“Assisted living” means an establishment which provides living quarters and domiciliary care to individuals who are unable to live independently due to infirmity of age or physical or mental handicap, but who do not need the skilled nursing care of a convalescent or nursing home. These facilities may consist of individual dwelling units of a barrier-free design, with separate bathroom facilities, a full kitchen or no kitchen. The facility may provide a minimal amount of supportive health care monitoring, such as assistance with medication. In addition, these facilities may have a communal dining area, recreation facilities (library, lounge, game room), laundry facilities and open space. Assisted living does not include adult family homes as defined in Chapter 70.128 RCW. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.220 Auction house.

“Auction house” means an establishment where the property of others is sold by a broker or auctioneer to persons who attend scheduled sales periods or events. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.224 Automotive sales and service, marine.

“Automotive sales and service, marine” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of new or used boats, jet skis, boat trailers, or similar vehicles, or an establishment primarily engaged in repair or service of these vehicles, including washing and the sale and installation of lubricants, tires, batteries, mufflers, and similar accessories.

May include NAICS 4412 (Other Motor Vehicle Dealers), 44132 (Tire Dealers), and 8111 (Automotive Repair and Maintenance). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.227 Automotive sales and service, nonmarine.

“Automotive sales and service, nonmarine” means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of new or used cars, trucks, truck tractors, semi-trailers, buses, mobile homes, utility trailers, RVs, motorcycles, ATVs, or similar vehicles, or an establishment primarily engaged in automotive repair or service of these vehicles, including washing and the sale and installation of lubricants, tires, batteries, mufflers, and similar accessories. Automotive sales and service, nonmarine does not include tire retreading, which is classified as a manufacturing land use.

May include NAICS 4411 (Auto Dealers), 4412 (Other Motor Vehicle Dealers), 44132 (Tire Dealers), 45393 (Manufactured/Mobile Home Dealers), and 8111 (Automotive Repair and Maintenance). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.228 Bankfull width.

“Bankfull width” means:

A. For streams – The measurement of the lateral extent of the water surface elevation perpendicular to the channel at bankfull depth. In cases where multiple channels exist, bankfull width is the sum of the individual channel widths along the cross-section.

B. For lakes, ponds, and impoundments – Line of mean high water.

C. For periodically inundated areas of associated wetlands – Line of periodic inundation, which will be found by examining the edge of inundation to ascertain where the presence and action of waters are so common and usual, and so long continued in all ordinary years, as to mark upon the soil a character distinct from that of the abutting upland. [Ord. 19-0488 § 4 (Exh. 2).]


18.20.230 Base flood.

“Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, often referred to as the “100-year flood.” Designation on the FIRM always includes the letter “A” or “V.” [Ord. 19-0488 § 4 (Exh. 2); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.240 Base flood elevation.

“Base flood elevation” means the water surface elevation of the base flood. [Ord. 19-0488 § 4 (Exh. 2); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.243 Base station.

“Base station” means the structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications licensed or authorized by the FCC, between user equipment and a communications network. The term does not encompass a tower or any equipment associated with a tower. The term includes, but is not limited to:

A. Equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.

B. Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems and small-cell networks).

C. Any structure other than a tower that, at the time an eligible communications facility modification (ECFM) application is filed with the City, supports or houses equipment described in subsections A and B of this section, and that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another State, county or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing that support.

D. The term does not include any structure that, at the time a completed eligible communication facilities modification (ECFM) application is filed with the City, does not support or house equipment described in subsections A and B of this section. [Ord. 16-0426 § 4 (Att. B).]


18.20.245 Basement.

“Basement” means any area of the building having its floor below ground level on all sides. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.250 Bed and breakfast guesthouse.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.260 Beehive.

“Beehive” means a structure designed to contain one colony of honey bees (Apis mellifera). [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.270 Berm.

“Berm” means a constructed area of compacted earth. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.272 Best available science.

“Best available science” means current scientific information derived from a valid scientific process, including that used in the process to designate, protect, or restore critical areas as defined by WAC 365-195-900 through 365-195-925. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.274 Best management practices (BMPs).

“Best management practices (BMPs)” means conservation practices or systems of practices and management measures that:

A. Control soil loss and reduce water quality degradation caused by high concentrations of nutrients, animal waste, toxics, and sediment;

B. Minimize adverse impacts to surface water and groundwater flow, circulation patterns, and to the chemical, physical, and biological characteristics of wetlands;

C. Protect trees and vegetation designated to be retained during and following site construction; and

D. Provide standards for proper use of chemical herbicides within critical areas.

The City shall monitor the application of best management practices to ensure that the standards and policies of this title are adhered to. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.280 Billboard.

“Billboard” means a sign, including both the supporting structural framework and attached billboard faces, used principally for advertising a business activity, use, product, or service unrelated to the primary use or activity of the property on which the billboard is located; excluding off-premises directional or temporary real estate signs. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.290 Billboard face.

“Billboard face” means that portion of a billboard, exclusive of its structural support, on which changeable advertising copy is displayed, either by affixing preprinted poster panels or by painting copy on location; subclassified as follows:

A. “Billboard face I” means a billboard face not exceeding a height of 14 feet or a width of 48 feet, and may also include temporary and irregularly shaped extensions subject to the area and duration limitations in Chapter 18.42 KMC; and

B. “Billboard face II” means a billboard face not exceeding a height of 12 feet or a width of 24 feet. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.300 Biologist.

“Biologist” means a person who has earned at least a Bachelor of Science degree in the biological sciences from an accredited college or university or who has equivalent educational training and experience. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.302 Blank walls.

“Blank walls” means any ground floor wall over six feet in height and 15 feet or more in length and/or greater than 400 square feet in total area without architectural embellishments such as windows, doors, or other special wall treatment. Upper floors are not included in blank wall requirements. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.305 Boat launch.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.308 Bonus unit.

“Bonus unit” means a dwelling unit achieved that exceeds the number of units allowed by the base density of the underlying zoning district. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A).]


18.20.310 Book, stationery, video and art supply store.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.320 Broadleaf tree.

“Broadleaf tree” means a tree characterized by leaves that are broad in width and may include both deciduous and evergreen species. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.330 Buffer.

For purposes of critical areas regulations, “buffer” means an area contiguous to a critical area that is required for the continued maintenance, functioning, and/or structural stability of the critical area. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.340 Building.

“Building” means any structure having a roof. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.350 Building envelope.

“Building envelope” means the area of a lot that delineates the limits of where a building may be placed on the lot. The building envelope is determined through minimum lot size and minimum lot width requirements. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.360 Building facade.

“Building facade” means that portion of any exterior elevation of a building extending from the grade of the building to the top of the parapet wall or eaves, for the entire width of the building elevation. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.370 Building, hardware and garden materials store.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.380 Bulk gas storage tank.

“Bulk gas storage tank” means a tank from which illuminating, heating, or liquefied gas is distributed by piping directly to individual users. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.390 Business service, intensive.

“Intensive business service” means an establishment primarily engaged in providing supporting services to business that is likely to generate levels of truck traffic, noise, pollution, vibration, dust, fumes, odors, hazardous materials, or other undesirable conditions that would be injurious to health or offensive to the senses, or would be an obstruction to the free use of surrounding property and essentially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property. Examples include industrial launderers, dry cleaning plants, and fuel dealers.

May include NAICS 45431 (Fuel Dealers). May include Sector 56 (Administrative and Support and Waste Management and Remediation Services), except the following: 561210 (Facilities Support Services for private correctional facilities), 5615 (Travel Arrangement and Reservation Services), 56171 (Exterminating and Pest Control Services), 56173 (Landscaping Services), 56179 (Other Services to Buildings/Dwellings) and 562 (Waste Management and Remediation). May include 8113 (Commercial and Industrial Machinery and Equipment Repair and Maintenance) and 812332 (Industrial Launderers). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.394 Business service, standard.

“Standard business service” means an establishment primarily engaged in providing supporting services to business that is lower in intensity and cleaner than an intensive business service, and that does not generate noise, particulate matter, vibration, smoke, dust, fumes, odors, or other nuisances that would be injurious to health or offensive to the senses, or would be an obstruction to the free use of surrounding property and essentially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property. Examples include telephone call centers, private mail services, copy centers, business incubators, and data centers.

May include NAICS 491 (Postal Service), 492 (Couriers and Messengers), 518 (Data Processing, Hosting, and Related Services), 53242 (Office Machinery and Equipment Rental and Leasing), 54186 (Direct Mail Advertising), and 541922 (Commercial Photography).

May include Sector 56 (Administrative and Support and Waste Management and Remediation Services), except the following: 561210 (Facilities Support Services for private correctional facilities), 5615 (Travel Arrangement and Reservation Services), 56171 (Exterminating and Pest Control Services), 56173 (Landscaping Services), 56179 (Other Services to Buildings/Dwellings) and 562 (Waste Management and Remediation). May include 8112 (Electronic and Precision Equipment Repair and Maintenance). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.395 Caliper.

“Caliper” means the American Nursery and Landscape Association (ANLA) standards for trunk measurement of nursery stock. Caliper of the trunk shall be the trunk diameter measured six inches above ground for up to and including four-inch caliper size and 12 inches above the ground for larger sizes. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.400 Campground.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.410 Capacity, school.

“School capacity” means the number of students a school district’s facilities can accommodate district-wide, based on the district’s standard of service, as determined by the school district. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.420 Capital facilities plan, school district.

“School district capital facilities plan” means a district’s facilities plan adopted by the school board consisting of:

A. An inventory showing the location and school capacity of existing school facilities;

B. A forecast of future needs for school facilities based on the district’s enrollment projections and adopted standard of service;

C. The long-range construction and capital improvement projects of the district;

D. The proposed locations and school capacities of expanded or new school facilities;

E. At least a six-year financing plan component, updated as necessary to maintain at least a six-year forecast period, for financing needed school facilities within projected funding levels, and identifying sources of financing for such purposes, including bond issues authorized by the voters and projected bond issues not yet authorized by the voters; and

F. Any other long-range projects planned by the district. [Ord. 18-0463 § 3 (Exh. 2); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.422 Car wash.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.425 Categorically excluded.

For purposes of Chapter 18.60 KMC, “categorically excluded” means as defined in 1.1306 and 1.1307 in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.430 Cattery.

“Cattery” means a place where adult cats are temporarily boarded for compensation, whether or not for training. An adult cat is of either sex, altered or unaltered, that has reached the age of six months. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.440 Cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum.

“Cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum” means land or structures used for interment of the dead or their remains. For purposes of this code, pet cemeteries are considered a subclassification of this use.

May include NAICS 81222 (Cemeteries and Crematories). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.450 Channel relocation and stream meander areas.

“Channel relocation and stream meander areas” means those areas subject to risk due to stream bank destabilization, rapid stream incision, stream bank erosion, and shifts in the location of stream channels. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.453 Channel width and gradient.

“Channel width and gradient” means a measurement over a representative section of at least 500 linear feet with at least 10 evenly spaced measurement points along the normal stream channel but excluding unusually wide areas of negligible gradient, such as marshy or swampy areas, beaver ponds and impoundments. Channel gradient may be determined utilizing stream profiles plotted from United States Geological Survey topographic maps. [Ord. 19-0488 § 4 (Exh. 2).]


18.20.460 Church, synagogue, mosque, temple.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.465 City.

“City” means the City of Kenmore. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.468 City manager.

“City manager” means the City of Kenmore city manager or his or her designee(s). [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.470 Classrooms, school.

“School classrooms” means educational facilities required to house students for a basic educational program. Specialized facilities, including but not limited to gymnasiums, cafeterias, libraries, administrative offices, and child care centers, shall not be counted as classrooms. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.480 Clearing.

“Clearing” means the limbing, pruning, trimming, topping, cutting or removal of vegetation or other organic plant matter by physical, mechanical, chemical or other means. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.485 Clustered.

“Clustered” means the grouping of structures on a portion of the available land, reserving a significant amount of the site as open space. Lot segregations for clustered development are discussed in KMC 17.20.130. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.490 Cogeneration.

“Cogeneration” means the sequential generation of energy and useful heat from the same primary source or fuel for industrial, commercial, or residential heating or cooling purposes. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.492 College/university.

“College/university” means an establishment primarily engaged in providing academic courses and granting degrees above the high school diploma, such as the associate, baccalaureate or graduate degree. College/university generally means the college/university campus. Off-site auxiliary facilities associated with a college or university are addressed under the appropriate land use listing for their individual operation. For example, an off-site affiliated bookstore would be considered retail sales. An off-site medical clinic would be considered health care and social assistance.

May include NAICS 6112 (Junior Colleges) and 6113 (Colleges, Universities, and Professional Schools). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.494 Collocation.

“Collocation” means the placement or installation of antennas on existing structures upon which antennas already exist. [Ord. 16-0426 § 4 (Att. B).]


18.20.495 Commercial nursery or tree farm.

“Commercial nursery” or “tree farm” means a licensed plant or tree nursery or farm in relation to those trees planted and growing on the premises of the licensee, which are planted and grown for sale through retail or wholesale channels in the ordinary course of the licensee’s business. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.498 Communication facility.

Repealed by Ord. 16-0426. [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.500 Communication facility, major.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.510 Communication facility, minor.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.520 Community residential facility (CRF).

“Community residential facility (CRF)” means living quarters meeting applicable federal and State standards that function as a single housekeeping unit and provide supportive services, including but not limited to counseling, rehabilitation and medical supervision, excluding drug and alcohol detoxification which is classified as a hospital. CRFs are further classified as follows:

A. CRF-I means nine to 10 residents and staff;

B. CRF-II means 11 or more residents and staff. If staffed by nonresident staff, each 24 staff hours per day equals one full-time residing staff member for purposes of subclassifying CRFs.

Provided, however, that this definition shall not apply to secure community transition facilities as defined in KMC 18.20.2465 or to adult family homes as defined in KMC 18.20.095.

May include NAICS 623210 (Residential Intellectual and Developmental Disability Facilities) and 623220 (Residential Mental Health and Substance Abuse Facilities). [Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.530 Commuter parking lot.

“Commuter parking lot” means vehicle parking specifically for the purpose of access to a public transit system or for users of carpools or vanpools. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.540 Compensatory storage.

“Compensatory storage” means new, excavated storage volume equivalent to any flood storage which is eliminated by building, filling or grading within the floodplain. For the purpose of this definition, equivalent flood storage capacity is that which is replaced by equal volume between corresponding one-foot contour intervals which are hydraulically connected to the floodway through their entire depth. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.550 Conditional use permit.

“Conditional use permit” means a permit required for uses due to special characteristics that may not generally be appropriate within a zoning district, but may be permitted subject to review by the reviewing official to establish conditions to protect public health, safety and welfare and ensure compatibility with nearby land uses. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.560 Conference center.

“Conference center” means an establishment developed primarily as a meeting facility, including only facilities for recreation, overnight lodging, and related activities provided for conference participants. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.570 Confinement area.

“Confinement area” means any open land area in which livestock are kept where the forage does not meet the definition of a grazing area. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.580 Consolidation.

Repealed by Ord. 16-0426. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.590 Construction and trade.

“Construction and trade” means an establishment that provides services related to construction and maintenance of buildings and infrastructure and improvements to property. Such establishments include landscape and horticultural services. This definition excludes construction and trade establishments that qualify as an office by virtue of having only a business office without outside storage or fabrication.

May include NAICS Sector 23 (Construction), 54135 (Building Inspection Services), 56171 (Exterminating and Pest Control Services), 56173 (Landscaping Services), 56179 (Other Services to Buildings and Dwellings), and 56299 (All Other Waste Management Services). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.610 Courtyard.

“Courtyard” means a private open space internal to development which is not accessible to the public and which is enclosed on at least two sides by structure(s) or fencing. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.612 Critical areas.

“Critical areas” means any of the following areas or ecosystems: aquifer recharge areas, fish and wildlife habitat areas of importance, frequently flooded areas, geologically hazardous areas, streams, and wetlands, as defined in Chapter 36.70A RCW and this chapter. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.614 Critical area tract.

“Critical area tract” means land held in private ownership and retained in an undeveloped condition in perpetuity for the protection of critical areas. Lands within this type of dedication may include, but are not limited to, portions and combinations of forest habitats, grasslands, geologically hazardous areas, on-site watersheds, 100-year floodplains, shorelines or shorelines of statewide significance, riparian areas, and wetlands. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.630 Critical facility.

“Critical facility” means a facility necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare and which is defined under the occupancy categories of “essential facilities,” “hazardous facilities” and “special occupancy structures” in the International Building Code. Critical facilities also include nursing homes, public roadway bridges, and sites for hazardous substance storage or production, not including the temporary storage of consumer products containing hazardous substances intended for household use or for retail sale on the site. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.632 Critical root zone (CRZ).

“Critical root zone (CRZ)” is the area where the tree’s essential mass of roots is located. This root zone is generally the area surrounding a tree at a distance which is equal to one foot for every inch of trunk diameter at breast height or the area of a circle with radius extending from a tree’s trunk to a point no less than the end of a tree’s longest branch, whichever is greater. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.633 Crown.

“Crown” means the area of a tree containing leaf- or needle-bearing branches. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.635 Cultural facilities.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.640 Daily care.

“Daily care” means medical procedures, monitoring and attention that are necessarily provided at the residence of the patient by the primary provider of daily care on a 24-hour basis. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.650 Day care.

“Day care” means an establishment for group care of nonresident adults or children.

A. Day care shall include only child day care services, adult day care centers and the following:

1. Adult day care, such as adult day health centers or social day care as defined by the Washington State Department of Social and Health Services;

2. Nursery schools for children under minimum age for education in public schools;

3. Privately conducted kindergartens or prekindergartens when not a part of a public or parochial school; and

4. Programs covering after-school care for school children.

B. Day care establishments are subclassified as follows:

1. Day care I – A maximum of 12 adults or children in any 24-hour period; and

2. Day care II – Over 12 adults or children in any 24-hour period.

Day care does not include family child-care home.

May include NAICS 6244 (Child Day Care Services). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.655 Debris flow.

“Debris flow” means a stream-like flow of muddy water filled with mixed sizes of sediment and rock. Debris flows are generated by sporadic heavy rains on steep slopes. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.660 Deciduous.

“Deciduous” means a plant species with foliage that is shed annually. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.665 Degraded wetland buffer.

“Degraded wetland buffer” means a buffer area which cannot adequately protect its adjacent wetland due to one or more of the following existing conditions:

A. Lack of vegetative cover or presence of bare soils (resulting from disturbance, fill, debris, or trash);

B. Significant cover (over 50 percent) in nonnative vegetation;

C. Significant cover (over 50 percent) in invasive species or noxious weeds;

D. Presence of existing nonconforming structures or improvements. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.670 Density credit, transfer of (TDC).

“Transfer of density credit (TDC)” means the ability to transfer potentially buildable dwelling units from an eligible sending site to an eligible receiving site as provided in this code. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.680 Department.

“Department” means the City department or outside agency assigned by the city manager to administer a portion of the City code. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.690 Department and variety store.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.695 Designated manufactured home.

“Designated manufactured home” means a manufactured home constructed after June 15, 1976, in accordance with State and federal requirements for manufactured homes, which meets the following conditions, as allowed under RCW 35A.21.312 and 35.63.160:

A. Is comprised of at least two fully enclosed parallel sections each of not less than 12 feet wide by 36 feet long;

B. Was originally constructed with, and now has, a composition or wood shake or shingle, coated metal, or similar roof of nominal 3:12 pitch;

C. Has exterior siding similar in appearance to siding materials commonly used on conventional site-built International Residential Code single-family residences;

D. Is a “new manufactured home” as defined in RCW 35.63.160, meaning any manufactured home required to be titled under RCW Title 46, which has not been previously titled to a retail purchaser, and is not a “used mobile home” as defined in RCW 82.45.032(2);

E. Is set upon a permanent foundation, as specified by the manufacturer, and that the space from the bottom of the home to the ground be enclosed by concrete or an approved concrete product which can be either load-bearing or decorative;

F. Complies with all local design standards applicable to all other homes within the neighborhood in which the manufactured home is to be located;

G. Is thermally equivalent to the State Energy Code; and

H. This section does not override any legally recorded covenants or deed restrictions of record. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.700 Destination resort.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.710 Developer.

“Developer” means the person or entity that owns or holds purchase options or other development control over property for which development is proposed. (Also see “Applicant,” KMC 18.20.190.) [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.715 Development.

“Development” means any activity upon the land consisting of construction or alteration of structures, earth movement, dredging, dumping, grading, filling, mining, removal of any sand, gravel, or minerals, driving of piles, drilling operations, bulkheading, clearing of vegetation, or other land disturbance. Development includes the storage or use of equipment or materials inconsistent with the existing use. Development also includes approvals issued by the City that bind land to specific patterns of use, including, but not limited to, subdivisions, short subdivisions, zone changes, conditional use permits, and binding site plans. Development does not include the following activities:

A. Interior building improvements;

B. Exterior structure maintenance activities, including painting and roofing;

C. Routine landscape maintenance of established, ornamental landscaping, such as lawn mowing, pruning and weeding; or

D. Maintenance of the following existing facilities that does not expand the affected area: septic tanks (routine cleaning); wells; individual utility service connections; and individual cemetery plots in established and approved cemeteries. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.730 Development agreement.

“Development agreement” means a recorded agreement between an applicant and the City which incorporates the site plans, development standards, and other features of a development. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.735 Development permit.

“Development permit” means any permit issued by the City, or other authorized agency, for construction, land use, or the alteration of land. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.740 Development proposal.

“Development proposal” means any activities requiring a permit or other approval from the City relative to the use or development of land. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.750 Development proposal site.

“Development proposal site” means the legal boundaries of the parcel or parcels of land for which an applicant has or should have applied for authority from the City to carry out a development proposal. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.752 Diameter at breast height (d.b.h.).

“Diameter at breast height (d.b.h.)” means a tree’s diameter in inches at four and one-half feet above the ground. On multiple stemmed or trunked trees, the diameter shall be the sum of diameters of all individual stems or trunks. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.755 Differential settlement.

“Differential settlement” means nonuniform or uneven ground settlement that occurs over a relatively short distance, such as measured across the width of a residential structure (typically 25 feet). Differential settlement can result if a structure is underlain by dissimilar soils below portions of the structure (e.g., dense fill versus loose fill below parts of the structure), or by uneven ground settlement as could occur if the ground below a structure were to liquefy during strong earthquake shaking. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.760 Distributed antenna system (DAS).

“Distributed antenna system” or “DAS” means a network consisting of transceiver equipment at a central hub site to support multiple antenna locations throughout the desired coverage area. [Ord. 16-0426 § 4 (Att. B).]


18.20.772 Dock.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.775 Domiciliary care.

“Domiciliary care” means:

A. Assistance with activities of daily living provided by the licensee either directly or by contract;

B. Assuming general responsibility for the safety and well-being of the resident; and

C. Limited nursing services, if provided by the licensee. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.780 Dormitory.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.785 Drive-through service.

“Drive-through service” means a business or a portion of a business where a customer is permitted or encouraged, either by the design of physical facilities or by service and/or packaging procedures, to carry on business in the off-street parking or paved area accessory to the business, while seated in a motor vehicle. In some instances, customers may need to get out of the vehicle to obtain the product or service. This definition shall include, but not be limited to, fast-food restaurants, espresso stands, and drive-in services at banks and pharmacies. This definition excludes automotive service and repair, gas stations, and car washes. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.790 Drop box facility.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.800 Drug store.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.805 Durable materials.

“Durable materials” means materials capable of withstanding wear and tear with limited maintenance required, long-term use, vandal resistant, and weather resistant. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.810 Dwelling unit.

“Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms designed for occupancy by a person or family for living and sleeping purposes, containing kitchen facilities and rooms with internal accessibility, for use solely by the dwelling’s occupants. Microhousing dwelling units may share kitchen facilities with other dwelling units in place of providing kitchen facilities within each unit. [Ord. 16-0415 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.820 Dwelling unit, accessory.

“Accessory dwelling unit” means a separate, complete dwelling unit attached to or contained within the structure of the primary dwelling; or contained within a separate structure that is accessory to the primary dwelling unit on the premises. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.830 Dwelling unit, microhousing.

“Microhousing dwelling unit” means an apartment with a total square footage of less than 320 square feet and a habitable space, as defined in the International Building Code as adopted in the Kenmore Municipal Code, of at least 220 square feet. The room(s) are intended for use solely by the dwelling’s occupant(s), although common kitchen or bath facilities may be provided. [Ord. 16-0415 § 1 (Att. A).]


18.20.835 Dwelling, multiple-family.

“Multiple-family dwelling” means a one-family dwelling attached to one or more one-family dwellings by common roofs, walls, or floors. Also includes one or more dwellings attached to nonresidential uses. This definition does not include accessory dwelling units, community residential facilities, supportive living facilities, or nursing and personal care facilities.

A. Apartment. A residential building containing two or more dwelling units or a single dwelling unit and a nonresidential use, which are attached at one or more common roofs, walls, or floors. Typically, the unit’s habitable area is provided on a single level. Unit entrances may or may not be provided from a common corridor. Microhousing dwelling units are considered apartments.

B. Townhouse. A one-family, ground-related dwelling attached to one or more such units or to a nonresidential use in which each unit has its own exterior, ground-level access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more vertical common walls. Typically the units are multi-story. [Ord. 16-0415 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.840 Dwelling unit, single detached.

“Single detached dwelling unit” means a detached building containing one dwelling unit or an adult family home. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.860 Earth station.

Repealed by Ord. 16-0426. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.863 Eating and drinking place.

“Eating and drinking place” means an establishment that prepares meals, snacks and beverages to customer order for immediate on-premises or off-premises consumption from a fixed location.

May include NAICS 722 (Food Services and Drinking Places), except 72233 (Mobile Food Services). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).] 


18.20.865 Educational institutions (public or private), K – 12.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.867 Educational service.

Educational service” means an institution that offers academic education, career and technical instruction as well as schools or programs that offer tutoring or nonacademic or self-enrichment classes, such as automobile driving and cooking instruction.

 May include NAICS Sector 61 (Educational Services), except 6112 (Junior Colleges) and 6113 (Colleges, Universities, and Professional Schools). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.870 Effective radiated power.

“Effective radiated power” means the product of the antenna power input and the numerical antenna power gain. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.880 Electrical substation.

“Electrical substation” means a site containing equipment for the conversion of high voltage electrical power transported through transmission lines into lower voltages transported through distribution lines and suitable for individual users. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.885 Emergent wetland.

“Emergent wetland” means a wetland with at least 30 percent of the surface area covered by erect, rooted, herbaceous vegetation extending above the water surface as the uppermost vegetative stratum. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.890 Emergency.

“Emergency” means an occurrence during which there is imminent danger to the public health, safety and welfare, or which poses an imminent risk to property, as a result of a natural or manmade catastrophe as so declared by the city manager. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.900 Energy resource recovery facility.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.910 Enhancement.

“Enhancement” means actions taken to improve habitat or water quality function and/or wildlife use in a given area by planting native species, removing nonnative species, installing habitat structures, and any other measures approved by the City. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.920 Equipment, heavy.

“Heavy equipment” means high-capacity mechanical devices for moving earth or other materials, and mobile power units including, but not limited to:

A. Carryalls;

B. Graders;

C. Loading and unloading devices;

D. Cranes;

E. Drag lines;

F. Trench diggers;

G. Tractors;

H. Augers;

I. Bulldozers;

J. Concrete mixers and conveyers;

K. Harvesters;

L. Combines; or

M. Other major agricultural equipment and similar devices operated by mechanical power as distinguished from manpower. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.930 Erosion.

“Erosion” means the process by which soil particles are mobilized and transported by natural agents such as wind, rainsplash, frost action or surface water flow. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.940 Erosion hazard areas.

“Erosion hazard areas” means those areas identified by the United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service or identified by a special study as having a “moderate to severe” or “very severe” erosion potential. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.950 Evergreen.

“Evergreen” means a plant species with foliage that persists and remains green year round. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.965 Existing legal uses.

Where the term “existing” or “existing legal” follows a listed use type, then those uses that can document their legal conforming status prior to April 28, 2003, are considered to be permitted uses and given all the rights of other permitted uses within the district, until such time as there is a change of use or abandonment as set forth in KMC 18.100.085. In addition, these uses may be rebuilt within the same footprint and floor area should they suffer damage; provided, that no new nonconformances with standards are created (e.g., setbacks), if any. These uses may be remodeled without limitation on value and may be enlarged subject to current code requirements (e.g., height limits, lot coverage, density limits, setbacks, parking, etc.), unless otherwise specifically conditioned. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.967 FAA.

“FAA” means the Federal Aviation Administration. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.970 Fabric shop.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1000 Fairground.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1010 Family.

“Family” means an individual; two or more persons related by blood or marriage; a group of two or more disabled residents protected under the Federal Housing Act Amendments, who are not related by blood or marriage, living together as a single housekeeping unit; a group of eight or fewer residents, who are not related by blood or marriage, living together as a single housekeeping unit; or a group living arrangement where eight or fewer residents receive supportive services such as counseling, foster care, or medical supervision at the dwelling unit by resident or nonresident staff. For purposes of this definition, minors living with parent shall not be counted as part of the maximum number of residents. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1012 Family child-care home.

“Family child-care home” means a child day care provider who regularly provides child day care and early learning services for not more than 12 children in the provider’s home in the family living quarters, or as otherwise defined in RCW 43.215.010. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1015 FCC.

“FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1020 Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) floodway.

Repealed by Ord. 19-0488. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1040 Fence.

“Fence” means a barrier for the purpose of enclosing space or separating lots, composed of:

A. Masonry or concrete walls, excluding retaining walls; or

B. Wood, metal or concrete posts connected by boards, rails, panels, wire or mesh. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1050 Financial guarantee.

“Financial guarantee” means a form of financial security posted to ensure timely and proper completion of improvements, compliance with this code or to warrant materials, workmanship of improvements, and design. Financial guarantees include assignments of funds, cash deposits, surety bonds, and other forms of financial security acceptable to the city manager. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1051 Fire or police facility.

“Fire or police facility” means a government establishment engaged in law enforcement or fire protection activities.

May include NAICS 92212 (Police Protection), 92215 (Parole Offices and Probation Offices), and 92216 (Fire Protection). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1052 First floor facades.

“First floor facades” means, for the purposes of determining priority design standards, the following categories of regulations when applied to the ground floor of buildings: ground floor facades, ground floor transparency and visibility, blank wall and side wall, and building materials. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1055 Fish habitat.

“Fish habitat” means habitat that is used by any fish at any life stage at any time of the year, including potential habitat likely to be used by fish that could be recovered by restoration or management and off-channel habitat. [Ord. 19-0488 § 4 (Exh. 2); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1057 Flood or flooding.

“Flood” or “flooding” means:

A. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

1. The overflow of inland waters.

2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.

3. Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in subsection (A)(2) of this section and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current.

B. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in subsection (A)(2) of this section. [Ord. 19-0488 § 4 (Exh. 2).]


18.20.1059 Flood elevation study.

“Flood elevation study” means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. [Ord. 19-0488 § 4 (Exh. 2).]


18.20.1060 Flood fringe.

Repealed by Ord. 19-0488. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1070 Flood hazard areas.

“Flood hazard areas” means those areas in the City subject to inundation by the base flood (see “Area of special flood hazard”) and those areas subject to flood risks from channel relocation or stream meander including, but not limited to, streams, lakes, wetlands and closed depressions. The latter flood hazard areas may extend outside of the area of special flood hazard mapped by FEMA, but are defined and designated by the City. [Ord. 19-0488 § 4 (Exh. 2); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1080 Flood insurance rate map (FIRM).

“Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a “digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM).” [Ord. 19-0488 § 4 (Exh. 2); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1090 Flood insurance study (FIS).

See “Flood elevation study.” [Ord. 19-0488 § 4 (Exh. 2); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1100 Flood protection elevation.

“Flood protection elevation” means an elevation which is one foot above the base flood elevation. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1110 Floodplain.

“Floodplain” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of “Flood or flooding”). [Ord. 19-0488 § 4 (Exh. 2); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1120 Floodproofing.

“Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. [Ord. 19-0488 § 4 (Exh. 2); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1125 Floodway.

“Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. Also known as the “regulatory floodway” or “FEMA floodway.” [Ord. 19-0488 § 4 (Exh. 2).]


18.20.1130 Floodway, zero-rise.

Repealed by Ord. 19-0488. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1135 Floor area ratio (FAR).

“Floor area ratio (FAR)” means a measure of development intensity equal to the gross building floor area, divided by the site area. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1140 Florist shop.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1150 Forest practice.

“Forest practice” means any activity regulated by the Washington Department of Natural Resources in WAC Title 222 or Chapter 79.06 RCW for which a forest practice permit is required, together with:

A. Fire prevention, detection and suppression; and

B. Slash burning or removal. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1160 Forest product sales.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1170 Forest research.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1185 Functions and values.

“Functions and values” means the beneficial roles served by critical areas including, but not limited to, water quality protection and enhancement, fish and wildlife habitat, food chain support, flood storage, conveyance and attenuation, groundwater recharge and discharge, erosion control, wave attenuation, protection from hazards, historical and archaeological and aesthetic value protection, and recreation. These beneficial roles are not listed in order of priority. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1187 Funeral home/crematory.

“Funeral home/crematory” means an establishment engaged in preparing the dead for burial or interment and conducting funerals.

May include NAICS 8122 (Death Care Services). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1190 Furniture and home furnishings store.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1200 General business service.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1202 General personal service use.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1203 General services land uses.

For purposes of Chapters 18.35 and 18.40 KMC, “general services land uses” means ambulatory surgery center; animal kennel/shelter; automotive service (except tire retreading); business service, intensive; cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum; day care; educational service; funeral home/crematory; health care and social assistance; hospital; laboratory; personal service; religious institution; and stable. [Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1205 Geologically hazardous areas.

“Geologically hazardous areas” means areas that may not be suited to development consistent with public health, safety or environmental standards because of their susceptibility to erosion, sliding, earthquake, or other geological events as designated by WAC 365-190-080(4). Types of geologically hazardous areas include: erosion, landslide, seismic, and other hazards. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1210 Geologist.

“Geologist” means a person who has earned at least a Bachelor of Science degree in the geological sciences from an accredited college or university or who has equivalent educational training and at least four years of professional experience. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1230 Golf course facility.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1233 Government/business services land uses.

For purposes of Chapters 18.35 and 18.40 KMC, “government/business services land uses” means air transportation service; business service, standard; construction and trade; fire or police facility; heavy equipment and truck repair; office; private stormwater management facility; public agency archive; public agency or utility yard; standalone parking; transportation; utility facility; vehicle or equipment rental; warehousing; and wholesale trade. [Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1235 Government facilities, City.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1240 Grade span.

“Grade span” means the categories into which a district groups its grades of students, i.e., elementary, middle or junior high school, and high school. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1250 Grading.

“Grading” means any excavation, filling, removing the duff layer or any combination thereof. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1260 Grazing area.

“Grazing area” means any open land area used to pasture livestock in which suitable forage is maintained over 80 percent of the area at all times of the year. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1270 Ground cover.

“Ground cover” means living plants designed to grow low to the ground (generally one foot or less) and intended to stabilize soils and protect against erosion. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1272 Ground floor.

“Ground floor” means the level of a building accessible from public walkways or public sidewalks that is typically at grade level. Building levels below ground are not considered ground floors. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1273 Grove.

“Grove” means a contiguous grouping of trees standing in close proximity, which form a continuous canopy and/or are mutually dependant. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1275 Hazard areas.

“Hazard areas” means areas designated as frequently flooded areas or geologically hazardous areas due to potential for erosion, landslide, seismic activity, or other geological condition. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1280 Hazardous household substance.

“Hazardous household substance” means a substance as defined in RCW 70.105.010. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1290 Hazardous liquid and gas transmission pipelines.

“Hazardous liquid and gas transmission pipelines” are as defined by RCW 81.88.040 and WAC 480-93-005. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1300 Hazardous substance.

“Hazardous substance” means a substance as defined in RCW 70.105.010. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1302 Health care and social assistance.

“Health care and social assistance” means an establishment or agency providing health care or social assistance. For purposes of this code, veterinary offices are considered a subclassification of this use.

May include NAICS 62 (Health Care and Social Assistance), except the following: 621493 (Freestanding Ambulatory Surgical and Emergency Centers), 621511 (Medical Laboratories), 621910 (Ambulance Services), 622 (Hospitals), 623 (Nursing and Residential Care Facilities), and 6244 (Child Day Care Services). May include 54194 (Veterinary Services). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1305 Health services, miscellaneous.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1307 Hearing examiner.

“Hearing examiner” means the hearing examiner as established by Chapter 19.30 KMC. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1310 Heavy equipment and truck repair.

“Heavy equipment and truck repair” means the repair and maintenance of self-powered, self-propelled or towed mechanical devices, equipment and vehicles used for commercial purposes, such as tandem axle trucks, graders, backhoes, tractor trailers, cranes, and lifts, but excluding automobiles and pickup trucks under 10,000 pounds, recreational vehicles, boats and their trailers. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1320 Helistop.

“Helistop” means an area on a roof or on the ground used for the takeoff and landing of helicopters for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or cargo but not including fueling service, hangars, maintenance or overhaul facilities. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1330 Historic resource.

“Historic resource” means a district, site, building, structure or object significant in national, State or local history, architecture, archaeology, and culture. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1340 Historic structure.

“Historic structure” means any structure that is:

A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

C. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or

D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:

1. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or

2. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. [Ord. 19-0488 § 4 (Exh. 2).]


18.20.1350 Hobby, toy, game shop.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1360 Home industry.

“Home industry” means a limited-scale sales, service or fabrication activity undertaken for financial gain, which occurs in a dwelling unit or residential accessory building, or in a barn or other resource accessory building and is subordinate to the primary use of the site as a residence. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1370 Home occupation.

“Home occupation” means a limited-scale service or fabrication activity undertaken for financial gain, which occurs in a dwelling unit or accessory building and is subordinate to the primary use of the site as a residence. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1372 Hospital.

“Hospital” means an establishment with medical staff primarily engaged in providing inpatient medical, diagnostic and treatment services and/or emergency care services. Hospitals may also provide outpatient services as a secondary activity.

May include NAICS 622 (Hospitals), including 622210 (Psychiatric and Substance Abuse Hospitals). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1375 Hotel.

“Hotel” means a building or portion thereof designed or used for transient rental for sleeping purposes. Hotel structures are at least two stories in height, with lodging space above the first floor. Lodging space may also be located on the first floor. Individual rooms are typically accessed from a common hallway. A central kitchen and dining room and accessory shops and services catering to the general public may be provided. Not included in this definition are townhouses, apartments, bed and breakfasts, or motels. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1380 Household pets.

“Household pets” means small animals that are kept within a dwelling unit. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1381 Human-scaled elements.

“Human-scaled elements” means the perceived size of a building or space relative to the human body. Human-scaled elements such as doors, windows, bays, etc., have dimensions and proportions which respond to the size of a human body. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1382 Hydraulic project approval (HPA).

“Hydraulic project approval (HPA)” means a permit issued by the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife for modifications to waters of the State in accordance with Chapter 75.20 RCW. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1390 Hydroelectric generation facility.

“Hydroelectric generation facility” means an establishment for the generation of electricity using water sources. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1400 Impervious surface.

“Impervious surface” means a nonvegetated surface that either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil mantle as under natural conditions prior to development, and/or that causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from the flow present under natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, roofs, walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, areas which are paved, graveled or made of packed or oiled earthen materials or other surfaces which similarly impede the natural infiltration of surface and stormwater. Impervious surface shall not include areas of turf, landscaping, or natural vegetation. Open uncovered flow control or water quality treatment facilities shall not be considered as impervious surfaces under this title, but shall be considered impervious surfaces for the purposes of runoff modeling. [Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1420 Individual transportation and taxi.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1430 Infiltration rate.

“Infiltration rate” means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed in inches per hour. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1435 In-kind.

“In-kind” means to replace critical areas with substitute areas whose characteristics and functions closely approximate those destroyed or degraded by a regulated activity. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1440 Interim recycling facility.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1470 Jail.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1480 Jail farm.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1490 Jewelry store.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1500 Joint use driveway.

“Joint use driveway” means a jointly owned and/or maintained vehicular access to two residential properties. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1510 Kennel.

“Kennel” means a place where adult dogs are temporarily boarded for compensation, whether or not for training. An adult dog is one of either sex, altered or unaltered, that has reached the age of six months. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1520 Kitchen or kitchen facility.

“Kitchen or kitchen facility” means an area within a building intended for the preparation and storage of food and containing:

A. An appliance for the refrigeration of food;

B. An appliance for the cooking or heating of food; and

C. A sink. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1525 Laboratory.

“Laboratory” means a standalone facility subject to biosafety or hazardous materials containment procedures in which research and experiments leading to the development of new products are conducted. This use may be associated with an institutional, clinical or commercial use.

May include NAICS 54138 (Testing Laboratories) and 621511 (Medical Laboratories). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1530 Landfill.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1540 Landscape water features.

“Landscape water features” means a pond, pool or fountain used as a decorative component of a development. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1550 Landscaping.

“Landscaping” means live vegetative materials required for a development. Said materials provided along the boundaries of a development site are referred to as perimeter landscaping. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1560 Landslide.

“Landslide” means episodic downslope movement of a mass including, but not limited to, soil, rock or snow. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1570 Landslide hazard areas.

“Landslide hazard areas” means areas that are potentially subject to risk of mass movement resulting from a combination of geologic, topographic, and hydrologic factors including: bedrock, soil, slope gradient, slope aspect, geologic structure, groundwater, or other factors. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1575 Lattice tower.

“Lattice tower” means a tower consisting of a self-supporting, multiple-sided, open steel frame structure without guy wires and ground anchors. [Ord. 16-0426 § 4 (Att. B); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1580 Level of service (LOS).

“Level of service (LOS)” means a measure of transportation system performance or completeness (by mode of travel) determined in accordance with Chapter 12.80 KMC. [Ord. 16-0420 § 4 (Exh. 2); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1590 Light equipment.

“Light equipment” means hand-held tools and construction equipment, such as chain saws, wheelbarrows and post-hole diggers. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1600 Livestock.

“Livestock” means grazing animals kept either in open fields or structures for training, boarding, home use, sales, or breeding and production, including but not limited to:

A. Cattle;

B. Riding and draft horses;

C. Hogs, excluding pigs weighing under 120 pounds and standing 20 inches or less at the shoulder which are kept as household pets or small animals;

D. Sheep; and

E. Goats. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1610 Livestock, large.

“Large livestock” means cattle, horses, and other livestock generally weighing over 500 pounds. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1620 Livestock, small.

“Small livestock” means hogs, excluding pigs weighing under 120 pounds and standing 20 inches or less at the shoulder which are kept as household pets or small animals, sheep, goats, miniature horses, llamas, alpacas and other livestock generally weighing under 500 pounds. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1630 Livestock sales.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1640 Loading space.

“Loading space” means a space for the temporary parking of a vehicle while loading or unloading cargo or passengers. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1650 Log storage.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1660 Lot.

“Lot” means a physically separate and distinct parcel of property, which has been created pursuant to KMC Title 17, Land Division. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1670 Lot line, interior.

“Interior lot line” means lot lines that delineate property boundaries along those portions of the property which do not abut a street. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1671 Low impact development (LID).

“Low impact development (LID)” means a stormwater management and land development strategy that strives to mimic predisturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration, filtration, storage, evaporation and transpiration by emphasizing conservation, use of on-site natural features, site planning, and distributed stormwater management practices that are integrated into a project design. [Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1673 Lowest floor.

For purposes of flood hazard area regulations, “lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of Article XIX of Chapter 18.55 KMC. [Ord. 19-0488 § 4 (Exh. 2).]


18.20.1675 Manufactured home.

“Manufactured home” is defined under WAC 296-150M-0020. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.” [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1675.1 Manufactured housing community.

“Manufactured housing community” means a development with two or more improved pads or spaces designed to accommodate mobile homes, manufactured homes, or designated manufactured homes. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A).]


18.20.1676 Manufacturing, heavy.

“Heavy manufacturing” means an establishment engaged in the mechanical, physical, or chemical transformation of materials, substances, or components into new products that is likely to generate levels of truck traffic, noise, pollution, vibration, dust, fumes, odors, radiation, poisons, pesticides, or other hazardous materials, fire or explosion hazards, or other undesirable conditions that would be injurious to health or offensive to the senses, or would be an obstruction to the free use of surrounding property and essentially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property. Heavy manufacturing facilities use larger quantities of raw materials and may require significant outdoor storage. Examples include concrete manufacture, asphalt batch plants, mass production of commercial or recreational vehicles or large machinery, production of industrial organic and inorganic chemicals, animal slaughtering, and refining, extruding, rolling, or drawing of ferrous or nonferrous metals.

May include NAICS Sectors 31 – 33 (Manufacturing). Also may include NAICS 54171 (Research and Development in the Physical, Engineering and Life Sciences). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1677 Manufacturing, light.

“Light manufacturing” means an establishment engaged in the mechanical, physical, or chemical transformation of materials, substances, or components into new products that is of a lower intensity and cleaner than heavy manufacturing establishments. Light manufacturing facilities do not generate noise, particulate matter, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors, radiation, or other nuisances that would be injurious to health or offensive to the senses, or would be an obstruction to the free use of surrounding property and essentially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property. Light manufacturing facilities require only a small amount of raw materials, area and power to produce items of relatively high value per unit weight. Examples include manufacture of clothes, jewelry, food, blown glass, furniture, computer hardware and software, medical instrumentation, consumer electronics, and winery/brewery, as well as research and development facilities and biotechnology.

May include NAICS Sectors 31 – 33 (Manufacturing). Also may include NAICS 54171 (Research and Development in the Physical, Engineering and Life Sciences). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1678 Manufacturing land uses.

For purposes of Chapters 18.35 and 18.40 KMC, “manufacturing land uses” means manufacturing, heavy; manufacturing, light; marijuana processor; and tire retreading. [Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1). Formerly 18.20.1677]


18.20.1679.1 Marijuana.

“Marijuana” means marijuana as defined in RCW 69.50.101. [Ord. 14-0384 § 4.]


18.20.1679.2 Marijuana business.

“Marijuana business” means a marijuana producer, marijuana processor, marijuana researcher, or marijuana retailer. Marijuana business does not include a marijuana cooperative as defined in KMC 18.20.1679.2.5. [Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0384 § 4.]


18.20.1679.2.5 Marijuana cooperative.

“Marijuana cooperative” means a cooperative of no more than four qualifying patients or designated providers sharing responsibility for acquiring and supplying the resources needed to produce and process marijuana only for the medical use of members of the cooperative, as described under Chapter 69.51A RCW. [Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A).]


18.20.1679.3 Marijuana processor.

“Marijuana processor” means a marijuana processor as defined in RCW 69.50.101. [Ord. 14-0384 § 4.]


18.20.1679.4 Marijuana producer.

“Marijuana producer” means a marijuana producer as defined in RCW 69.50.101. [Ord. 14-0384 § 4.]


18.20.1679.4.5 Marijuana researcher.

“Marijuana researcher” means a person licensed by the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board to produce, process, and possess marijuana for the purposes of conducting research on marijuana and marijuana-derived drug products. [Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A).]


18.20.1679.5 Marijuana retailer.

“Marijuana retailer” means a marijuana retailer as defined in RCW 69.50.101. [Ord. 14-0384 § 4.]


18.20.1680 Marina.

“Marina” means an establishment providing docking, moorage space and related activities limited to the provisioning or minor repair of pleasure boats and yachts; and accessory facilities including, but not limited to:

A. Showers;

B. Toilets; and

C. Self-service laundries. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1683 Mass wasting.

“Mass wasting” means the spontaneous downhill movement of soil and/or rock under the influence of gravity. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1685 Master plan.

A “master plan” consists of a narrative description and map conceptually describing long-term land uses, circulation and infrastructure, open space, and development phasing for an area or property to guide future development. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1690 Median income.

“King County median income” means the median family income for the Seattle-Bellevue, WA HUD Metro FMR Area as most recently determined by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development under Section 8(f)(3) of the United States Housing Act of 1937, as amended, or if programs under said Section 8(f)(3) are terminated, median family income is determined under the method used by the Secretary prior to such termination. In the event that HUD no longer publishes median family income figures for the Seattle-Bellevue, WA HUD Metro FMR Area or King County, the City may use any other method for determining the King County median income, adjusted for household size. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A).]


18.20.1695 Medical/dental office/outpatient clinic.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1700 Microwave.

Repealed by Ord. 16-0426. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1705 Miscellaneous repair.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1710 Mitigation.

“Mitigation” means the use of any or all of the following actions listed in descending order of preference:

A. Avoiding the impact by not taking a certain action;

B. Minimizing the impact by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action by using appropriate technology or by taking affirmative steps to avoid or reduce the impact;

C. Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating or restoring the affected critical area or buffer;

D. Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation or maintenance operations during the life of the development proposal;

E. Compensating for the impact by replacing, enhancing or providing substitute critical areas and environments; and

F. Monitoring the impact and taking appropriate corrective measures. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1720 Mitigation bank.

“Mitigation bank” means a property that has been protected in perpetuity, and approved by appropriate county, State and federal agencies expressly for the purpose of providing compensatory mitigation in advance of authorized impacts through restoration, creation, and/or enhancement of wetlands, and, in exceptional circumstances, preservation of adjacent wetlands, wetland buffers, and/or other aquatic resources. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1730 Mitigation banking.

“Mitigation banking” means a system for providing compensatory mitigation in advance of authorized wetland impacts of development in the City in which credits are generated through restoration, creation, and/or enhancement of wetlands, and, in exceptional circumstances, preservation of adjacent wetlands, wetland buffers, and/or other aquatic resources. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1740 Mixed use development.

“Mixed use development” means a combination of residential and nonresidential uses within the same building or site as part of an integrated development project with functional interrelationships and coherent physical design. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1745 Mobile food vendor.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1747 Mobile food service.

“Mobile food service” means an establishment engaged in preparing and serving meals and snacks for immediate consumption from motorized vehicles or nonmotorized carts.

May include NAICS Sector 72233 (Mobile Food Services). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1750 Mobile home.

“Mobile home” is defined under WAC 296-150M-0020. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1760 Mobile home park.

Repealed by Ord. 19-0481. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1761 Mobility unit.

A “mobility unit” means one PM peak hour person trip end. Each person trip has two trip ends, one each at the origin and destination. [Ord. 16-0420 § 4 (Exh. 2).]


18.20.1762 Modification.

Repealed by Ord. 16-0426. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1765 Modulation.

“Modulation” means variations in a building facade through the use of setbacks, upper level stepbacks, and/or projections from the building which serve to break up the apparent mass and bulk of a building. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1770 Monitoring.

For purposes of Chapter 18.55 KMC, “monitoring” means evaluating the impacts of development proposals on the biological, hydrological, and geological elements of critical areas and assessing the performance of required mitigation measures throughout the collection and analysis of data by various methods. Monitoring serves the purpose of understanding and documenting changes in natural ecosystems and features, and includes gathering baseline data. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1775 Monopole tower.

Repealed by Ord. 16-0426. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1785 Motel.

“Motel” means a building or group of detached or connected buildings designed or used primarily for providing sleeping accommodations for automobile travelers and typically having a parking space adjacent to a sleeping accommodation. This definition excludes townhouses, apartments, bed and breakfast guesthouses, and hotels. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1790 Motor vehicle and boat dealers.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1800 Motor vehicle and bicycle manufacturing.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1810 Mulch.

“Mulch” means any material such as leaves, bark, or straw left loose and applied to the soil surface to reduce evaporation. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1820 Municipal water production.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1830 Native vegetation.

“Native vegetation” means vegetation comprised of plant species, other than noxious weeds, which are indigenous to the coastal region of the Pacific Northwest and which reasonably could have been expected to naturally occur on the site. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1835 Natural waters.

“Natural waters” means all surface waters of the State, only excluding water conveyance systems which are artificially constructed and actively maintained for irrigation. [Ord. 19-0488 § 4 (Exh. 2).]


18.20.1840 Negative externality.

“Negative externality” means a cost, burden, or undesirable physical impact on persons or property outside the property from which the negative externality is generated. Negative externalities shall include, without limitation, noise, odors, pollution, dust, fumes, vibration, and hazardous substances. [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1850 Net buildable area.

“Net buildable area” means the “site area” less the following areas:

A. Areas within or on the perimeter of a project site which are required to be dedicated for public rights-of-way; 

B. Critical areas and their buffers to the extent they are required by the City to remain undeveloped;

C. Areas required for stormwater control facilities other than facilities which are completely underground, including, but not limited to, retention/detention ponds, biofiltration swales and setbacks from such ponds and swales;

D. Areas required by the City to be dedicated or reserved as on-site recreation areas;

E. Regional utility corridors;

F. Other areas, excluding setbacks, required by the City to remain undeveloped. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1860 Nonconformance.

“Nonconformance” means any use, improvement or structure established in conformance with the City rules and regulations in effect at the time of establishment that no longer conforms to the range of uses permitted in the site’s current zone or to the current development standards of the code due to changes in the code or its application to the subject property. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1870 Nonhydroelectric generation facility.

“Nonhydroelectric generation facility” means an establishment for the generation of electricity by nuclear reaction, burning fossil fuels, or other electricity generation methods. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1875 Nonindigenous.

“Nonindigenous” means any species of plants or animals not native to the Puget Sound region. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1880 Nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER).

“Nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER)” means electromagnetic radiation of low photon energy unable to cause ionization. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1890 Noxious weed.

“Noxious weed” means any plant which is highly destructive, competitive or difficult to control by cultural or chemical practices, limited to those plants on the State noxious weed list contained in Chapter 16-750 WAC. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1900 Off-street required parking lot.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1905 Office.

“Office” means a place of employment for professional or administrative staff which does not include outside storage, or fabrication or on-site sale or transfer of commodities. Types of offices include, but are not limited to, accounting; architectural; engineering; banking; consulting; management; administrative; secretarial; marketing or advertising; personnel; sales offices where no inventories or goods are available on the premises; real estate; insurance; travel agent; brokerage; computer programming; or other similar services. Office does not include medical offices which are classified as a health care and social assistance land use.

May include NAICS Sector 51 (Information), except the following: 512 (Motion Picture and Sound Recording Industries), 515 (Broadcasting), 517 (Telecommunications), 518 (Data Processing, Hosting and Related Services), and 51912 (Libraries and Archives). May include Sectors 52 (Finance and Insurance) and 53 (Real Estate Rental and Leasing), except the following: 53113 (Lessors of Miniwarehouses and Self-Storage Units), 5321 (Automotive Equipment Rental and Leasing), 5322 (Consumer Goods Rental), 5323 (General Rental Centers), and 5324 (Commercial and Industrial Machinery and Equipment Rental and Leasing). May include Sector 54 (Professional, Scientific and Technical Services), except the following: 54135 (Building Inspection Services), 54138 (Testing Laboratories), 54171 (Research and Development in the Physical, Engineering and Life Sciences), 54186 (Direct Mail Advertising), 54192 (Photographic Services), and 54194 (Veterinary Services). May include Sector 55 (Management of Companies and Enterprises) and 56151 (Travel Agencies). May include 8132 (Grantmaking and Giving Services), 8133 (Social Advocacy Organizations), 8139 (Business, Professional, Labor, Political, and Similar Organizations), and Sector 92 (Public Administration), except the following: 92212 (Police Protection), 92214 (Correctional Institutions), 92215 (Parole Offices and Probation Offices), and 92216 (Fire Protection). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1910 Open space.

“Open space” means areas left predominately in a natural state to create urban separators and greenbelts, sustain native ecosystems, connect and increase protective buffers for critical areas, provide a visual contrast to continuous development, reinforce community identity and aesthetics, or provide links between important environmental or recreational resources. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1920 Open-work fence.

“Open-work fence” means a fence in which the solid portions are evenly distributed and constitute no more than 50 percent of the total surface area. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1930 Ordinary high water mark.

“Ordinary high water mark” means the mark found by examining the bed and banks of a stream or lake and ascertaining where the presence and action of waters are so common and long maintained in ordinary years as to mark upon the soil a vegetative character distinct from that of the abutting upland. In any area where the ordinary high water mark cannot be found, the line of mean high water shall substitute. In any area where neither can be found, the top of the channel bank shall substitute. In braided channels and alluvial fans, the ordinary high water mark or line of mean high water shall be measured so as to include the entire stream feature. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1940 Outdoor performance center.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1945 Outdoor retail display/sidewalk sale.

“Outdoor retail display/sidewalk sale” means exhibit of goods which are directly accessible to the public for retail sale. These display areas are accessory to the principal indoor retail use. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1960 Park.

“Park” means a site designed or developed for recreational use by the public including, but not limited to:

A. Indoor facilities, such as:

1. Gymnasiums;

2. Swimming pools; or

3. Activity centers;

B. Outdoor facilities, such as:

1. Playfields;

2. Fishing areas;

3. Picnic and related outdoor activity areas;

C. Areas and trails for:

1. Hikers;

2. Equestrians;

3. Bicyclists;

D. Areas provided under KMC 18.30.130 or Chapter 20.47 KMC;

E. Facilities for on-site maintenance. [Ord. 18-0463 § 3 (Exh. 2); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.1995 Parking management plan.

“Parking management plan” means a plan developed by a property owner or applicant that clearly identifies the short- and long-term parking management methods used to ensure that on-site parking provided on a property is adequate to meet anticipated parking demands. Parking management methods can include but are not limited to transportation demand methods that include on-site parking enforcement, signage, and parking fees. [Ord. 15-0406 § 1 (Att. A).]


18.20.2000 Parking space.

“Parking space” means an area accessible to vehicles, improved, maintained and used for the sole purpose of parking a motor vehicle. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2030 Peak hour.

“Peak hour” means the hour during the morning or afternoon when the most critical level of service occurs for a particular roadway or intersection. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2035 Pedestrian walkway.

“Pedestrian walkway” means a public walkway that connects public streets to other streets, walkways, public spaces, or drives. Public walkways should be lit for nighttime use and be aligned for maximum nighttime visibility. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2040 Permanent school facilities.

“Permanent school facilities” means facilities of a school district with a fixed foundation which are not relocatable facilities. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2050 Personal medical supply store.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2055 Personal service.

“Personal service” means an establishment primarily engaged in providing services to individuals, such as beauty and barber shops, retail laundry and drycleaning including coin-operated, clothing alterations and repair, diaper services, carpet and upholstery cleaning services, photo studios, shoe repair, pet grooming, and repair of personal or household items. This definition excludes automotive repair and service.

May include NAICS 5322 (Consumer Goods Rental), 5323 (General Rental Center), 541921 (Photo Studios), 811211 (Consumer Electronics Repair and Maintenance), and 8114 (Personal and Household Goods Repair and Maintenance). May include 812 (Personal and Laundry Services) except the following: 8122 (Death Care Services), 812332 (Industrial Launderers), and 81293 (Parking Lots and Garages). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2060 Pet shop.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2070 Photographic and electronic shop.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2102 Practical alternative.

“Practical alternative” means an alternative that is available and capable of being carried out after taking into consideration effectiveness, engineering feasibility, cost, safety, existing technology, and logistics in light of overall project needs, purposes and objectives, and has less impacts to critical areas. For example, a practical alternative to a proposal to place a sidewalk through a wetland might be to place an elevated boardwalk through the wetland. [Ord. 19-0488 § 4 (Exh. 2); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2104 Priority habitat.

“Priority habitat” means a habitat type or elements with unique or significant value to one or more species as classified by the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife. A priority habitat may consist of a unique vegetation type or dominant plant species, a described successional stage, or a specific structural element. (WAC 173-26-020(34)). [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2110 Private.

“Private” means solely or primarily for the use of residents or occupants of the premises; e.g., a noncommercial garage used solely by residents or their guests is a private garage. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2120 Private stormwater management facility.

“Private stormwater management facility” means a surface water control structure installed by a project proponent to retain, detain or otherwise limit runoff from an individual or group of developed sites specifically served by such structure. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2130 Professional office.

“Professional office” means an office used as a place of business by licensed professionals, or persons in other generally recognized professions, which use training or knowledge of a technical, scientific or other academic discipline as opposed to manual skills, and which does not involve outside storage or fabrication, or on-site sale or transfer of commodities. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2135 Pro shop.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2140 Public agency.

“Public agency” means any agency, political subdivision or unit of government including, but not limited to, municipal corporations, special purpose districts and local service districts, any agency of the State of Washington, the United States or any state thereof or any Indian tribe recognized as such by the federal government. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2150 Public agency animal control facility.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2160 Public agency archive.

“Public agency archive” means a facility for the enclosed storage of public agency documents or related materials, excluding storage of vehicles, equipment, or similar materials. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2170 Public agency or utility office.

“Public agency or utility office” means an office for the administration of any governmental or utility activity or program, with no outdoor storage. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2180 Public agency or utility yard.

“Public agency or utility yard” means a facility for open or enclosed storage, repair, and maintenance of vehicles, equipment, or related materials, excluding document storage. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2190 Public agency training facility.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2195 Public space/public open space.

“Public space/public open space” means an open space or plaza in an area between a building and a street or pedestrian walkway where people gather or sit. Public spaces are open for public use during the daytime and evening and are visible from adjacent streets. Public spaces contain site furnishings, artwork, landscaping, pedestrian lighting, and other amenities which make the space comfortable and inviting. Public spaces may be government owned or dedicated property or areas open to all persons by design or intent. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2202 Public view.

“Public view” means areas which are visible from adjacent public streets, walkways, or public spaces. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2205 Qualified professional.

“Qualified professional” means a person with experience and training in the pertinent scientific discipline, and who is a qualified scientific expert with expertise appropriate for the relevant critical area subject in accordance with WAC 365-195-905(4). A qualified professional must have obtained a B.S. or B.A. or equivalent degree in biology, engineering, environmental studies, fisheries, geology, geomorphology or a related field, and have two years of related work experience.

A. A qualified professional for habitats or wetlands must have a degree in biology and professional experience related to the subject species;

B. A qualified professional for a geological hazard must be a professional engineer or geologist licensed in the State of Washington. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2207 Qualified tree protection professional.

“Qualified tree protection professional” means a licensed professional with academic and/or field experience that makes her or him a recognized expert in tree preservation and management. The tree protection professional shall be an arborist certified by the International Society of Arboriculture or be an arborist registered with the American Society of Consulting Arborists, and shall have specific experience with tree management in the State of Washington. A qualified tree protection professional must possess the ability to evaluate the health and hazard potential of existing trees, and the ability to prescribe appropriate measures necessary for the preservation of trees during development. [Ord. 15-0409 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2210 Radio frequency.

“Radio frequency” means the number of times the current from a given source of nonionizing electromagnetic radiation changes from a maximum positive level through a maximum negative level and back to a maximum positive level in one second; measured in cycles per second or Hertz (Hz). [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2220 Reasonable use.

“Reasonable use” means a legal concept articulated by federal and State courts in regulatory taking cases. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2230 Receiving site.

“Receiving site” means land for which allowable residential density is increased over the base density permitted by the underlying zone, by virtue of permanently securing and dedicating to the City, or another qualifying agency, the development potential of an associated sending site. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2231 Reclassification.

“Reclassification” means a change in the zone classification on the zoning map pursuant to a Type 4 land use permit decision, where the reclassification is not related to a comprehensive plan land use map amendment. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2232 Recreational/cultural land uses.

For purposes of Chapters 18.35 and 18.40 KMC, “recreational/cultural land uses” means adult entertainment business; arts, entertainment, indoor; arts, entertainment, outdoor; park; recreational facility, indoor; recreational facility, outdoor; and trail. [Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2234 Recreational facility, indoor.

“Indoor recreational facility” means an establishment that provides facilities or services for recreational uses inside a building. Indoor recreational facility includes such uses as clubhouses, gyms, indoor swimming pools, and fitness and bowling centers. 

May include NAICS 61162 (Sports and Recreation Instruction), 711211 (Sports Teams and Clubs), 71312 (Amusement Arcades), and 7139 (Other Amusement and Recreation Industries). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2237 Recreational facility, outdoor.

“Outdoor recreational facility” means an establishment that provides facilities or services for recreational uses outside a building. Outdoor recreational facility includes such uses as outdoor tennis courts, outdoor swimming pools, batting cages, miniature golf courses, golf driving ranges, marinas, boat launches, campgrounds, and RV parks.

May include NAICS 61162 (Sports and Recreation Instruction), 711211 (Sports Teams and Clubs), 7139 (Other Amusement and Recreation Industries), and 7212 (RV/Recreational Vehicle Parks and Recreational Camps). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2240 Recreational vehicle (RV).

“Recreational vehicle (RV)” means a vehicle designed primarily for recreational camping, travel or seasonal use which has its own motive power or is mounted on or towed by another vehicle, including but not limited to:

A. Travel trailer;

B. Folding camping trailer;

C. Park trailer;

D. Truck camper;

E. Park trailer;

F. Motor home; and

G. Multi-use vehicle. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2250 Recreational vehicle parks.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2260 Recyclable material.

“Recyclable material” means a nontoxic, recoverable substance that can be reprocessed for the manufacture of new products. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2265 Regional land use.

“Regional land use” means an airport, ferry terminal, park and ride lot, transfer station, racetrack, stadium/arena, or other land use of a regional nature that may be difficult to site. Regional land use includes essential public facilities, as defined in RCW 36.70A.200, if not otherwise defined in this title.

May include NAICS Sector 22 (Utilities), 411 (Air Transportation), and 4881 (Support Activities for Air Transportation). May include 562 (Waste Management Remediation Service) except 56299 (All Other Waste Management Services). May include 7112 (Spectator Sports) except 711211 (Sports Teams and Clubs). May include 713110 (Amusement and Theme Parks) and 71391 (Golf Courses and Country Clubs). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2275 Regional land uses.

For purposes of Chapter 18.40 KMC, “regional land uses” means college/university; conference center; hydroelectric generation facility; nonhydroelectric generation facility; regional land use; resource land use; secure facility; transit bus base; school bus base; and wireless communication facility. [Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2280 Regional stormwater management facility.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2290 Regional utility corridor.

“Regional utility corridor” means a right-of-way tract or easement other than a street right-of-way which contains transmission lines or pipelines for utility companies. Right-of-way tracts or easements containing lines serving individual lots or developments are not regional utility corridors. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2295 Religious institution.

“Religious institution” means a place where religious services are conducted, including accessory uses in the primary or accessory buildings such as religious education, reading rooms, assembly rooms, and residences for nuns and clergy. This definition does not include facilities for training of religious orders.

May include NAICS 8131 (Religious Organizations). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2310 Relocatable facility.

“Relocatable facility” means any factory-built structure, transportable in one or more sections, that is designed to be used as an education space and is needed to prevent the overbuilding of school facilities, to meet the needs of service areas within a district or to cover the gap between the time that families move into new residential developments and the date that construction is completed on permanent school facilities. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2320 Relocation facilities.

“Relocation facilities” means housing units within the City that provide housing to persons who have been involuntarily displaced from other housing units within the City as a result of conversion of their housing unit to other land uses. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2325 Residential land uses.

For purposes of Chapters 18.35 and 18.40 KMC, “residential land uses” means community residential facility; family child-care home; manufactured home; mobile home; manufactured housing community; multiple-family dwelling; single detached dwelling unit; supportive living facility; and temporary lodging. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2326 Resource land use.

“Resource land use” means a production use on agricultural, forest, aquatic, or mineral lands, including farming, timber production, and mining.

May include NAICS Sectors 11 (Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting) and 21 (Mining). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2327 Resource land uses.

For purposes of Chapter 18.40 KMC, “resource land uses” means resource land use and marijuana producer. [Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2330 Restoration.

“Restoration” means measures taken to restore an altered or damaged natural feature including:

A. Active steps taken to restore damaged wetlands, streams, protected habitat, or their buffers to the functioning condition that existed prior to an unauthorized alteration; and

B. Actions performed to reestablish structural and functional characteristics of the critical area that have been lost by alteration, past management activities, or catastrophic events. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2350 Retail, comparison.

Repealed by Ord. 14-0391. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2362 Retail land uses.

For purposes of Chapters 18.35 and 18.40 KMC, “retail land uses” means auction house; automotive sales; eating and drinking place; marijuana retailer; mobile food service; retail sales; retail sales, bulk; and vehicle refueling station. [Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2364 Retail sales.

“Retail sales” means an establishment within a permanent structure of less than 65,000 square feet engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. This definition excludes auction houses, automotive sales and service, sales of automotive parts if service, repair or installation are provided on site, bulk retail sales, and eating and drinking places.

May include NAICS Sectors 44 – 45 (Retail Trade), except the following: 4411 (Automobile Dealers), 4412 (Other Motor Vehicle Dealers), 44132 (Tire Dealers), 447 (Gasoline Stations), 45291 (Warehouse Clubs and Superstores), 45393 (Manufactured/Mobile Home Dealers), and 45431 (Fuel Dealers). [Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2365 Retail sales, bulk.

“Bulk retail sales” means a singular indoor “big box” retail business that occupies more than 65,000 square feet of gross floor area, typically requires high parking to building area ratios, and has a regional sales market. Bulk retail sales can include, but is not limited to, membership warehouse clubs that emphasize bulk sales, discount stores and department stores.

May include NAICS 45291 (Warehouse Clubs and Superstores). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2367 Retail sales, outdoor.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2370 Retaining wall.

“Retaining wall” means any wall used to resist the lateral displacement of any material. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2375 Riparian.

“Riparian” means areas adjacent to aquatic systems with flowing water that contain elements of both aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems that mutually influence each other. The width of these areas extends to that portion of the terrestrial landscape that directly influences the aquatic ecosystem by providing shade, fine or large woody material, nutrients, organic and inorganic debris, terrestrial insects, or habitat for riparian-associated wildlife. Widths shall be measured from the ordinary high water mark or from the top of bank if the ordinary high water mark cannot be identified. It includes the entire extent of the floodplain and the extent of vegetation adapted to wet conditions as well as adjacent upland plant communities that directly influence the aquatic system. Riparian habitat areas include those riparian areas severely altered or damaged due to human development activities. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2410 Salmonid.

“Salmonid” means a member of the fish family Salmonidae, such as Chinook, coho, chum, sockeye salmon, bull trout and cutthroat trout. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2415 Satellite dish.

“Satellite dish” means a type of antenna, typically in the shape of a shallow dish or cone, that transmits to and/or receives signals from an orbiting satellite. [Ord. 16-0426 § 4 (Att. B).]


18.20.2420 School bus base.

“School bus base” means an establishment for the storage, dispatch, repair and maintenance of coaches and other vehicles of a school transit system. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2430 School district.

“School district” means any school district in Kenmore. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2440 School district support facility.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2450 Schools, elementary and middle/junior high.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2460 Schools, secondary or high school.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2461 Seasonal low flow and seasonal low water.

“Seasonal low flow” and “seasonal low water” mean the conditions of the seven-day, two-year low water situation, as measured or estimated by accepted hydrologic techniques. [Ord. 19-0488 § 4 (Exh. 2).]


18.20.2462 Section 404 permit.

“Section 404 permit” means a permit issued by the Corps of Engineers for the placement of dredge or fill material or clearing in waters of the U.S., including wetlands, in accordance with 33 USC Section 1344. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2465 Secure community transition facilities (SCTF).

“Secure community transition facility (SCTF)” means a residential facility for persons civilly committed and conditionally released to a less restrictive alternative under this chapter. A secure community transition facility has supervision and security, and either provides or ensures the provision of sex offender treatment services. Secure community transition facilities include but are not limited to the facilities established pursuant to RCW 71.09.250 and any community-based facilities established under this chapter and operated by the Secretary or under contract with the Secretary. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2468 Secure facility.

“Secure facility” means a jail, prison, secure community transition facility, or other similar facility for the confinement, correction, and rehabilitation of offenders. This definition includes facilities managed and operated by the government as well as those operated by nongovernmental entities under contract with the government.

May include NAICS 92214 (Correctional Institutions). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2470 Seismic hazard areas.

“Seismic hazard areas” means areas in the City that are subject to severe risk of damage as a result of earthquake-induced ground shaking, slope failure, settlement, or soil liquefaction. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2480 Self-service storage.

“Self-service storage” means an establishment containing separate storage spaces that are leased or rented as individual units. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2490 Sending site.

“Sending site” means land capable of providing a public benefit if permanently protected by virtue of having its zoned development potential transferred to another property. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2500 Senior citizen.

“Senior citizen” means a person aged 62 or older. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2524 Services, off-site.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2527 Services, on-site.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2530 Setback.

“Setback” means the required distance between a structure and a specified line such as a lot, easement or buffer line that is required to remain free of structures. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2540 Shelters for temporary placement.

“Shelters for temporary placement” means housing units within the City that provide housing to persons on a temporary basis for a duration not to exceed four weeks. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2550 Shooting range.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2560 Sign.

“Sign” means any device, structure, fixture, or placard that is visible from a public right-of-way or surrounding properties and uses graphics, symbols, or written copy for the purpose of advertising or identifying any establishment, product, goods, or service. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2570 Sign, awning.

“Awning sign” means a sign painted on or attached directly to and supported by an awning. An awning may be constructed of rigid or nonrigid materials and may be retractable or nonretractable. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2580 Sign, changing message center.

“Changing message center sign” means an electrically controlled sign that contains advertising messages which changes at intervals of three minutes or greater. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2590 Sign, community bulletin board.

“Community bulletin board sign” means a permanent sign used to notify the public of community events and public services, and which contains no commercial advertising. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2600 Sign, directional.

“Directional sign” means a sign designed to guide or direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic to an area, place or convenience, and may include incidental graphics such as trade names and trademarks. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2610 Sign, freestanding.

“Freestanding sign” means a sign standing directly upon the ground or having one or more supports standing directly upon the ground, and being detached from any building or fence. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2620 Sign, fuel price.

“Fuel price sign” means a sign utilized to advertise the price of gasoline and/or diesel fuel. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2630 Sign, incidental.

“Incidental sign” means a sign, emblem or decal designed to inform the public of goods, facilities, or services available on the premises, and may include but not be limited to signs designating:

A. Restrooms;

B. Hours of operation;

C. Acceptable credit cards;

D. Property ownership or management;

E. Phone booths; and

F. Recycling containers. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2640 Sign, indirectly illuminated.

“Indirectly illuminated sign” means a sign that is illuminated entirely from an external artificial source. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2650 Sign, monument.

“Monument sign” means a freestanding sign that is above ground level and is anchored to the ground by a solid base, with no open space between the sign and the ground. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2660 Sign, off-premises directional.

“Off-premises directional sign” means a sign which contains no advertising of a commercial nature which is used to direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic circulation to a facility, service or business located on other premises within 660 feet of the sign. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2670 Sign, on-premises.

“On-premises sign” means a sign which displays a message which is incidental to and directly associated with the use of the property on which it is located. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2680 Sign, permanent residential development identification.

“Permanent residential development identification sign” means a permanent sign identifying the residential development upon which the sign is located. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2690 Sign, portable.

“Portable sign” means a sign which is capable of being moved and is not permanently affixed to the ground, a structure or a building. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2700 Sign, projecting.

“Projecting sign” means any sign which is attached to and supported by the exterior wall of a building with the exposed face of the sign on a plane perpendicular to the wall of the building; projecting more than one foot from the wall of a building and vertical to the ground. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2710 Sign, time and temperature.

“Time and temperature sign” means an electrically controlled sign that contains messages for date, time, and temperature, which changes at intervals of one minute or less. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2720 Sign, wall.

“Wall sign” means any sign painted on, or attached directly to and supported by, a building or structure; with the exposed face of the sign on a plane parallel to the portion of the building or structure to which it is attached; projecting no more than one foot from the building or structure; including window signs which are permanently attached. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2730 Significant tree.

“Significant tree” means an existing healthy tree that is not a hazard tree (i.e., a tree that does not have a high probability of imminently falling due to a debilitating disease or structural defect) and that, when measured four and one-half feet above grade, has a minimum diameter of:

A. Eight inches for evergreen trees; or

B. Twelve inches for deciduous trees. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2740 Site.

“Site” means a single lot, or two or more contiguous lots that are under common ownership or documented legal control, used as a single parcel for a development proposal in order to calculate compliance with the standards and regulations of this title. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2750 Site area.

“Site area” means the total horizontal area of a project site, less areas below the ordinary high water mark. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2765 Small cell.

“Small cell” means a wireless communication facility that meets both of the following qualifications:

A. Each antenna is located inside an antenna enclosure of no more than three cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than three cubic feet; and

B. Primary equipment enclosures are no larger than 17 cubic feet in volume. The following associated equipment may be located outside the primary equipment enclosure and if so located, is not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment, telecomm demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, battery back-up power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, and cut-off switch. [Ord. 17-0446 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 16-0426 § 4 (Att. B).]


18.20.2782 Social card game.

“Social card game” is defined as set forth in RCW 9.46.0282, as now in effect or as may be subsequently amended or recodified. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2784 Social services.

“Social services” means establishments or agencies offering social or rehabilitation services. Subcategories include:

“Social services, correctional” that offer offender rehabilitation, offender self-help, parole or probation services; and

“Social services, noncorrectional” that provide services including, but not limited to, individual and family counseling, welfare, relief, referral, job training, or vocational services. “Social services, noncorrectional” includes social advocacy organizations. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2790 Soil recycling facility.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2810 Special use permit.

“Special use permit” means a permit granted by the City to locate a regional land use at a particular location, subject to conditions placed on the proposed use to ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2820 Specialized instruction school.

“Specialized instruction school” means establishments engaged in providing specialized instruction in a designated field of study, rather than a full range of courses in unrelated areas; including, but not limited to:

A. Art;

B. Dance;

C. Music;

D. Cooking;

E. Driving; and

F. Pet obedience training. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2822 Species.

“Species” means any group of animals classified as a species or subspecies as commonly accepted by the scientific community. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2824 Species, endangered.

“Species, endangered” means any fish or wildlife species that is threatened with extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range and is listed by the State or federal government as an endangered species. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2826 Species, threatened.

“Species, threatened” means any fish or wildlife species that is likely to become an endangered species within the foreseeable future throughout a significant portion of its range without cooperative management or removal of threats, and is listed by the State or federal government as a threatened species. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2840 Sporting goods store.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2850 Sports club.

“Sports club” means an establishment engaged in operating physical fitness facilities and sports and recreation clubs. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2860 Stable.

“Stable” means a structure or facility in which horses or other livestock are kept for:

A. Boarding;

B. Training;

C. Riding lessons;

D. Breeding;

E. Rental; or

F. Personal use. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2865 Standalone parking.

“Standalone parking” means an establishment engaged in providing parking space for motor vehicles or boats, usually on an hourly, daily or monthly basis. Parking may be provided on a surface lot, in a garage or, in the case of boats, on a storage rack. Standalone parking does not include required parking associated with a use, authorized through a development application.

May include NAICS 81293 (Parking Lots and Garages). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2870 Standard of service, school districts.

“School districts standard of service” means the standard adopted by each school district which identifies the program year, the class size by grade span and taking into account the requirements of students with special needs, the number of school classrooms, the types of facilities the district believes will best serve its student population, and other factors as identified by the school district. The district’s standard of service shall not be adjusted for any portion of the classrooms housed in relocatable facilities which are used as transitional facilities or for any specialized facilities housed in relocatable facilities. Except as otherwise defined by the school board pursuant to a board resolution, transitional facilities shall mean those facilities that are used to cover the time required for the construction of permanent facilities; provided, that the “necessary financial commitments” as defined in Chapter 18.45 KMC are in place to complete the permanent facilities called for in the capital plan. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2875 Start of construction.

For purposes of flood hazard area regulations, “start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The “actual start” means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the “actual start of construction” means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. [Ord. 19-0488 § 4 (Exh. 2).]


18.20.2884 Storage, indoor.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2887 Storage, outdoor.

“Outdoor storage” means the storage of materials outside of a completely enclosed building for more than 24 hours, including items for sale, lease, shipment, processing, maintenance or repair (including vehicles and equipment), and items used in business operations. [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2890 Stream functions.

“Stream functions” means natural processes performed by streams including functions which are important in facilitating food chain production, providing habitat for nesting, rearing and resting sites for aquatic, terrestrial and avian species, maintaining the availability and quality of water, such as purifying water, acting as recharge and discharge areas for groundwater aquifers, moderating surface and stormwater flows and maintaining the free flowing conveyance of water, sediments and other organic matter. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2900 Stream.

“Stream” means an area where open surface water produces a defined channel or bed, not including irrigation ditches, canals, storm or surface water runoff facilities or other wholly artificial watercourses, unless they are used by salmonids or are used to convey a watercourse naturally occurring prior to construction. A channel or bed need not contain water year-round, provided there is evidence of at least intermittent flow during years of normal rainfall. [Ord. 19-0488 § 4 (Exh. 2); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2910 Street.

“Street” means a public or recorded private thoroughfare providing pedestrian and vehicular access through neighborhoods and communities and to abutting property. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2920 Street frontage.

“Street frontage” means any portion of a lot or combination of lots which directly abut a street. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2925 Street tree.

“Street tree” means trees located within the street right-of-way, adjacent to public or private streets, including undeveloped areas. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2930 Structure.

“Structure” means anything permanently constructed in or on the ground, or over the water; excluding fences eight feet or less in height, decks less than 18 inches above grade, paved areas, and structural or nonstructural fill. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2945 Subdrainage basin or sub-basin.

“Subdrainage basin” or “sub-basin” means the drainage area of the highest order stream containing the subject property impact area. “Stream order” is the term used to define the position of a stream in the hierarchy of tributaries in the watershed. The smallest streams are the highest order (first order) tributaries. These are the upper watershed streams and have no tributaries of their own. When two first order streams meet, they form a second order stream, and when two second order streams meet they become a third order stream, and so on. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2955 Substantial damage.

For purposes of flood hazard area regulations, “substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. [Ord. 19-0488 § 4 (Exh. 2).]


18.20.2960 Substantial improvement.

“Substantial improvement” means any maintenance, repair, structural modification, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the maintenance, repair, modification or addition is started or before the damage occurred, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2963 Supportive living facility.

“Supportive living facility” means an assisted living facility, continuing care facility, convalescent center, or nursing home. Supportive living facility does not include an adult family home, community residential facility, hospital, or secure facility.

May include NAICS 6231 (Nursing Care Facilities) and 6233 (Community Care Facilities for the Elderly). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2965 Taxi stand.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2968 Temporary lodging.

“Temporary lodging” means a hotel, motel, bed and breakfast guesthouse, or other facility providing temporary accommodations for travelers for compensation.

May include NAICS 721 (Accommodation), except 72112 (Casino Hotels) and 7212 (RV/Recreational Vehicle Parks and Recreational Camps). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2970 Theater.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2980 Theatrical production services.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.2990 Tower.

“Tower” means any wireless communications structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas. “Tower” includes a lattice tower or monopole. “Tower” does not include a replacement utility pole or an amateur (ham) radio facility. [Ord. 16-0426 § 4 (Att. B).]


18.20.3000 Trails.

“Trails” means manmade pathways designed and intended for use by pedestrians, bicyclists, equestrians, and/or recreational users. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3010 Transfer station.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3020 Transit bus base.

“Transit bus base” means an establishment for the storage, dispatch, repair and maintenance of coaches and other vehicles of a public transit system. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3023 Transit center.

“Transit center” means any facility designed for accommodating large numbers of public transportation passengers to wait, board, and disembark at the intersection of multiple transit routes. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3030 Transitional housing facilities.

“Transitional housing facilities” means housing units within the City owned by public housing authorities, nonprofit organizations or other public interest groups that provide housing to persons on a temporary basis for a duration not to exceed 24 months in conjunction with job training, self sufficiency training, and human services counseling; the purpose of which is to help persons make the transition from homelessness to placement in permanent housing. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3040 Transmission equipment.

Repealed by Ord. 16-0426. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3060 Transmission support structure.

Repealed by Ord. 16-0426. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3065 Transmission support structure, alternative.

Recodified to KMC 18.20.147 by Ord. 16-0426. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3067 Transmission support structure, guyed.

Repealed by Ord. 16-0426. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3070 Transmitter building.

Repealed by Ord. 16-0426. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3075 Transportation.

“Transportation” means establishments providing transportation of passengers or cargo, such as taxi and limousine services, scenic and sightseeing transportation businesses, motor vehicle towing, trucking, shipping, or freight hauling businesses. This use includes related support activities, such as cargo handling and packing and crating of cargo. Transportation does not include air transportation service or airport (classified as a regional land use).

May include NAICS Sector 48 (Transportation and Warehousing), except the following: 481 (Air Transportation), 486 (Pipeline Transportation), 4881 (Support Activities for Air Transportation), and 493 (Warehousing and Storage). May include 62191 (Ambulance Services). [Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3077 Transportation concurrency.

“Transportation concurrency” means the transportation improvements or strategies to accommodate the impacts of development are made concurrent with the development, as described in KMC 12.80.010(A). Transportation concurrency shall be measured by mobility units, comparing the amount of transportation capital facilities constructed or programmed in the next six years (mobility unit capacity) to the amount of mobility units that would be generated by new development (mobility unit demand). If the City’s mobility unit capacity is larger than the mobility units that would be generated by new development, then the transportation system will be deemed concurrent. [Ord. 16-0420 § 4 (Exh. 2).]


18.20.3082 Tree.

“Tree” means a self-supporting woody perennial plant characterized by one main stem or trunk of at least six inches d.b.h., or a multiple stemmed or trunk system with a definite crown, maturing at a height of at least 12 feet above ground level. The department shall determine whether any specific woody plant shall be considered a tree. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3084 Tree, hazard.

“Hazard tree” means any tree with any structural defect, disease, damage, or combinations of these which make it subject to a high probability of failure which might cause damage to persons or property. A “hazard tree” includes, but is not limited to, any isolated tree(s) that have a high probability of failure due to low wind-firmness in post-construction conditions as determined by a qualified tree protection professional. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3088 Tree, remove or removal.

“Remove” or “removal” with regard to trees means the act of removing a tree by digging up, cutting down, or any act which causes a tree to die within a period of three years from such act. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3090 Tree windthrow.

“Tree windthrow” means the process of uprooting, breaking, and overthrowing of a tree by force of wind during a storm event. [Ord. 15-0409 § 2 (Att. B).]


18.20.3095 Unavoidable impact.

“Unavoidable impact” means adverse impacts to a critical area that remain after all appropriate and practicable avoidance and minimization have been achieved. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3110 Use.

“Use” means activity or function carried out on an area of land, or in a building or structure located thereon. Any use subordinate or incidental to the primary use on a site is considered an accessory use. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3111 Uses, classified.

“Uses, classified” means a use which appears in any list of permitted, conditional, accessory or prohibited uses in this title. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3112 Uses, permitted.

“Uses, permitted” means land uses allowed outright within a zone. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3114 Uses, prohibited.

“Uses, prohibited” means any land use not specifically enumerated or permitted as allowable in that district. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3117 Uses, unclassified.

“Uses, unclassified” means a use which does not appear in any list of permitted, conditional, accessory, or prohibited uses in this title, but which is interpreted by the city manager as similar to a listed permitted, conditional, accessory, or prohibited use. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3118 Utility.

“Utility” means an enterprise or facility serving the public by means of an integrated system of collection, transmission, distribution, and processing facilities through more or less permanent physical connections between the plant of the serving entity and the premises of the customer. Included are systems for the delivery of natural gas, electricity, telecommunications services, and water, and for the disposal of sewage. [Ord. 19-0488 § 4 (Exh. 2).]


18.20.3120 Utility facility.

“Utility facility” means a smaller-scale facility for the distribution or transmission of services to a limited area, including, but not limited to:

A. Telephone exchanges (not including communication facilities);

B. Water pumping or treatment stations or distribution systems;

C. Electrical substations;

D. Water storage reservoirs or tanks;

E. Stormwater management facilities;

F. Repealed by Ord. 14-0391.

G. Natural gas gate stations and limiting stations;

H. Propane, compressed natural gas and liquefied natural gas storage tanks serving multiple lots or uses from which fuel is distributed directly to individual users;

I. Sewer lift stations and wastewater treatment or distribution systems; and

J. Pipes, electrical wires and associated structural supports.

Utility facility does not include larger-scale regional facilities that are classified as a regional land use.

May include NAICS Sector 22 (Utilities). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3130 Vactor waste.

“Vactor waste” means liquid or solid waste material collected from catch basins, retention/detention facilities or drainage pipes. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3140 Vactor waste receiving facility.

“Vactor waste receiving facility” means a facility where vactor waste is brought for treatment and storage prior to final disposal. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3150 Variance.

“Variance” means an adjustment in the application of standards of a zoning code to a particular property. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3155 Variety store.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3160 Vegetation.

“Vegetation” means any and all plant life growing at, below or above the soil surface. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3165 Vehicle or equipment rental.

“Vehicle or equipment rental” means an establishment that provides vehicles, machinery or equipment to customers in return for a rental payment.

May include NAICS Sectors 5321 (Automotive Equipment Rental and Leasing), 5323 (General Rental Centers), and 5324 (Commercial and Industrial Machinery and Equipment Rental and Leasing). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3168 Vehicle refueling station.

“Vehicle refueling station” means an establishment retailing automotive fuels, sometimes in combination with convenience store items.

May include NAICS 447 (Gasoline Stations). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3170 Vocational school.

“Vocational school” means establishments offering training in a skill or trade to be pursued as a career. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3180 Warehousing.

“Warehousing” means establishments providing warehousing and storage of goods, including standalone outdoor storage. Warehouses are distinguished from wholesale trade as warehouses do not sell goods.

May include NAICS Sector 49 (Transportation and Warehousing), except 491 (Postal Service) and 492 (Couriers and Messengers). May include 53113 (Lessors of Miniwarehouses and Self-Storage Units). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3190 Warehousing and wholesale trade.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3200 Wastewater treatment facility.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3220 Water-dependent use.

“Water-dependent use” means a use or portion of a use that cannot exist in a location that is not adjacent to the water, but is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operations. A use that can be carried out only on, in, or adjacent to water. Examples of water-dependent uses include ship cargo terminal loading areas; fishing; ferry and passenger terminals; barge loading, ship building, and dry docking facilities; marinas, moorage, and boat launching facilities; aquaculture; float plane operations; surface water intake; and sanitary sewer and storm drain outfalls. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3225 Water resource inventory area (WRIA).

“Water resource inventory area (WRIA)” means one of 62 watersheds in the State of Washington, each composed of the drainage areas of a stream or streams, as established in Chapter 173-500 WAC as it existed on January 1, 1997. Kenmore is located in WRIA 8, Lake Washington/Cedar/Sammamish River. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3227 Weather protection.

“Weather protection” means awnings, canopies, arcades or marquees which are permanently fixed to buildings and which cover the public sidewalks to provide protection from the weather for pedestrians. Weather protection should allow light and transparency into ground floor uses. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3240 Wetland edge.

“Wetland edge” means the line delineating the outer edge of a wetland, consistent with the 1987 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual in use on January 1, 1995, by the United States Army Corps of Engineers and the United States Environmental Protection Agency as implemented through and consistent with the May 23, 1994, “Washington Regional Guidance on the 1987 Wetland Delineation Manual” document issued by the Corps of Engineers and the Environmental Protection Agency. When the State of Washington, Department of Ecology, adopts a manual as required pursuant to a new Section 11 of Engrossed Senate Bill 5776, wetlands regulated under development regulations shall be delineated pursuant to said manual. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3250 Wetland, forested.

“Forested wetland” means a wetland which is characterized by woody vegetation at least 20 feet tall. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3260 Wetland functions.

“Wetland functions” means natural processes performed by wetlands including functions which are important in facilitating food chain production, providing habitat for nesting, rearing and resting sites for aquatic, terrestrial and avian species, maintaining the availability and quality of water, acting as recharge and discharge areas for groundwater aquifers and moderating surface and stormwater flows, as well as performing other functions including, but not limited to, those set forth in 33 CFR 320.4(b)(2), 1988. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3280 Wetlands.

“Wetlands” means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. Wetlands do not include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland sites, including, but not limited to, irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and landscape amenities, or those wetlands created after July 1, 1990, that were unintentionally created as a result of the construction of a road, street, or highway. Wetlands may include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland areas to mitigate the conversion of wetlands. For identifying and delineating a wetland, local government shall use the Washington State Wetland Identification and Delineation Manual (1997). [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3290 Wholesale trade.

“Wholesale trade” means an establishment that sell goods for resale by other wholesalers or retailers, capital or durable nonconsumer goods, or raw and intermediate material and supplies used in production. Wholesalers normally operate from a warehouse characterized by little or no display of merchandise. Neither the design nor the location of the premises is intended to solicit walk-in traffic.

May include NAICS Sector 42 (Wholesale Trade). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3300 Wildlife shelter.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3305 Wind-firm.

“Wind-firm” means a tree which is capable of withstanding windstorms. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3306 Wireless communication facility (WCF).

“Wireless communication facility” or “WCF” generally means an unmanned facility for the transmission and/or reception of radio frequency (RF) signals or other wireless communications, typically consisting of one or more antennas, a transmission or alternative transmission support structure, cables and other transmission equipment, and an equipment enclosure or cabinets. Wireless communication facility shall not include equipment intended solely for internal household or business use such as wireless modems, cellular signal boosters, or personal cellular cellspots. [Ord. 16-0426 § 4 (Att. B).]


18.20.3307 Wireless services.

Repealed by Ord. 16-0426. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3310 Work release facility.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3320 Wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle.

“Wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle” means a motor vehicle or the remains or remnant parts of a motor vehicle which is mechanically inoperative and cannot be made operative without the addition of vital parts or mechanisms or the application of a substantial amount of labor and is certified by the department as meeting at least three of the following requirements:

A. Is three years old or older;

B. Is extensively damaged, such damage including but not limited to any of the following: missing wheels, tires, motor, or transmission;

C. Is apparently inoperable;

D. Has an approximate fair market value equal only to the approximate value of the scrap in it. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3330 Yard or organic waste processing.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0438. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.20.3340 Zero-lot-line development.

“Zero-lot-line development” means a development that sites a building so that a wall is on the property boundary. Lot segregations for zero-lot-line development are discussed in KMC 17.20.125. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 18.21 RESIDENTIAL ZONES

Sections:

18.21.020    Residential zones R-1, R-4 and R-6 – Use allowances.

18.21.030    Residential zones R-1, R-4 and R-6 – Development standards.

18.21.040    Residential zones R-12, R-18 and R-24 – Use allowances.

18.21.045    Residential zone MHC – Use allowances.

18.21.050    Residential zones R-12, R-18, R-24, R-48, and MHC – Development standards.

18.21.055    MHC zoning exception.

18.21.060    Nonresidential land uses in residential zones.

18.21.070    Personal service, eating and drinking place and retail sales uses in R-4 through R-24 zones.

18.21.073    Accessory uses.

18.21.075    Drive-through service.

18.21.078    Outdoor storage.

18.21.080    Wireless communication facilities.


18.21.020 Residential zones R-1, R-4 and R-6 – Use allowances.

The following uses listed in Table A are identified as permitted, conditionally permitted, or prohibited uses in residential zones R-1, R-4 and R-6:

 

Table A. R-1, R-4 and R-6 Zones Use Allowances  

	PERMITTED	CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED	PROHIBITED

	Air transportation service1	Ambulatory surgery center25	Adult entertainment business

	Arts, entertainment, indoor2,3	Arts, entertainment, outdoor26	Animal kennel/shelter

	Day care4	Cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum27	Auction house

	Educational service5	College/university25	Automotive sales and service, marine

	Family child-care home6	Community residential facility28	Automotive sales and service, non-marine

	Fire or police facility7,8	Eating and drinking place3,29	Business service, intensive

	Health care and social assistance9,10	Hospital25	Business service, standard

	Multiple-family dwelling11	Manufactured housing community30	Construction and trade

	Office12	Personal service31	Funeral home/crematory

	Park13	Recreational facility, indoor3,16,32	Laboratory

	Recreational facility, outdoor14,15,16	Regional land use33,34,35	Manufacturing, heavy

	Religious institution17	Retail sales31,36	Manufacturing, light

	Resource land use18	Temporary lodging37	Marijuana business

	Single detached dwelling unit19,20	 	Marijuana cooperative

	Standalone parking21	 	Mobile food service

	Supportive living facility22	 	Retail sales, bulk

	Utility facility23,24	 	Secure facility

	 	 	Transportation

	 	 	Vehicle or equipment rental

	 	 	Vehicle refueling station

	 	 	Warehousing

	 	 	Wholesale trade

1. One single-engine, noncommercial seaplane shall be permitted only on lots that abut a waterbody, provided there are (a) no aircraft sales, service, repair, charter, or rental; and (b) no storage of aviation fuel except that contained in the tank or tanks of the aircraft. A helistop at an emergency medical evacuation site in conjunction with a police, fire or health service facility is a conditional use. All other air transportation service uses are prohibited.

2. Only (a) in a building listed on the National Register as a historic site or designated as a City landmark; (b) as a re-use of a surplus nonresidential facility; or (c) as a joint use of an existing public school facility. All subject to Chapter 18.50 KMC. Otherwise, a conditional use.

3. Social card games are prohibited.

4. Permitted only as a re-use of a public school facility subject to Chapter 18.50 KMC, or an accessory use to a school, religious institution, park, sports club or public housing administered by a public agency, and:

a. Outdoor play areas shall be completely enclosed by a solid wall or fence, with no openings except for gates and have a minimum height of six feet;

b. Outdoor play equipment shall maintain a minimum distance of 20 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones;

c. Direct access to a developed arterial street shall be required in any residential zone; and

d. Hours of operation may be restricted to assure compatibility with surrounding development.

All other day care uses require a conditional use permit.

5. K-12 facilities only. All other educational service uses require a conditional use permit.

6. A family child-care home is subject to the requirements established by the Washington State Department of Early Learning (DEL) in WAC Title 170. The family child-care home shall meet the following requirements:

a. The family child-care provider shall be licensed by DEL to operate a family child-care home;

b. A safe passenger loading area shall be provided;

c. The family child-care home shall comply with all applicable building, fire, safety, and health codes enforced by the City;

d. The family child-care home shall comply with all applicable development standards of the City, unless determined to be legally nonconforming;

e. All signage shall conform to the applicable requirements of Chapter 18.42 KMC;

f. The City has the authority to limit the hours of operation to facilitate neighborhood compatibility; and

g. Prior to receiving State licensing, the family child-care provider shall provide the City with proof of written notification informing immediately adjoining property owners of the intent to locate and maintain the family child-care home. The notification shall inform the notified parties that comments may be submitted to the DEL and provide contact information for submitting such comments to the DEL. The proof of notification shall be in the form of a written affidavit containing (1) the date and means of notification; (2) a copy of the notification; and (3) a list of the parties to whom the notification was distributed.

7. Limited to “storefront” police offices. Such offices shall not have:

a. Holding cells;

b. Suspect interview rooms; or

c. Long-term storage of stolen properties.

All other fire or police facility uses require a conditional use permit, except police or fire training facilities, such as shooting ranges, auto test tracks, and fire suppression simulations, which are prohibited.

8. For conditionally permitted fire facilities:

a. All buildings and structures shall maintain a minimum distance of 20 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones;

b. Any buildings from which firefighting equipment emerges onto a street shall maintain a distance of 35 feet from such street; and

c. No outdoor storage.

9. Only as a re-use of a public school facility. May be permitted as a conditional use if proposed as re-use of a surplus nonresidential facility. All subject to Chapter 18.50 KMC.

10. Veterinary clinics are prohibited.

11. Townhouse units only permitted and only on lots in a subdivision or short subdivision designed for townhouse units. Other townhouse units require a conditional use permit. Apartments are prohibited.

12. Public agency or utility office permitted only as a re-use of a public school facility or a surplus nonresidential facility subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.50 KMC. Otherwise, public agency or utility office is a conditional use. All other office uses are prohibited.

13. The following conditions and limitations shall apply, where appropriate:

a. Lighting for structures and fields shall be directed away from residential areas;

b. Structures or service yards shall maintain a minimum distance of 50 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones, except for structures in on-site recreation areas provided under KMC 18.30.130 or Chapter 20.47 KMC. Setback requirements for structures in these on-site required recreation areas shall be maintained in accordance with the zoning standards for the underlying residential zone.

14. Limited to stable and covered riding arena. All other outdoor recreational facility uses require a conditional use permit except campground, RV park, and shooting range which are prohibited.

15. Covered riding arenas are subject to KMC 18.70.030 and shall not exceed 20,000 square feet unless a conditional use permit is obtained. Stabling areas, whether attached or detached, shall not be counted in this calculation.

16. Conditionally permitted recreational facilities are subject to the following conditions and limitations:

a. The bulk and scale shall be compatible with residential character of the area;

b. The gross floor area shall not exceed 10,000 square feet unless the building is on the same site or adjacent to a site where a public facility is located or unless the building is a nonprofit facility; and

c. Use is limited to residents of a specified residential development or to sports clubs providing supervised instructional or athletic programs.

17. Only as a re-use of a public school facility subject to Chapter 18.50 KMC. Otherwise, a conditional use permit is required.

18. Farming is permitted. All other resource land uses require a conditional use permit, except mineral extraction, which is prohibited.

19. More than one single detached dwelling unit may be allowed on an individual lot through the conditional use permit process. A conditional use permit is not required for lots in subdivisions, short subdivisions or binding site plans approved as multiple unit lots or for accessory dwelling units.

20. Manufactured homes and mobile homes are allowed only in manufactured housing communities. Designated manufactured homes are not restricted to manufactured housing communities.

21. Limited to commuter parking lots for users of transit, carpools or ride-share programs, provided:

a. They are located on existing parking lots for religious institutions, schools, or other permitted nonresidential uses which have excess capacity available during commuting hours; and

b. The site is adjacent to a designated arterial that has been improved to a standard acceptable to the department.

Other commuter parking lots require a conditional use permit. All other standalone parking uses are prohibited.

22. Only in a building listed on the National Register as an historic site or designated as a King County landmark subject to the provisions of Chapter 2.20 KMC. Otherwise, a conditional use permit is required.

23. Excluding utilities using bulk gas storage tanks, which are a conditional use. Liquefied natural gas storage tanks are prohibited.

24. Private stormwater management facilities permitted except when participating in an approved shared facility drainage plan. Private stormwater management facilities shall be located on the same lot that they are designed to serve except in subdivisions or short subdivisions that set aside a separate tract for such facilities. For shared facilities, such facilities which are not located on the lot they are designed to serve shall be located on a lot with the same or more intensive zoning designation.

25. Only as a re-use of a public school facility or a surplus nonresidential facility subject to Chapter 18.50 KMC.

26. Outdoor performance center and drive-in theater are prohibited.

27. Structures shall maintain a minimum distance of 100 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones.

28. Community residential facility I only. Community residential facility II is prohibited.

29. Not permitted in R-1 and excluding drinking places, and limited to a maximum of 5,000 square feet of gross floor area and subject to KMC 18.21.070.

30. Manufactured housing communities are not permitted in the R-1 zone.

31. Not permitted in R-1 and limited to a maximum of 5,000 square feet of gross floor area and subject to KMC 18.21.070.

32. Bowling center and shooting range are prohibited.

33. Hydroelectric generation facilities limited to those that comply with the following:

a. Any new diversion structure shall not: (1) Exceed a height of eight feet as measured from the streambed; or (2) impound more than three surface acres of water at the normal maximum surface level;

b. There shall be no active storage;

c. The maximum water surface area at any existing dam or diversion shall not be increased;

d. An exceedance flow of no greater than 50 percent in mainstream reach shall be maintained;

e. Any transmission line shall be limited to a: (1) right-of-way of five miles or less; and (2) capacity of 230 kV or less;

f. Any new, permanent access road shall be limited to five miles or less; and

g. The facility shall only be located above any portion of the stream used by anadromous fish.

34. Nonhydroelectric generation facilities limited to cogeneration facilities for on-site use only.

35. Fairground, amusement park, and stadium/arena are prohibited.

36. Pet shops and auto supply stores are prohibited.

37. Bed and breakfast guesthouse only, subject to the following conditions:

a. The guesthouse shall be owner-occupied;

b. Meals shall be served to paying guests only (no restaurant use permitted);

c. The number of guestrooms shall not be greater than that authorized by the International Building and Fire Codes;

d. Parking shall be provided as required by this title; and

e. The guesthouse shall be compatible with the neighborhood character as determined by the city manager, and shall not create significant adverse neighborhood effects that cannot be mitigated.

[Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 18-0463 § 3 (Exh. 2); Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 16-0433 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 16-0426 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0384 § 5; Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.21.030 Residential zones R-1, R-4 and R-6 – Development standards.

The following zone-specific development standards in Table B apply in the R-1, R-4 and R-6 residential zones:

Table B. R-1, R-4 and R-6 Residential Zones Development Standards  

	STANDARDS	Z

O

N

E

S	R-11	R-4	R-6

	Base Density: Dwelling Unit/Acre2	1 du/ac	4 du/ac3	6 du/ac

	Maximum Density: Dwelling Unit/Acre4	 	6 du/ac	9 du/ac

	Minimum Density	 	 	 

	Minimum Lot Width6	35 ft.7	30 ft.	30 ft.

	Minimum Street Setback 	20 ft.7	15 ft.8,9	15 ft.8,9

	Minimum Side Setback5,10	5 ft.7	15 ft. total11	15 ft. total11

	Minimum Rear Setback5,10	5 ft.7	20 ft.	20 ft.

	Maximum Height12	35 ft.	35 ft.	35 ft.

45 ft.13

	Base Impervious Surface: Percentage	30%	45%	60%

	Maximum Impervious Surface: Percentage14	30%15	55%	70%

	Minimum Lot Size	2,500 sq. ft.	7,200 sq. ft.16,17	5,400 sq. ft.16,17

1    a. All subdivisions and short subdivisions in the R-1 zone shall be required to be clustered when the property is located within or contains:

(1) A floodplain;

(2) A regionally or locally significant resource area;

(3) Existing or planned public parks or trails, or connections to such facilities;

(4) A Category I or II wetland or Type S or F stream;

(5) A “greenbelt/urban separator” or “wildlife corridor” area designated by the comprehensive plan.

b. The development shall be clustered away from critical areas or corridors such as urban separators or the wildlife habitat network to the extent possible and the open space shall be placed in a separate tract that includes at least 50 percent of the site. Open space tracts shall be permanent and meet the provisions of KMC 17.20.130.

2 Density applies only to dwelling units and not to sleeping units.

3 Manufactured housing communities shall be allowed a base density of six dwelling units per acre.

4 This maximum density may be achieved only through the application of residential density incentives pursuant to Chapter 18.80 KMC or transfers of density credits, or any combination of density incentive or density transfer. Maximum density may only be exceeded pursuant to KMC 18.80.040(E)(1)(f).

5 These standards may be modified under the provisions for zero-lot-line developments.

6 The building envelope is determined through meeting minimum lot size and minimum lot width measurement requirements (KMC 18.30.110).

7 The standards of the R-4 zone shall apply if a lot is less than 15,000 square feet in area.

8 If development provides alleys or consists of townhouses, then the street setback may equal 10 feet.

9 At least 20 linear feet of driveway shall be provided between any garage, carport or other fenced parking area and the street property line. The linear distance shall be measured along the centerline of the driveway from the access point to such garage, carport or fenced area to the street property line.

10 Vehicle access points from garages, carports or fenced parking areas shall be set back from the property line on which a joint use driveway is located to provide a straight line length of at least 26 feet as measured from the centerline of the garage, carport or fenced parking area, from the access point to the opposite side of the joint use driveway.

11 Any side yard shall equal a minimum of five feet but the two side yards combined must equal a minimum of 15 feet.

12 Reserved.

13 The maximum height of 45 feet to be used only for projects as follows:

a. In R-6 zones, a building with a footprint built on slopes exceeding a 15 percent finished grade.

14 Applies to each individual lot. Impervious surface area standards for:

a. Regional uses shall be established at the time of permit review;

b. Nonresidential uses in residential zones shall comply with KMC 18.21.060 and 18.30.170;

c. Individual lots in the R-4 through R-6 zones which are less than 9,076 square feet in area shall be subject to the applicable provisions of the nearest comparable R-6 zone;

d. Lots may be increased beyond the total amount permitted in this chapter subject to approval of a conditional use permit;

e. The base impervious surface percentage may be exceeded, up to the maximum impervious surface percentage, provided low impact development strategies are implemented subject to approval by the city manager.

15 Lots smaller than one-half acre in area shall comply with standards of the nearest comparable R-4 through R-6 zone. For lots that are one-half acre in area or larger, the maximum impervious surface area allowed shall be at least 10,000 square feet. On any lot over one acre in area, an additional five percent of the lot area may be used for buildings related to agricultural or forestry practices. For lots smaller than two acres but larger than one-half acre, an additional 10 percent of the lot area may be used for structures which are determined to be medically necessary, provided the applicant submits with the permit application a notarized affidavit, conforming with the requirements of KMC 18.100.170(A)(2).

16 For properties with critical areas or topographic constraints, up to 20 percent of the number of lots in a subdivision or a short subdivision of more than four lots, and one of the lots in a short plat of four lots or less, may contain an area less than the prescribed minimum for this zoning district. In no case shall any lots be created which contain an area more than 10 percent less than the prescribed minimum for this zoning district. These smaller lots shall be located so as to have the least impact on surrounding properties in terms of consistency of street frontages and privacy of abutting properties.

17 This excludes any area required for public or private streets, access easements, access tracts, and access panhandles.

[Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 16-0433 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.21.040 Residential zones R-12, R-18 and R-24 – Use allowances.

The following uses listed in Table C are identified as permitted, conditionally permitted, or prohibited uses in residential zones R-12, R-18 and R-24:

Table C. R-12, R-18, and R-24 Zones Use Allowances  

	PERMITTED	CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED	PROHIBITED

	Air transportation service1	Ambulatory surgery center25	Adult entertainment business

	Arts, entertainment, indoor2,3	Arts, entertainment, outdoor26	Animal kennel/shelter

	College/university4,5	Cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum27	Auction house

	Community residential facility	Eating and drinking place3,28	Automotive sales and service, marine

	Construction and trade6	Hospital5	Automotive sales and service, non-marine

	Day care7	Personal service29	Business service, intensive

	Educational service8	Recreational facility, indoor3,30,31	Business service, standard

	Family child-care home9	Regional land use32	Funeral home/crematory

	Fire or police facility10,11,12	Retail sales29,33	Laboratory

	Health care and social assistance4,5,13	Temporary lodging34	Manufacturing, heavy

	Manufactured housing community	Warehousing35	Manufacturing, light

	Multiple-family dwelling	 	Marijuana business

	Office14	 	Marijuana cooperative

	Park15	 	Mobile food service

	Recreational facility, outdoor16,17	 	Resource land use

	Religious institution18	 	Retail sales, bulk

	Single detached dwelling unit19,20	 	Secure facility

	Standalone parking21	 	Transportation

	Supportive living facility	 	Vehicle or equipment rental

	Utility facility22,23,24	 	Vehicle refueling station

	 	 	Wholesale trade

1. One single-engine, noncommercial seaplane shall be permitted only on lots that abut a waterbody, provided there are (a) no aircraft sales, service, repair, charter, or rental; and (b) no storage of aviation fuel except that contained in the tank or tanks of the aircraft. A helistop at an emergency medical evacuation site in conjunction with a police, fire or health service facility is a conditional use. All other air transportation service uses are prohibited.

2. Museums and libraries permitted only as accessory to a park or in a building listed on the National Register as an historic site or designated as a City landmark subject to Chapter 18.50 KMC; otherwise, a conditional use permit is required. Artist studios permitted only as a re-use of a surplus nonresidential facility subject to Chapter 18.50 KMC or as a joint use of an existing public school facility; otherwise a conditional use permit is required. For all other arts, entertainment, indoor uses, a conditional use permit is required, except theater, which is prohibited.

3. Social card games are prohibited.

4. Permitted only as a re-use of a public school facility subject to Chapter 18.50 KMC.

5. Conditionally permitted only as a re-use of a surplus nonresidential facility subject to Chapter 18.50 KMC.

6. Permitted when:

a. Located in the R-24 zone; and

b. On a site in office or construction and trade office uses as of May 8, 2003; and

c. Part of a mixed use development; and

d. Limited to 15,000 square feet; and

e. No outdoor storage of equipment occurs.

Otherwise, prohibited.

7. Day care II permitted only as a re-use of a public school facility subject to Chapter 18.50 KMC, or an accessory use to a school, religious institution, park, sports club or public housing administered by a public agency, and:

a. Outdoor play areas shall be completely enclosed by a solid wall or fence, with no openings except for gates and have a minimum height of six feet;

b. Outdoor play equipment shall maintain a minimum distance of 20 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones;

c. Direct access to a developed arterial street shall be required in any residential zone; and

d. Hours of operation may be restricted to assure compatibility with surrounding development.

Otherwise, day care II requires a conditional use permit.

8. K-12 facilities only, except vocational school which is permitted only as a re-use of a surplus nonresidential facility subject to Chapter 18.50 KMC unless a conditional use permit is obtained. All other educational service uses require a conditional use permit.

9. A family child-care home is subject to the requirements established by the Washington State Department of Early Learning (DEL) in WAC Title 170. The family child-care home shall meet the following requirements:

a. The family child-care provider shall be licensed by DEL to operate a family child-care home;

b. A safe passenger loading area shall be provided;

c. The family child-care home shall comply with all applicable building, fire, safety, and health codes enforced by the City;

d. The family child-care home shall comply with all applicable development standards of the City, unless determined to be legally nonconforming;

e. All signage shall conform to the applicable requirements of Chapter 18.42 KMC; and

f. The City has the authority to limit the hours of operation to facilitate neighborhood compatibility.

10. Limited to “storefront” police offices. Such offices shall not have:

a. Holding cells;

b. Suspect interview rooms; or

c. Long-term storage of stolen properties.

All other police facilities require a conditional use permit.

11. Fire facilities require a conditional use permit, subject to the following:

a. All buildings and structures shall maintain a minimum distance of 20 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones;

b. Any buildings from which fire-fighting equipment emerges onto a street shall maintain a distance of 35 feet from such street; and

c. No outdoor storage.

12. Fire or police training facilities such as shooting ranges, auto test tracks, and fire suppression simulations are prohibited.

13. Veterinary clinics are prohibited.

14. Public agency or utility office is permitted only as a re-use of a public school facility or a surplus nonresidential facility subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.50 KMC. All other office uses require a conditional use permit.

15. The following conditions and limitations shall apply, where appropriate:

a. Lighting for structures and fields shall be directed away from residential areas;

b. Structures or service yards shall maintain a minimum distance of 50 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones, except for structures in on-site recreation areas provided under KMC 18.30.130 or Chapter 20.47 KMC. Setback requirements for structures in these on-site required recreation areas shall be maintained in accordance with the zoning standards for the underlying residential zone.

16. Golf course facility only permitted. Clubhouses, maintenance buildings, equipment storage areas and driving range tees shall be at least 50 feet from residential property lines. Lighting for practice greens and driving range ball impact areas shall be directed away from adjoining residential zones. Applications shall comply with adopted best management practices for golf course development. All other outdoor recreational facility uses are conditional uses, except stable, RV park, and shooting range, which are prohibited.

17. Conditional uses are subject to the following conditions and limitations:

a. The bulk and scale shall be compatible with residential character of the area;

b. Use is limited to residents of a specified residential development or to sports clubs providing supervised instructional or athletic programs.

18. Permitted only as a re-use of a public school facility subject to Chapter 18.50 KMC. Other religious institutions require a conditional use permit.

19. More than one single detached dwelling unit may be allowed on an individual lot through the conditional use permit process. A conditional use permit is not required for lots in subdivisions, short subdivisions or binding site plans approved as multiple unit lots or for accessory dwelling units.

20. Manufactured homes and mobile homes are allowed only in manufactured housing communities. Designated manufactured homes are not restricted to manufactured housing communities.

21. Limited to commuter parking facilities for users of transit, carpools or ride-share programs, provided:

a. They are located on existing parking lots for religious institutions, schools, or other permitted nonresidential uses which have excess capacity available during commuting hours; and

b. The site is adjacent to a designated arterial that has been improved to a standard acceptable to the department.

Otherwise a conditional use permit is required.

22. Bulk gas storage tanks which pipe to individual residences require a conditional use permit. All other bulk gas storage tanks, including liquefied natural gas storage tanks, are prohibited.

23. Private stormwater management facilities permitted except when participating in an approved shared facility drainage plan. Private stormwater management facilities shall be located on the same lot that they are designed to serve except in subdivisions or short subdivisions that set aside a separate tract for such facilities. For shared facilities, such facilities which are not located on the lot they are designed to serve shall be located on a lot with the same or more intensive zoning designation.

24. Hydroelectric generation facilities are prohibited. A nonhydroelectric generation facility may be conditionally permitted as a cogeneration facility for on-site use only.

25. Conditionally permitted only as a re-use of a surplus nonresidential facility subject to Chapter 18.50 KMC.

26. Arboretum only.

27. Structures shall maintain a minimum distance of 100 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones.

28. Excluding drinking places, and limited to a maximum of 5,000 square feet of gross floor area and subject to KMC 18.21.070.

29. Limited to a maximum of 5,000 square feet of gross floor area and subject to the additional requirements in KMC 18.21.070.

30. Conditional uses are subject to the following conditions and limitations:

a. The bulk and scale shall be compatible with residential character of the area;

b. For sports clubs, the gross floor area shall not exceed 10,000 square feet unless the building is on the same site or adjacent to a site where a public facility is located or unless the building is a nonprofit facility; and

c. Use is limited to residents of a specified residential development or to sports clubs providing supervised instructional or athletic programs.

31. Bowling center and shooting range are prohibited.

32. Amusement park, fairground, and stadium/arena are prohibited.

33. Auto supply stores and pet shops are prohibited.

34. Bed and breakfast guesthouse only, subject to the following conditions:

a. The guesthouse shall be owner-occupied;

b. Meals shall be served to paying guests only (no restaurant use permitted);

c. The number of guestrooms shall not be greater than that authorized by the International Building and Fire Codes;

d. Parking shall be provided as required by this title; and

e. The guesthouse shall be compatible with the neighborhood character as determined by the city manager, and shall not create significant adverse neighborhood effects that cannot be mitigated.

35. Self-service storage only permitted and only if accessory to an apartment development of at least 12 units, provided:

a. The gross floor area in self-service storage shall not exceed the total gross floor area of the apartment dwellings on the site;

b. All outdoor lights shall be deflected, shaded and focused away from all adjoining property;

c. The use of the facility shall be limited to dead storage of household goods;

d. No servicing or repair of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawn mowers or similar equipment;

e. No outdoor storage or storage of flammable liquids, highly combustible or explosive materials or hazardous chemicals;

f. No residential occupancy of the storage units;

g. No business activity other than the rental of storage units; and

h. A resident director shall be required on the site and shall be responsible for maintaining the operation of the facility in conformance with the conditions of approval.

[Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 18-0463 § 3 (Exh. 2); Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 16-0426 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0384 § 5; Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.21.045 Residential zone MHC – Use allowances.

The following uses listed in Table D are identified as permitted, conditionally permitted, or prohibited uses in residential zone MHC: 

Table D. MHC Zone Use Allowances  

	PERMITTED	CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED	PROHIBITED

	Day care1	Community residential facility	Adult entertainment business

	Family child-care home2	Cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum	Air transportation service

	Manufactured housing community8	Educational service6	Ambulatory surgery center

	Park3	Religious institution	Animal kennel/shelter

	Single detached dwelling unit4,5	Supportive living facility	Arts, entertainment, indoor

	 	Temporary lodging7	Arts, entertainment, outdoor

	 	 	Auction house

	 	 	Automotive sales and service, marine

	 	 	Automotive sales and service, nonmarine

	 	 	Business service, intensive

	 	 	Business service, standard

	 	 	College/university

	 	 	Construction and trade

	 	 	Eating and drinking place

	 	 	Fire or police facility

	 	 	Funeral home/crematory

	 	 	Health care and social assistance

	 	 	Hospital

	 	 	Laboratory

	 	 	Manufacturing, heavy

	 	 	Manufacturing, light

	 	 	Marijuana business

	 	 	Marijuana cooperative

	 	 	Mobile food service

	 	 	Multiple-family dwelling

	 	 	Office

	 	 	Personal service

	 	 	Recreational facility, indoor

	 	 	Recreational facility, outdoor

	 	 	Regional land use

	 	 	Resource land use

	 	 	Retail sales

	 	 	Retail sales, bulk

	 	 	Secure facility

	 	 	Standalone parking

	 	 	Transportation

	 	 	Utility facility

	 	 	Vehicle or equipment rental

	 	 	Vehicle refueling station

	 	 	Warehousing

	 	 	Wholesale trade

1. Day care I is permitted. Day care II is permitted only as an accessory use to a religious institution, park or public housing administered by a public agency, and:

a. Outdoor play areas shall be completely enclosed by a solid wall or fence with no openings except for gates and have a minimum height of six feet;

b. Outdoor play equipment shall maintain a minimum distance of 20 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones;

c. Direct access to a developed arterial street shall be required in any residential zone; and

d. Hours of operation may be restricted to assure compatibility with surrounding development.

Otherwise, day care II requires a conditional use permit.

2. A family child-care home is subject to the requirements established by the Washington State Department of Early Learning (DEL) in WAC Title 170. The family child-care home shall meet the following requirements:

a. The family child-care provider shall be licensed by DEL to operate a family child-care home;

b. A safe passenger loading area shall be provided;

c. The family child-care home shall comply with all applicable building, fire, safety, and health codes enforced by the City;

d. The family child-care home shall comply with all applicable development standards of the City, unless determined to be legally nonconforming;

e. All signage shall conform to the applicable requirements of Chapter 18.42 KMC; and

f. The City has the authority to limit the hours of operation to facilitate neighborhood compatibility.

3. The following conditions and limitations shall apply, where appropriate:

a. Lighting for structures and fields shall be directed away from residential areas;

b. Structures or service yards shall maintain a minimum distance of 50 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones.

4. One single detached dwelling unit only per existing legal lot as of April 23, 2019.

5. Manufactured homes and mobile homes are allowed only in manufactured housing communities. Designated manufactured homes are not restricted to manufactured housing communities.

6. K-12 facilities only. All other educational service uses are prohibited.

7. Bed and breakfast guesthouse only, subject to the following conditions:

a. The guesthouse shall be owner-occupied;

b. Meals shall be served to paying guests only (no restaurant use permitted);

c. The number of guestrooms shall not be greater than that authorized by the International Building and Fire Codes;

d. Parking shall be provided as required by this title; and

e. The guesthouse shall be compatible with the neighborhood character as determined by the city manager, and shall not create significant adverse neighborhood effects that cannot be mitigated.

8. For properties continuing in an existing manufactured housing community use after April 23, 2019, a transfer of density credits shall be permitted. See Chapter 18.80 KMC.

[Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A).]


18.21.050 Residential zones R-12, R-18, R-24, R-48, and MHC – Development standards. 

The following zone-specific development standards in Table E apply in the R-12, R-18, R-24, R-48, and MHC residential zones:

 

Table E. R-12, R-18, R-24, R-48, and MHC Residential Zones Development Standards  

	STANDARDS	Z

O

N

E

S	R-12	R-18	R-24	R-48	MHC12

	Base Density: Dwelling Unit/Acre1	12 du/ac	18 du/ac	24 du/ac	48 du/ac	12 du/ac

	Maximum Density: Dwelling Unit/Acre2	18 du/ac	27 du/ac	36 du/ac	72 du/ac	18 du/ac

	Minimum Density11	80%	75%	70%	65%	80%

	Minimum Lot Width4	30 ft.	30 ft.	30 ft.	30 ft.	--

	Minimum Street Setback	10 ft.6	10 ft.6	10 ft.6	10 ft.6	10 ft.

	Minimum Side Setback3,5	5 ft.7	5 ft.7	5 ft.7	5 ft.7	5 ft.

	Minimum Rear Setback3,5	5 ft.7	5 ft.7	5 ft.7	5 ft.7	5 ft.

	Base Height8	60 ft.	60 ft.

80 ft.9	60 ft.

80 ft.9	60 ft.

80 ft.9	35 ft.

	Maximum Impervious Surface: Percentage10	85%	85%	85%	90%	85%

	Minimum Lot Size	--	--	--	--	--

1 Density applies only to dwelling units and not to sleeping units.

2 This maximum density may be achieved only through the application of residential density incentives pursuant to Chapter 18.80 KMC or transfers of density credits, or any combination of density incentive or density transfer. Maximum density may only be exceeded pursuant to KMC 18.80.040(E)(1)(f).

3 These standards may be modified under the provisions for zero-lot-line developments.

4 The building envelope is determined through meeting minimum lot size and minimum lot width measurement requirements (KMC 18.30.110).

5 Vehicle access points from garages, carports or fenced parking areas shall be set back from the property line on which a joint use driveway is located to provide a straight line length of at least 26 feet as measured from the centerline of the garage, carport or fenced parking area, from the access point to the opposite side of the joint use driveway.

6 At least 20 linear feet of driveway shall be provided between any garage, carport or other fenced parking area and the street property line. The linear distance shall be measured along the centerline of the driveway from the access point to such garage, carport or fenced area to the street property line.

7    a. For developments consisting of three or more single detached dwellings located on a single parcel, the setback shall be 10 feet along any property line abutting R-1 through R-6, except for structures in on-site recreation areas required in KMC 18.30.130, which shall have a setback of five feet.

b. For townhouse and apartment development, the setback shall be 20 feet along any property line abutting R-1 through R-6, except for structures in on-site recreation areas required in KMC 18.30.130, which shall have a setback of five feet, unless the townhouse or apartment development is adjacent to property upon which an existing townhouse or apartment development is located.

8 In the R-12, R-18, R-24 and R-48 zones, height limits may be increased when portions of the structure which exceed the base height limit provide one additional foot of street and interior setback for each foot above the base height limit, provided the maximum height may not exceed 75 feet. Netting or fencing and support structures for the netting or fencing used to contain golf balls in the operation of golf courses or golf driving ranges are exempt from the additional interior setback requirements; provided, that the maximum height shall not exceed 75 feet.

9 The base height to be used only for projects as follows:

a. In R-18, R-24 and R-48 zones using residential density incentives and transfer of density credits pursuant to this title.

10 Applies to each individual lot. Impervious surface area standards for:

a. Regional uses shall be established at the time of permit review;

b. Nonresidential uses in residential zones shall comply with KMC 18.21.060 and 18.30.170;

c. Lots may be increased beyond the total amount permitted in this chapter subject to approval of a conditional use permit.

11 Minimum density is determined by multiplying the allowable number of dwelling units, as calculated using KMC 18.30.020, by the percentage shown for each zone.

12 See also the standards in KMC 18.50.140.

[Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.21.055 MHC zoning exception.

A. A manufactured housing community landowner may request an exception from the application of the MHC zoning to their property through a Type 4 permit process as described in Chapter 19.25 KMC.

B. Along with other information required by the department, the application shall include information demonstrating that:

1. There is no reasonable use of the MHC property under the MHC zoning;

2. The uses authorized by the MHC zoning are not economically viable at the property’s location; and

3. The proposal meets the zone reclassification criteria in KMC 18.115.060.

If, based on the information provided, the request is granted by the city council, the property shall revert to the zoning designation in place on April 23, 2019, without further action by the council. If necessary, a comprehensive plan map amendment to recognize that zoning designation shall be initiated by the City. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A).]


18.21.060 Nonresidential land uses in residential zones.

Except for utility facilities, regional land uses, and nonresidential uses regulated by KMC 18.21.070, all nonresidential uses located in the R zones shall be subject to the following requirements:

A. Impervious surface coverage shall not exceed:

1. Seventy percent of the site in the R-1 through R-6 zones.

2. Eighty percent of the site in the R-12 through R-48 and MHC zones.

B. Buildings and structures, except fences and wire or mesh backstops, shall not be closer than 30 feet to any property line, except as provided in subsection C of this section.

C. A single detached dwelling allowed as accessory to a church or school shall conform to the setback requirements of the zone.

D. Parking areas are permitted within the required setback area from property lines, provided such parking areas are located outside of the required landscape area.

E. Sites shall abut or be accessible from at least one public street functioning at a level consistent with the City street design standards. New high school sites shall abut or be accessible from a public street functioning as an arterial per the City design standards.

F. The base height shall conform to the zone in which the use is located.

G. Building illumination and lighted signs shall be designed so that no direct rays of light are projected into neighboring residences or onto any street right-of-way. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.21.070 Personal service, eating and drinking place and retail sales uses in R-4 through R-24 zones.

Personal service uses, eating and drinking place uses, and retail sales uses which are located in the R-4 through R-24 zones shall be subject to the following requirements:

A. Each individual establishment shall not exceed 5,000 square feet of gross floor area and the combined total of all contiguous commercial establishments shall not exceed 15,000 square feet of gross floor area;

B. Establishments shall not be located less than one mile from another commercial establishment, unless located with other establishments meeting the criteria in subsection A of this section;

C. Establishment sites shall abut an intersection of two public streets, each of which is designated as a neighborhood collector or arterial and which has improved pedestrian facilities for at least one-fourth mile from the site;

D. The maximum on-site parking ratios for establishments and sites shall be two per 1,000 square feet and required parking shall not be located between the building(s) and the street;

E. Buildings shall comply with the building facade modulation and roofline variation requirements in KMC 18.50.080 and at least one facade of the building shall be located within five feet of the sidewalk;

F. If the personal service, eating and drinking place, or retail sales use is located in a building with multifamily uses, then the commercial use shall be on the ground floor and shall not exceed 25 percent of the total floor area of the building; and

G. Sign and landscaping standards for the use apply. [Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.21.073 Accessory uses.

Accessory uses, when consistent with the definition in Chapter 18.20 KMC, are allowed as determined by the city manager. [Ord. 17-0438 § 3 (Att. B).]


18.21.075 Drive-through service.

Drive-through service is prohibited in these zoning districts. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 17-0438 § 3 (Att. B).]


18.21.078 Outdoor storage.

Outdoor storage is prohibited in these zoning districts. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 17-0438 § 3 (Att. B).]


18.21.080 Wireless communication facilities.

Use allowances and development regulations for wireless communication facilities are located in Chapter 18.60 KMC. [Ord. 16-0426 § 6 (Att. D).]


Chapter 18.22 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS ZONE

Sections:

18.22.010    Neighborhood business zone – Use allowances.

18.22.015    Accessory uses.

18.22.020    Neighborhood business zone – Development standards.

18.22.025    Drive-through service.

18.22.028    Outdoor storage.

18.22.030    Wireless communication facilities.


18.22.010 Neighborhood business zone – Use allowances.

The following uses listed in Table A are identified as permitted, conditionally permitted, or prohibited uses in the neighborhood business zone:

Table A. Neighborhood Business Zone Use Allowances  

	PERMITTED	CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED	PROHIBITED

	Arts, entertainment, indoor1,2	Automotive sales and service, marine4	Adult entertainment business

	Business service, standard	Automotive sales and service, nonmarine4	Air transportation service

	Community residential facility9	Manufacturing, light	Ambulatory surgery center

	Day care	Recreational facility, indoor2,22	Animal kennel/shelter

	Eating and drinking place2,10,28	 	Arts, entertainment, outdoor

	Educational service28	 	Auction house

	Fire or police facility12	 	Business service, intensive

	Health care and social assistance13,14	 	Cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum

	Mobile food service27	 	College/university

	Multiple-family dwelling15	 	Construction and trade

	Office	 	Family child-care home

	Park	 	Funeral home/crematory

	Personal service28	 	Hospital

	Religious institution	 	Laboratory

	Retail sales16,28	 	Manufactured housing community

	Supportive living facility9	 	Manufacturing, heavy

	Temporary lodging18,19	 	Marijuana business

	Vehicle refueling station	 	Marijuana cooperative

	 	 	Recreational facility, outdoor

	 	 	Regional land use

	 	 	Resource land use

	 	 	Retail sales, bulk

	 	 	Secure facility

	 	 	Single detached dwelling unit

	 	 	Standalone parking

	 	 	Transportation

	 	 	Utility facility

	 	 	Vehicle or equipment rental

	 	 	Warehousing

	 	 	Wholesale trade

1. Artist studios are permitted. All other indoor arts, entertainment uses require a conditional use permit.

2. Social card games are prohibited.

3. Repealed by Ord. 18-0454.

4. Automotive sales are prohibited. Repair or service shall only be performed in an enclosed building, with no outdoor storage of materials. Top, body, and upholstery repair shops, paint shops, and tire retreading are prohibited, as is heavy equipment and truck repair.

5. Repealed by Ord. 18-0454.

6. Repealed by Ord. 18-0454.

7. Repealed by Ord. 18-0454.

8. Repealed by Ord. 18-0454.

9. Only as part of a mixed use development subject to the conditions of Chapter 18.50 KMC.

10. Drinking places are prohibited.

11. Repealed by Ord. 18-0454.

12. Police facility only and limited to “storefront” police offices. Such offices shall not have:

a. Holding cells; or

b. Long-term storage of stolen properties.

13. Veterinary clinics permitted subject to the following:

a. No burning of refuse or dead animals is allowed;

b. The portion of the building or structure in which animals are kept or treated shall be soundproofed. All run areas, excluding confinement areas for livestock, shall be surrounded by an eight-foot solid wall and surfaced with concrete or other impervious material; and

c. The provisions of Chapter 18.70 KMC relative to animal keeping are met.

14. Social assistance permitted only as a re-use of a surplus nonresidential facility subject to Chapter 18.50 KMC.

15. Only as part of a mixed use development subject to the conditions of Chapter 18.50 KMC, except that townhouse developments are permitted subject to KMC 17.20.125, 18.22.020, 18.30.130 and 18.50.050.

16. Used goods shops are prohibited.

17. Repealed by Ord. 18-0454.

18. Bed and breakfast guesthouse only. All other temporary lodging is prohibited.

19. Bed and breakfast guesthouse shall be subject to the following conditions:

a. The guesthouse shall be owner-occupied;

b. The number of guestrooms shall not be greater than that authorized by the International Building and Fire Codes;

c. Parking shall be provided as required by this title; and

d. The guesthouse shall be compatible with the neighborhood character as determined by the city manager, and shall not create significant adverse neighborhood effects that cannot be mitigated.

20. Repealed by Ord. 18-0454.

21. Repealed by Ord. 18-0454.

22. Shooting ranges are prohibited.

23. Repealed by Ord. 18-0454.

24. Repealed by Ord. 18-0454.

25. Repealed by Ord. 18-0454.

26. Repealed by Ord. 18-0454.

27. Mobile food service is permitted subject to the following requirements: 

a. No permanent fencing, walls, or other structures shall be installed which hinder removal of the structure from the site;

b. No required parking stall shall be blocked or rendered unusable as a result of the mobile vendor; 

c. Safe ingress and egress shall be maintained. Visibility for transportation and pedestrian access shall be maintained;

d. The limited duration of the mobile vendor shall be established as a condition of approval of any applicable permits;

e. A sign permit is required for exterior signage in accordance with the sign code, Chapter 18.42 KMC;

f. If a stand: 

(1) The stand shall be located on a sidewalk or near a storefront consistent with barrier-free regulations; 

(2) The stand location on the sidewalk or near a storefront shall provide for at least four feet of unobstructed sidewalk between the stand and the sidewalk edge for pedestrian movement.

28. Each use is limited to maximum 5,000 square feet per use and 15,000 square feet total contiguous.

[Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 18-0454 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 16-0426 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0384 § 5; Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.22.015 Accessory uses.

Accessory uses, when consistent with the definition in Chapter 18.20 KMC, are allowed as determined by the city manager. [Ord. 17-0438 § 3 (Att. B).]


18.22.020 Neighborhood business zone – Development standards. 

The following zone-specific development standards in Table B apply in the neighborhood business zone:

Table B. Neighborhood Business Zone Development Standards  

	 	Z

O

N

E	NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS

	STANDARDS	NB

	Base Density: Dwelling Unit/Acre	8 du/ac

	Maximum Density: Dwelling Unit/Acre	24 du/ac2

	Minimum Street Setback	10 ft.3; or 0 ft. for a mixed use building with commercial on the ground floor or for any building with structured parking

	Minimum Interior Setback	20 ft.5

	Base Height	35 ft.

45 ft.7

	Maximum Impervious Surface: Percentage9	85%

1 Repealed by Ord. 18-0454.

2 This density may only be achieved through mixed use development or through the application of residential density incentives or transfer of density credits. See Chapter 18.80 KMC.

3 Gas station pump islands shall be placed no closer than 25 feet to street front lines.

4 Repealed by Ord. 18-0454.

5 Required on property lines adjoining residential zones except when a townhouse development is proposed to be located adjacent to property upon which an existing townhouse development is located.

6 Repealed by Ord. 18-0454.

7 This base height is allowed only for mixed use developments.

8 Repealed by Ord. 18-0454.

9 The impervious surface area for any lot may be increased beyond the total amount permitted in this chapter subject to approval of a conditional use permit.

[Ord. 18-0454 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.22.025 Drive-through service.

Drive-through service is permitted as an accessory use. Drive-through service shall be oriented to the side and/or rear of the building, and integrated into the exterior wall. Drive-through lanes shall not be located between the street and the main pedestrian access to the buildings. Modifications to these requirements may be reviewed through the site plan or building permit review process when meeting the intent of pedestrian orientation pursuant to Chapter 18.52 KMC, Downtown Design Standards. [Ord. 17-0438 § 3 (Att. B).]


18.22.028 Outdoor storage.

Outdoor storage is prohibited in this zoning district. [Ord. 17-0438 § 3 (Att. B).]


18.22.030 Wireless communication facilities.

Use allowances and development regulations for wireless communication facilities are located in Chapter 18.60 KMC. [Ord. 16-0426 § 6 (Att. D).]


Chapter 18.23 COMMUNITY BUSINESS ZONE

Sections:

18.23.010    Intent.

18.23.015    Subareas.

18.23.020    Community business zone west subarea – Use allowances.

18.23.025    Community business zone Juanita subarea – Use allowances.

18.23.030    Accessory uses.

18.23.040    Community business zone – Development standards.

18.23.045    Drive-through service.

18.23.048    Outdoor storage.

18.23.050    Wireless communication facilities.

18.23.055    Repealed.


18.23.010 Intent.

A. The purpose of the community business zone (CB) is to provide pedestrian-friendly, mixed use development that both supports larger mixed use and commercial areas with its residential development, and provides small-scale retail, office and personal services for the local community. The CB zone also provides retail and personal services in locations that are not appropriate for extensive outdoor storage or automotive sales uses. These purposes are accomplished by:

1. Providing for offices as well as a wide range of small-scale retail, educational, and personal service uses;

2. Encouraging mixed use (housing and retail/service/office) developments; and

3. Excluding commercial uses with extensive outdoor storage as well as automotive sales uses.

B. Use of this zone is appropriate in areas that are designated by the comprehensive plan that are served at the time of development by adequate public sewers, water supply, streets and other needed public facilities and services. [Ord. 18-0454 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.23.015 Subareas.

The community business zone is divided into two subareas: community business west and community business Juanita as depicted in Figure 18.23.015.1.


[IMAGE]


[Ord. 18-0454 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.23.020 Community business zone west subarea – Use allowances.

The following uses listed in Table A are identified as permitted, conditionally permitted, or prohibited uses in the community business zone west subarea:

Table A. Community Business Zone West Subarea Use Allowances  

	PERMITTED	CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED	PROHIBITED

	Arts, entertainment, indoor1	Ambulatory surgery center	Adult entertainment business

	Business service, standard	College/university	Air transportation service

	Day care	Community residential facility	Animal kennel/shelter

	Eating and drinking place2	Fire or police facility	Arts, entertainment, outdoor

	Educational service3	Laboratory	Auction house

	Family child-care home4	Recreational facility, indoor	Automotive sales and service, marine

	Health care and social assistance5	Regional land use	Automotive sales and service, non-marine

	Multiple-family dwelling	Religious institution	Business service, intensive

	Office	Supportive living facility	Cemetery, columbarium, or mausoleum

	Park	 	Construction and trade

	Personal service2	 	Funeral home/crematory

	Retail sales2,6	 	Hospital

	 	 	Manufactured housing community

	Single detached dwelling unit, existing legal7	 	Manufacturing, heavy

	Standalone parking10	 	Manufacturing, light

	Temporary lodging8	 	Marijuana business

	Utility facility9	 	Marijuana cooperative

	 	 	Mobile food service

	 	 	Recreational facility, outdoor

	 	 	Resource land use

	 	 	Retail sales, bulk

	 	 	Secure facility

	 	 	Transportation

	 	 	Vehicle or equipment rental

	 	 	Vehicle refueling station

	 	 	Warehousing

	 	 	Wholesale trade

1. Artist studios permitted. All other indoor arts, entertainment uses require a conditional use permit, except theaters which are prohibited.

2. Permitted only as part of a mixed use development and must occupy 50 percent of the ground floor at street frontage. Each use is limited to maximum 5,000 square feet per use and 15,000 square feet total contiguous.

3. Arts and craft schools are a permitted use; all other educational service uses require a conditional use permit.

4. A family child-care home is permitted in an existing legal single detached dwelling unit subject to the requirements established by the Washington State Department of Early Learning (DEL) in WAC Title 170. The family child-care home shall meet the following requirements:

a. The family child-care provider shall be licensed by DEL to operate a family child-care home;

b. A safe passenger loading area shall be provided;

c. The family child-care home shall comply with all applicable building, fire, safety, and health codes enforced by the City;

d. The family child-care home shall comply with all applicable development standards of the City, unless determined to be legally nonconforming;

e. All signage shall conform to the applicable requirements of Chapter 18.42 KMC; and

f. The City has the authority to limit the hours of operation to facilitate neighborhood compatibility.

5. Social assistance uses and veterinary offices/clinics are conditionally permitted.

6. Outdoor retail display/sidewalk sales and auto supply stores are prohibited.

7. Other single detached dwelling units are prohibited.

8. Bed and breakfast guesthouse only. Hotels and motels are prohibited.

9. Private stormwater management facility is a permitted use. Sewer lift stations and pipes/electrical wires and associated structure supports may be conditionally permitted. All other utility facility uses are prohibited.

10. Limited to commuter parking lots for users of transit, carpools or ride-share programs, provided the facilities are located on existing parking lots for religious institutions, schools, or other permitted nonresidential uses which have excess capacity available during commuting hours. All other standalone parking uses require a conditional use permit.

[Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 18-0454 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 16-0426 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0384 § 5; Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.23.025 Community business zone Juanita subarea – Use allowances.

The following uses listed in Table A are identified as permitted, conditionally permitted, or prohibited uses in the community business zone Juanita subarea:

Table A. Community Business Zone Juanita Subarea Use Allowances  

	PERMITTED	CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED	PROHIBITED

	Arts, entertainment, indoor1	Ambulatory surgery center	Adult entertainment business

	Business service, standard	Automotive sales and service, marine7	Air transportation service

	Day care	Automotive sales and service, non-marine7	Animal kennel/shelter

	Eating and drinking place2	Community residential facility	Arts, entertainment, outdoor

	Educational service2	Fire or police facility	Auction house

	Health care and social assistance3	Laboratory	Business service, intensive

	Mobile food service4	Manufacturing, light	Cemetery, columbarium, or mausoleum

	Multiple-family dwelling5	Recreational facility, indoor	College/university

	Office	Religious institution	Construction and trade

	Park	Supportive living facility	Family child-care home

	Personal service2	Vehicle refueling station	Funeral home/crematory

	Retail sales2	 	Hospital

	Standalone parking8	 	Manufactured housing community

	Temporary lodging6	 	Manufacturing, heavy

	 	 	Marijuana business

	 	 	Marijuana cooperative

	 	 	Recreational facility, outdoor

	 	 	Regional land use

	 	 	Resource land use

	 	 	Retail sales, bulk

	 	 	Secure facility

	 	 	Single detached dwelling unit

	 	 	Transportation

	 	 	Utility facility

	 	 	Vehicle or equipment rental

	 	 	Warehousing

	 	 	Wholesale trade

1. Artist studios are permitted. All other indoor arts, entertainment uses require a conditional use permit.

2. Each use is limited to maximum 5,000 square feet per use and 15,000 square feet total contiguous.

3. Veterinary clinics subject to the following:

a. No outdoor kennels or facilities;

b. No burning of refuse or dead animals is allowed;

c. The portion of the building or structure in which animals are kept or treated shall be soundproofed. All run areas, excluding confinement areas for livestock, shall be surrounded by an eight-foot solid wall and surfaced with concrete or other impervious material; and

d. The provisions of Chapter 18.70 KMC relative to animal keeping are met.

4. Mobile food service is permitted subject to the following requirements:

a. No permanent fencing, walls, or other structures shall be installed which hinder removal of the structure from the site;

b. No required parking stall shall be blocked or rendered unusable as a result of the mobile vendor;

c. Safe ingress and egress shall be maintained. Visibility for transportation and pedestrian access shall be maintained;

d. The limited duration of the mobile vendor shall be established as a condition of approval of any applicable permits;

e. A sign permit is required for exterior signage in accordance with the sign code, Chapter 18.42 KMC;

f. If a stand:

(1) The stand shall be located on a sidewalk or near a storefront consistent with barrier-free regulations;

(2) The stand location on the sidewalk or near a storefront shall provide for at least four feet of unobstructed sidewalk between the stand and the sidewalk edge for pedestrian movement.

5. Only as part of a mixed use development subject to the conditions of Chapter 18.50 KMC.

6. Bed and breakfast guesthouse only. Hotels and motels are prohibited.

7. Automotive sales are prohibited. Repair or service shall only be performed in an enclosed building, with no outdoor storage of materials. Top, body, and upholstery repair shops, paint shops, and tire retreading are prohibited, as is heavy equipment and truck repair.

8. Limited to commuter parking lots for users of transit, carpools or ride-share programs, provided the facilities are located on existing parking lots for religious institutions, schools, or other permitted nonresidential uses which have excess capacity available during commuting hours. All other standalone parking uses require a conditional use permit.

[Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 18-0454 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.23.030 Accessory uses.

Accessory uses, when consistent with the definition in Chapter 18.20 KMC, are allowed as determined by the city manager. [Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.23.040 Community business zone – Development standards.

The following zone-specific development standards in Table B apply in the community business zone:

Table B. Community Business Zone Development Standards  

	STANDARD	REQUIREMENT

	Base Density: Dwelling Units/Gross Acre	24

	Minimum Density: Dwelling Units/Gross Acre	18

	Maximum Density: Dwelling Units/Gross Acre:

	West Subarea	36 for mixed use development.

	Juanita Subarea	36 if affordable housing is provided as described in Chapter 18.77 KMC.

	Minimum Street Setback1	10 feet; or

0 feet for a mixed use building with commercial on the ground floor or for any building with structured parking.

	Minimum Interior Setback1:

	West Subarea	0 feet for commercial or mixed use development except for interior lot lines adjoining property zoned R-1 to R-6.

5 feet landscaped setback for residential except for interior lot lines adjoining property zoned R-1 to R-6. Native vegetation is encouraged.

For all interior lot lines adjoining a property zoned R-1 to R-6 a 15-foot landscaped setback of native vegetation is required.

	Juanita Subarea	20 feet2

	Base Height:

	West Subarea3	35 feet

	Juanita Subarea	35 feet

45 feet4

	Maximum Impervious Surface: Percentage	90%

	Pedestrian Connections	Pedestrian connections are required to be provided in accordance with Chapter 18.52 KMC, Downtown Design Standards.

1 Any portion of development that occurs underground is exempt from property line setback requirements of this section.

2 Required on property lines adjoining residential zones.

3 The exceptions to height limits listed in KMC 18.30.060 do not apply to the base height allowed in CB west. Any development utilizing the exception to height limits for the CB zone between 61st Avenue NE and 65th Avenue NE shall dedicate 25 percent of the average lot width above 35 feet in height as a view corridor to Lake Washington.

Exceptions to height limitations for the base height in CB west shall be:

a. Roof structures housing or screening elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required for building operations and maintenance may extend up to 10 feet above the 35-foot base height for a maximum of 25 percent of the average lot width.

b. Fire or parapet walls, skylights, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, church steeples, crosses, spires, utility line towers and poles, and similar structures may extend up to three feet above the maximum base height of 35 feet.

c. Roof details or features that are used to comply with the roof form requirements of KMC 18.52.220 may extend a maximum of 10 feet above the 35-foot base height.

4 This maximum height is allowed only for mixed use developments.

[Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 18-0454 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 16-0426 § 7 (Att. E); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.23.045 Drive-through service.

Drive-through service is prohibited in this zoning district. [Ord. 17-0438 § 3 (Att. B).]


18.23.048 Outdoor storage.

Outdoor storage is prohibited in this zoning district. [Ord. 17-0438 § 3 (Att. B).]


18.23.050 Wireless communication facilities.

Use allowances and development regulations for wireless communication facilities are located in Chapter 18.60 KMC. [Ord. 16-0426 § 6 (Att. D).]


18.23.055 Affordable housing – Juanita subarea.

Repealed by Ord. 19-0481. [Ord. 18-0454 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 18.24 DOWNTOWN RESIDENTIAL ZONE

Sections:

18.24.010    Intent.

18.24.020    Downtown residential zone – Use allowances.

18.24.030    Accessory uses.

18.24.040    Zoning standards.

18.24.042    Drive-through service.

18.24.044    Outdoor storage.

18.24.045    Wireless communication facilities.

18.24.050    Conflicts.


18.24.010 Intent.

A. The downtown residential zone provides higher density residential development in support of the downtown commercial zone. Limited retail and office uses are also allowed as part of mixed use developments. The zone represents an opportunity to provide a range of housing types in the community with attention to appearance and scale. 

B. Some limited existing uses requiring vehicle storage that continue to contribute to the economic vitality of downtown are permitted to continue their business on existing properties, but are encouraged to transition the use of their properties to those more in keeping with subsection A of this section. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.24.020 Downtown residential zone – Use allowances.

The following uses listed in Table A are identified as permitted, conditionally permitted, or prohibited uses in the downtown residential zone:

Table A. Downtown Residential Zone Use Allowances  

	PERMITTED	CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED	PROHIBITED

	Arts, entertainment, indoor1	Eating and drinking place1	Adult entertainment business

	Auction house, existing2	Educational service3	Air transportation service

	Business service, standard3	Health care and social assistance10	Ambulatory surgery center

	Community residential facility	Religious institution	Animal kennel/shelter

	Day care4	Supportive living facility	Arts, entertainment, outdoor

	Family child-care home5	Utility facility11	Automotive sales and service, marine

	Manufactured housing community12	 	Automotive sales and service, non-marine

	Multiple-family dwelling6	 	Business service, intensive

	Office3	 	Cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum

	Park	 	College/university

	Personal service3	 	Construction and trade

	Recreational facility, indoor	 	Fire or police facility

	Retail sales3,7	 	Funeral home/crematory

	Single detached dwelling unit, existing legal8	 	Hospital

	Temporary lodging9	 	Laboratory

	 	 	Manufacturing, heavy

	 	 	Manufacturing, light

	 	 	Marijuana business

	 	 	Marijuana cooperative

	 	 	Mobile food service

	 	 	Recreational facility, outdoor

	 	 	Regional land use

	 	 	Resource land use

	 	 	Retail sales, bulk

	 	 	Secure facility

	 	 	Standalone parking

	 	 	Transportation

	 	 	Vehicle or equipment rental

	 	 	Vehicle refueling station

	 	 	Warehousing

	 	 	Wholesale trade

1. Social card games are prohibited.

2. Except for animal auction uses which are prohibited. Existing auction houses, excluding vehicle auctions, are permitted on properties currently used for auction house activity as of January 12, 2007. This use may be continued and may be re-established for purposes of rebuilding upon unintentional destruction of the property. The auction house use may not expand buildings or storage beyond the use’s existing footprint. The auction house may expand accessory on-site parking associated with existing auction house use to adjoining or nearby parcels of land, subject to the City’s approval of a site improvement plan that addresses the following issues:

a. Submittal of a long-term parking management plan that shows how the use’s parking needs are met by on-site parking and/or provisions of a long-term shared parking agreement;

b. Submittal of a traffic management plan that shows how the applicant intends to assure safe passage of pedestrians and vehicles in the vicinity of auction events;

c. Screening of outdoor storage and parking areas consistent with Kenmore downtown design standard parking lot screening requirements, KMC 18.52.180;

d. Provision of sidewalks along property frontages in the public rights-of-way, or other measures deemed by the City to adequately protect pedestrians traveling along property frontages; and

e. Ensures that expanded accessory parking area is not used for storage.

Vehicle auctions in existence as of January 12, 2007, are permitted on site area and within buildings in the downtown residential zone located east of 68th Avenue NE and north of NE 182nd Street that are being used as a vehicle auction use as of that date. This use may be continued and may be reestablished for purposes of rebuilding upon unintentional destruction of property. With the exception of accessory parking as outlined below, existing vehicle auction uses may not expand beyond their existing building footprint plus abutting easements, loading, or parking areas used for vehicle auction as of January 12, 2007. Renovations or alterations within the existing building footprint are permitted. However, expansion of existing buildings for vehicle auction use is prohibited. Expansion of accessory on-site parking associated with existing vehicle auction use to adjoining or nearby parcels of land is allowed, subject to the City’s approval of a site improvement plan that addresses the following issues:

a. Submittal of a long-term parking management plan that shows how the use’s parking needs are met by on-site parking and/or provisions of a long-term shared parking agreement;

b. Submittal of a traffic management plan that shows how the applicant intends to assure safe passage of pedestrians and vehicles in the vicinity of auction events;

c. Screening of outdoor storage and parking areas consistent with Kenmore downtown design standard parking lot screening requirements, KMC 18.52.180;

d. Provision of sidewalks along property frontages in the public rights-of-way, or other measures deemed by the City to adequately protect pedestrians traveling along property frontages; and

e. Ensures that expanded accessory parking area is not used for storage.

3. Permitted only as part of a mixed use development, and must occupy 50 percent of the ground floor at street frontage. Each use is limited to maximum 5,000 square feet per use and 15,000 square feet total contiguous. These standards do not apply to city government offices.

4. Day care II permitted only when accessory to a school, religious institution, park, sports club or public housing administered by a public agency.

5. A family child-care home is permitted in an existing legal single detached dwelling unit subject to the requirements established by the Washington State Department of Early Learning (DEL) in WAC Title 170. The family child-care home shall meet the following requirements:

a. The family child-care provider shall be licensed by DEL to operate a family child-care home;

b. A safe passenger loading area shall be provided;

c. The family child-care home shall comply with all applicable building, fire, safety, and health codes enforced by the City;

d. The family child-care home shall comply with all applicable development standards of the City, unless determined to be legally nonconforming;

e. All signage shall conform to the applicable requirements of Chapter 18.42 KMC; and

f. The City has the authority to limit the hours of operation to facilitate neighborhood compatibility.

6. Townhouses are required to have four units minimum in a cluster. Enclosed under building parking is required per Chapter 18.52 KMC, Downtown Design Standards.

7. Except outdoor retail sales which is prohibited.

8. Other single detached dwelling units are prohibited.

9. Bed and breakfast guesthouse only. All other temporary lodging uses are prohibited.

10. Except social services, correctional which is prohibited.

11. Limited to sewer lift stations and pipes/electrical wires and associated structural supports.

12. Limited to manufactured housing communities in existence as of April 23, 2019.

[Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 16-0426 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0384 § 5; Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.24.030 Accessory uses.

Accessory uses, when consistent with the definition in Chapter 18.20 KMC, are allowed as determined by the city manager. [Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.24.040 Zoning standards.

Specific zone-based development standards for the downtown residential zone in Table B apply to the DR zone as follows:

Table B. Downtown Residential Development Standards  

	STANDARD	REQUIREMENT

	Base Density: Dwelling Units/Gross Acre	48; applies east of 68th Avenue NE

	Maximum Density: Dwelling Units/Gross Acre with Density Bonus Incentives	72; density incentives or bonuses not required west of 68th Avenue NE

	Minimum Density: Dwelling Units/Net Acre	18 – Townhouse only development

18 – 36 – Townhouse/apartment combination development

36 – Apartments

	Minimum Lot Width	Townhouse – 20 ft.

Apartment – 30 ft.

	Minimum Street Setback	Primary structure – 6 ft. min.; 8 ft. min. average

Garage, carport, paved parking – 10 ft.

	Maximum Street Setback	West of 68th Avenue NE, the maximum setback is 10 ft.

	Minimum Interior Setback	5 ft.; otherwise when adjoining property zoned R-l to R-6 zone then 20 ft.

	Maximum Height	East of 68th Avenue NE – 60 ft. or 80 ft. if providing density incentives per Chapter 18.80 KMC

West of 68th Avenue NE – 80 ft.1

	Maximum Impervious Surface: Percentage	90%

	Pedestrian Connections	Pedestrian connections shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 18.52 KMC, Downtown Design Standards

1 Through the design review process the city manager may require greater upper story setbacks, or mass and bulk reductions, than otherwise stated in KMC 18.52.310 in order to achieve greater compatibility of development where DR zoned property abuts property zoned R-1 to R-12. For example, greater upper story setbacks may be required in proportion to the height of structures above 60 feet.

[Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.24.042 Drive-through service.

Drive-through service is prohibited in this zoning district. [Ord. 17-0438 § 3 (Att. B).]


18.24.044 Outdoor storage.

Outdoor storage is prohibited in this zoning district. [Ord. 17-0438 § 3 (Att. B).]


18.24.045 Wireless communication facilities.

Use allowances and development regulations for wireless communication facilities are located in Chapter 18.60 KMC. [Ord. 16-0426 § 6 (Att. D).]


18.24.050 Conflicts.

In the event of conflict between Chapter 18.52 KMC, Downtown Design Standards, and downtown residential zone standards, the Kenmore downtown design standards shall prevail. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).] 


Chapter 18.25 DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL ZONE

Sections:

18.25.010    Intent.

18.25.020    Downtown commercial zone – Use allowances.

18.25.030    Accessory uses.

18.25.040    Zoning standards.

18.25.042    Drive-through service.

18.25.044    Outdoor storage.

18.25.045    Wireless communication facilities.

18.25.050    Conflicts.


18.25.010 Intent.

A. The downtown commercial zone features a mix of private and public uses designed to create a small-town feel and pedestrian-friendly environment. Public places, sidewalks, extensive landscaping, transit orientation, shared or structured parking, protection of critical areas, and high quality design and signage are key features. Permitted uses emphasize mixed or multiple use developments, and include high-density housing, civic and governmental offices, small-scale commercial and retail, and locally oriented professional and personal services. 

B. Uses not compatible with the downtown commercial zone intent such as those which require vehicle or materials storage, service bays, wide curb cuts, expanses of exterior product display or storage, or produce little customer or visitor activity are not permitted. Some limited existing uses requiring vehicle storage that continue to contribute to the economic vitality of downtown are permitted to continue their business on existing properties, but are encouraged to transition the use of their properties to those more in keeping with subsection A of this section and this intent statement. Park-and-ride/transit centers are promoted along SR-522, particularly in the northwest quadrant of the 68th Avenue NE/SR-522 intersection. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.25.020 Downtown commercial zone – Use allowances.

The following uses listed in Table A are identified as permitted, conditionally permitted, or prohibited uses in the downtown commercial zone:

 

Table A. Downtown Commercial Zone Use Allowances 

	PERMITTED	CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED	PROHIBITED

	Adult entertainment business1	Air transportation service	Animal kennel/shelter

	Arts, entertainment, indoor	Ambulatory surgery center	Business service, intensive

	Arts, entertainment, outdoor2	College/university	Cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum

	Auction house, existing3	Community residential facility	Construction and trade

	Automotive sales and service, marine, existing legal4	Fire or police facility	Family child-care home

	Automotive sales and service, non-marine, existing legal4	Hospital	Funeral home/crematory

	Business service, standard	Laboratory	Manufacturing, heavy

	Day care	Religious institution	Manufacturing, light

	Eating and drinking place	Utility facility16	Marijuana business

	Educational service5	 	Marijuana cooperative

	Health care and social assistance6,7	 	Recreational facility, outdoor

	Manufactured housing community17	 	Resource land use

	Mobile food service8	 	Retail sales, bulk

	Multiple-family dwelling9	 	Secure facility

	Office	 	Single detached dwelling unit

	Park	 	Supportive living facility

	Personal service	 	Transportation

	Recreational facility, indoor	 	Warehousing

	Regional land use10	 	Wholesale trade

	Retail sales11	 	 

	Standalone parking12	 	 

	Temporary lodging13	 	 

	Vehicle or equipment rental14	 	 

	Vehicle refueling station15	 	 

1. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish an adult entertainment business or to relocate an adult entertainment business within 330 feet, measured from the property line of the parcel or parcels proposed to contain the adult entertainment business to the property line of the parcels containing the uses in this section, without regard to intervening structures or objects, if any:

a. Residentially zoned property;

b. Public or private school for general education of any grade K through 12;

c. School bus stop;

d. Licensed day care or licensed preschool facility;

e. Public park;

f. Publicly dedicated trail; provided, however, that the setback distance shall apply only on the south side of the Burke-Gilman Trail, and that there shall be no setback on the north side of that trail due to the separation provided by SR-522;

g. Sports fields or playgrounds;

h. Recreation or community center;

i. Religious institution;

j. Public library.

It shall be unlawful for any person to establish an adult entertainment business or to relocate an adult entertainment business within 500 feet of another adult entertainment business, measured from the property line of the parcel or parcels containing the adult entertainment business and the proposed adult entertainment business.

2. Outdoor performance center permitted when located west of 68th Avenue NE and associated with a plaza open to the public, and space is made available for general public passive or active use during non-performance hours.

3. Except for animal auction uses which are prohibited. Existing auction houses, excluding vehicle auctions, are permitted on properties currently used for auction house activity as of January 12, 2007. This use may be continued and may be reestablished for purposes of rebuilding upon unintentional destruction of the property. The auction house use may not expand buildings or storage beyond the use’s existing footprint. The auction house may expand accessory on-site parking associated with existing auction house use to adjoining or nearby parcels of land, subject to the City’s approval of a site improvement plan that addresses the following issues:

a. Submittal of a long-term parking management plan that shows how the use’s parking needs are met by on-site parking and/or provisions of a long-term shared parking agreement;

b. Submittal of a traffic management plan that shows how the applicant intends to assure safe passage of pedestrians and vehicles in the vicinity of auction events;

c. Screening of outdoor storage and parking areas consistent with Kenmore downtown design standard parking lot screening requirements, KMC 18.52.180;

d. Provision of sidewalks along property frontages in the public rights-of-way, or other measures deemed by the City to adequately protect pedestrians traveling along property frontages; and

e. Ensures that expanded accessory parking area is not used for storage.

Vehicle auctions in existence as of January 12, 2007, are permitted on site area and within buildings in the downtown commercial zone located east of 68th Avenue NE and north of NE 182nd Street that are being used as a vehicle auction use as of that date. This use may be continued and may be reestablished for purposes of rebuilding upon unintentional destruction of property. With the exception of accessory parking as outlined below, existing vehicle auction uses may not expand beyond their existing building footprint plus abutting easements, loading, or parking areas used for vehicle auction as of January 12, 2007. Renovations or alterations within the existing building footprint are permitted. However, expansion of existing buildings for vehicle auction use is prohibited. Expansion of accessory on-site parking associated with existing vehicle auction use to adjoining or nearby parcels of land is allowed, subject to the City’s approval of a site improvement plan that addresses the following issues:

a. Submittal of a long-term parking management plan that shows how the use’s parking needs are met by on-site parking and/or provisions of a long-term shared parking agreement;

b. Submittal of a traffic management plan that shows how the applicant intends to assure safe passage of pedestrians and vehicles in the vicinity of auction events;

c. Screening of outdoor storage and parking areas consistent with Kenmore downtown design standard parking lot screening requirements, KMC 18.52.180;

d. Provision of sidewalks along property frontages in the public rights-of-way, or other measures deemed by the City to adequately protect pedestrians traveling along property frontages; and

e. Ensures that expanded accessory parking area is not used for storage.

4. In the downtown commercial zone, properties (a) fronting SR-522 or taking primary access from SR-522, and (b) located on a property where the extent of use is no deeper than 260 feet from SR-522, and (c) containing automotive repair or automotive service uses as of April 28, 2003, shall be considered existing legal uses. Otherwise, automotive service uses are prohibited unless accessory to and contained within a structured parking garage.

Automotive sales are prohibited unless accessory to an existing legal automotive repair or service use and consistent with the following: (a) motor vehicles for sale or lease shall not be arranged in a display lot fashion along the primary street frontage, and (b) shall be a subordinate and incidental part of the automotive repair or service use, and (c) shall be subject to Chapter 18.52 KMC, Downtown Design Standards, regarding screening, location and other relevant standards.

5. Arts and crafts schools permitted. All other educational service uses are conditionally permitted.

6. Veterinary clinics subject to the following:

a. No outdoor kennels or facilities;

b. No burning of refuse or dead animals is allowed;

c. The portion of the building or structure in which animals are kept or treated shall be soundproofed. All run areas, excluding confinement areas for livestock, shall be surrounded by an eight-foot solid wall and surfaced with concrete or other impervious material; and

d. The provisions of Chapter 18.70 KMC relative to animal keeping are met.

7. Social services, noncorrectional is a permitted use. Social services, correctional is a conditionally permitted use.

8. Mobile food service is permitted subject to the following requirements:

a. No permanent fencing, walls, or other structures shall be installed which hinder removal of the structure from the site;

b. No required parking stall shall be blocked or rendered unusable as a result of the mobile vendor;

c. Safe ingress and egress shall be maintained. Visibility for transportation and pedestrian access shall be maintained;

d. The limited duration of the mobile vendor shall be established as a condition of approval of any applicable permits;

e. A sign permit is required for exterior signage in accordance with the sign code, Chapter 18.42 KMC;

f. If a stand:

(1) The stand shall be located on a sidewalk or near a storefront consistent with barrier-free regulations;

(2) The stand location on the sidewalk or near a storefront shall provide for at least four feet of unobstructed sidewalk between the stand and the sidewalk edge for pedestrian movement.

9. When located on property fronting on SR-522, 73rd Avenue NE, NE 181st Street west of 68th Avenue NE, 65th Avenue NE, 67th Avenue NE, or 68th Avenue NE, such uses shall be subject to the following conditions:

a. A minimum of 80 percent of a structure’s street front facade at street level shall be occupied by nonresidential (e.g., retail, office or service) uses. If the nonresidential and residential uses are located in separate structures, the 80 percent requirement shall apply to the lot’s lineal street frontage at street level. Where the lot fronts on two or more streets and abuts a lot which is not zoned commercial, the street front facade requirement shall apply to the structure’s facade along the street with the greatest continuous lineal feet of commercially zoned frontage.

b. The required nonresidential use shall extend at least 30 feet in depth at street level from the street front facade of the structure; provided, that the minimum required depth may be averaged, with no depth less than 15 feet.

c. Where a lot fronts on two or more streets and only abuts lots which are zoned commercial, the street front facade requirement shall be calculated by totaling the combined street front facades of the structure containing the required nonresidential use.

10. Transit center only permitted. All other regional land uses are prohibited. Transit centers shall be located a maximum distance of 1,200 lineal feet measured from the center line of SR-522 to the furthermost point of the transit center.

11. Outdoor retail displays/sidewalk sales also are permitted subject to:

a. The outdoor retail display/sidewalk sale shall be accessory to a permitted permanent commercial use;

b. Fire lanes shall remain fully open and accessible at all times;

c. The location on sidewalk or near storefront is barrier-free;

d. No required parking stall shall be blocked or unusable as a result of the outdoor retail display/sidewalk sale;

e. Safe ingress and egress to the site shall be maintained. Visibility for transportation and pedestrian access shall be maintained;

f. Such display and activity is removed daily at the time of or prior to the close of business hours;

g. A sign permit is required for exterior signage in accordance with the sign code, Chapter 18.42 KMC.

12. a. Within the zone north of SR-522 and west of 68th Avenue NE, commuter parking facilities shall be in structured buildings when the number of stalls exceeds 20. Commuter parking lots shall be located a maximum distance of 1,200 lineal feet measured from the center line of SR-522 to the furthermost point of the commuter parking lot.

b. All parking structures shall provide retail usages for at least 50 percent of the ground floor street frontages, consistent with Chapter 18.52 KMC, Downtown Design Standards.

c. All parking structures shall be designed consistent with Chapter 18.52 KMC, Downtown Design Standards; interior design considerations shall include integration of parking with any transit bays, provision of indoor access to shops, and covered walkways to adjacent shopping, civic, residential, or other developments that patrons will access. Crime prevention through environmental design (CPTED) principles shall be integrated, such as, but not limited to, full spectrum lighting and maximization of visibility in publicly used areas.

13. Bed and breakfast guesthouse permitted only if part of a mixed use development.

14. Equipment rental is prohibited. Vehicle rental is permitted only when accessory to and contained within a structured parking garage. Automotive rental and leasing uses may also be permitted when accessory to an existing legal automotive service or existing legal automotive repair use and consistent with the following:

a. Motor vehicles for lease or rental shall not be arranged in a display lot fashion along the primary street frontage; and

b. Shall be a subordinate and incidental part of the automotive repair or automotive service business; and

c. Shall be subject to Chapter 18.52 KMC, Downtown Design Standards, regarding screening, location and other relevant standards. Otherwise prohibited.

15. Existing legal gasoline service stations are permitted. Other gasoline service stations are prohibited.

16. Limited to sewer lift stations and pipes/electrical wires and associated structural supports.

17. Limited to manufactured housing communities in existence as of April 23, 2019.

[Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 16-0426 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0384 § 5; Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.25.030 Accessory uses.

Accessory uses, when consistent with the definition in Chapter 18.20 KMC, are allowed as determined by the city manager. [Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.25.040 Zoning standards.

The following zone-specific development standards in Table B apply in the downtown commercial zone:

Table B. Downtown Commercial Development Standards  

	STANDARD	REQUIREMENT

	Base Density: Dwelling Units/Gross Acre	48; applies east of 68th Avenue NE

	Maximum Density: Dwelling Units/Gross Acre with Density Bonus Incentives	72; density incentives or bonuses not required west of 68th Avenue NE

	Minimum Density: Dwelling Units/Net Acre for Stand-Alone Multifamily Proposals 	36

	Street Setback	Minimum 10 ft. from SR-522, unless otherwise allowed through Chapter 18.52 KMC, Downtown Design Standards; other streets 0 ft.

Maximum 10 ft. unless otherwise allowed through Chapter 18.52 KMC, Downtown Design Standards

The City may authorize intrusions of structural elements into the public right-of-way, including awnings, columns, bay windows, or others, through the design review, site plan review, building permit review, or right-of-way use permit processes, if such intrusions would not impede safe travel by pedestrians, solar access is not significantly diminished, and City liability is limited

	Minimum Interior Setback	0 ft.; except when property adjoins R-1 to R-12 property, then 20 ft.

	Base Height	35 ft.

	Maximum Height

Applicable to mixed use developments containing residential dwellings at a minimum 50 percent of square footage to a maximum of 75 percent square footage; or to developments achieving density bonus; or to developments providing structured parking	65 ft.

	Maximum Impervious Surface: Percentage 	90%

	Pedestrian Connections	Pedestrian connections are required to be provided in accordance with Chapter 18.52 KMC, Downtown Design Standards

[Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.25.042 Drive-through service.

Properties having frontage on SR-522 and taking primary access from SR-522 as of May 8, 2003, shall be permitted drive-through service. Where allowed, drive-through service is permitted as an accessory use. Drive-through service shall be oriented to the side and/or rear of the building, and integrated into the exterior wall. Drive-through lanes shall not be located between the street and the main pedestrian access to the buildings. Modifications to these requirements may be reviewed through the site plan or building permit review process when meeting the intent of pedestrian orientation pursuant to Chapter 18.52 KMC, Downtown Design Standards. [Ord. 17-0438 § 3 (Att. B).]


18.25.044 Outdoor storage.

Outdoor storage is prohibited in this zoning district. [Ord. 17-0438 § 3 (Att. B).]


18.25.045 Wireless communication facilities.

Use allowances and development regulations for wireless communication facilities are located in Chapter 18.60 KMC. [Ord. 16-0426 § 6 (Att. D).]


18.25.050 Conflicts.

In the event of conflict between Chapter 18.52 KMC, Downtown Design Standards, and downtown commercial zone standards, the Kenmore downtown design standards shall prevail. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 18.25A URBAN CORRIDOR ZONE

Sections:

18.25A.010    Intent.

18.25A.020    Subareas.

18.25A.030    Use allowances – Urban corridor west subarea.

18.25A.040    Use allowances – Urban corridor east subarea.

18.25A.050    Accessory uses.

18.25A.060    Zoning standards.

18.25A.070    Additional development standards.

18.25A.075    Wireless communication facilities.

18.25A.080    Conflict with design standards.


18.25A.010 Intent.

The intent of the urban corridor zone is to convert SR-522 from a commercial strip, focused on the automobile, to a more pedestrian- and transit-friendly urban corridor. In the west subarea, uses along the north side of the highway would continue to be a mix of restaurant, retail and service uses, with additional opportunities for office and mixed use multifamily development. Uses along the south side of the highway would convert to office and multifamily development, taking advantage of lake views and proximity to transit.

In the east subarea, the western portion of the district would be an “enterprise zone,” allowing for a wide range of commercial uses, including bulk retail, as well as standalone multifamily development. Farther to the east, near the city limits, office and multifamily uses are envisioned.

New auto-oriented businesses are prohibited throughout the zone. [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.25A.020 Subareas.

The urban corridor zone is divided into two subareas: urban corridor west and urban corridor east as depicted in Figure 18.25A.020.1. 


[IMAGE]


[Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.25A.030 Use allowances – Urban corridor west subarea.

The following uses listed in Table A are identified as permitted, conditionally permitted, or prohibited uses in the urban corridor west subarea:

Table A. Urban Corridor West Subarea Use Allowances  

	PERMITTED	CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED	PROHIBITED

	Adult entertainment business1

Ambulatory surgery center

Animal kennel/shelter2

Arts, entertainment, indoor

Business service, standard

Cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum3

Community residential facility

Day care

Eating and drinking place4

Educational service

Funeral home/crematory

Health care and social assistance

Laboratory5

Manufacturing, light

Marijuana business

Mobile food service6

Multiple-family dwelling7

Office

Park

Personal service

Recreational facility, indoor8

Religious institution

Retail sales9

Standalone parking10

Supportive living facility

Temporary lodging	Arts, entertainment, outdoor11

College/university

Fire or police facility

Laboratory5

Recreational facility, indoor8

Recreational facility, outdoor13	Air transportation service

Auction house

Automotive sales and service, marine

Automotive sales and service, nonmarine

Business service, intensive

Construction and trade

Family child-care home

Hospital

Manufactured housing community

Manufacturing, heavy

Marijuana cooperative

Recreational facility, outdoor13

Regional land use

Resource land use

Retail sales, bulk

Secure facility

Single detached dwelling unit

Transportation

Utility facility

Vehicle or equipment rental

Vehicle refueling station

Warehousing

Wholesale trade

1 It shall be unlawful for any person to establish an adult entertainment business or to relocate an adult entertainment business within 330 feet, measured from the property line of the parcel or parcels proposed to contain the adult entertainment business to the property line of the parcels containing the uses in this subsection, without regard to intervening structures or objects, of any:

a. Residentially zoned property;

b. Public or private school for general education of any grade K through 12;

c. School bus stop;

d. Licensed day care or licensed preschool facility;

e. Public park;

f. Publicly dedicated trail; provided, however, that the setback distance shall apply only on the south side of the Burke-Gilman Trail, and that there shall be no setback on the north side of that trail due to the separation provided by Highway 522;

g. Sports fields or playgrounds;

h. Recreation or community center;

i. Religious institution;

j. Public library.

It shall be unlawful for any person to establish an adult entertainment business or to relocate an adult entertainment business within 500 feet of another adult entertainment business, measured from the property line of the parcel or parcels containing the adult entertainment business and the proposed adult entertainment business.

2 Provided:

a. No burning of refuse or dead animals is allowed;

b. The portion of the building or structure in which animals are kept or treated shall be soundproofed. All run areas, excluding confinement areas for livestock, shall be surrounded by an eight-foot solid wall and surfaced with concrete or other impervious material;

c. Outdoor runs shall be prohibited on properties adjacent to residential zones; and

d. The provisions of Chapter 18.70 KMC relative to animal keeping shall be met.

3 Limited to indoor columbariums and mausoleums only.

4 Social card games, as defined by this title, are prohibited.

5 Laboratories that must comply with special containment procedures for large quantities of hazardous materials are subject to a conditional use permit.

6 Provided:

a. No permanent fencing, walls, or other structures shall be installed which hinder removal of the structure from the site, unless the structure is permanently permitted.

b. No required parking stall shall be blocked or rendered unusable as a result of the mobile vendor.

c. Safe ingress and egress shall be maintained. Visibility for transportation and pedestrian access shall be maintained.

d. The limited duration of the mobile vendor shall be established as a condition of approval of any applicable permits.

e. A sign permit is required for exterior signage in accordance with the sign code, Chapter 18.42 KMC.

7 North of SR-522, allowed only as part of a mixed use development subject to the conditions of Chapter 18.50 KMC.

8 South of SR-522, indoor recreational facility is a conditional use.

9 South of SR-522, allowed only as part of a mixed use development subject to the conditions of Chapter 18.50 KMC.

10 Standalone surface parking and boat racks shall not be permitted.

11 Outdoor activities shall be at least 50 feet from adjoining residential zones and lighting shall be directed away from adjoining residential zones. Hours of operation may be restricted to ensure compatibility.

12 Reserved.

13 North of SR-522, outdoor recreational facility is a prohibited use. Campgrounds and RV parks shall not be permitted south of SR-522.

[Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 16-0426 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.25A.040 Use allowances – Urban corridor east subarea.

The following uses listed in Table B are identified as permitted, conditionally permitted, or prohibited uses in the urban corridor east subarea:

Table B. Urban Corridor East Subarea Use Allowances  

	PERMITTED	CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED	PROHIBITED

	Adult entertainment business1

Ambulatory surgery center

Animal kennel/shelter2

Arts, entertainment, indoor

Arts, entertainment, outdoor3

Business service, standard

Cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum4

Community residential facility5

Day care

Eating and drinking place6

Educational service

Funeral home/crematory

Health care and social assistance

Laboratory7

Manufacturing, light

Marijuana business

Mobile food service8

Multiple-family dwelling 

Office

Park

Personal service

Recreational facility, indoor

Recreational facility, outdoor3,9

Religious institution

Retail sales

Retail sales, bulk5,10

Standalone parking11

Supportive living facility

Temporary lodging

Vehicle refueling station12	College/university

Fire or police facility

Hospital5

Laboratory7

Regional land use5

Retail sales, bulk5,10	Air transportation service

Arts, entertainment, outdoor3

Auction house

Automotive sales and service, marine

Automotive sales and service, nonmarine

Business service, intensive

Community residential facility5

Construction and trade

Family child-care home

Hospital5

Manufactured housing community

Manufacturing, heavy

Marijuana cooperative

Recreational facility, outdoor3

Regional land use5

Resource land use

Retail sales, bulk5

Secure facility

Single detached dwelling unit

Standalone parking11

Transportation

Utility facility

Vehicle or equipment rental

Vehicle refueling station12

Warehousing

Wholesale trade

1 It shall be unlawful for any person to establish an adult entertainment business or to relocate an adult entertainment business within 330 feet, measured from the property line of the parcel or parcels proposed to contain the adult entertainment business to the property line of the parcels containing the uses in this subsection, without regard to intervening structures or objects, of any:

a. Residentially zoned property;

b. Public or private school for general education of any grade K through 12;

c. School bus stop;

d. Licensed day care or licensed preschool facility;

e. Public park;

f. Publicly dedicated trail; provided, however, that the setback distance shall apply only on the south side of the Burke-Gilman Trail, and that there shall be no setback on the north side of that trail due to the separation provided by Highway 522;

g. Sports fields or playgrounds;

h. Recreation or community center;

i. Religious institution;

j. Public library.

It shall be unlawful for any person to establish an adult entertainment business or to relocate an adult entertainment business within 500 feet of another adult entertainment business, measured from the property line of the parcel or parcels containing the adult entertainment business and the proposed adult entertainment business.

2 Provided:

a. No burning of refuse or dead animals is allowed;

b. The portion of the building or structure in which animals are kept or treated shall be soundproofed. All run areas, excluding confinement areas for livestock, shall be surrounded by an eight-foot solid wall and surfaced with concrete or other impervious material;

c. Outdoor runs shall be prohibited on properties adjacent to residential zones; and

d. The provisions of Chapter 18.70 KMC relative to animal keeping shall be met.

3 Prohibited east of 80th Avenue NE. West of 80th Avenue NE, outdoor activities shall be at least 50 feet from adjoining residential zones and lighting shall be directed away from adjoining residential zones. Hours of operation may be restricted to ensure compatibility.

4 East of 80th Avenue NE, limited to indoor columbariums and mausoleums only.

5 Prohibited east of 80th Avenue NE.

6 Social card games, as defined by this title, are prohibited.

7 Laboratories that must comply with special containment procedures for large quantities of hazardous materials are subject to a conditional use permit.

8 Provided:

a. No permanent fencing, walls, or other structures shall be installed which hinder removal of the structure from the site, unless the structure is permanently permitted.

b. No required parking stall shall be blocked or rendered unusable as a result of the mobile vendor.

c. Safe ingress and egress shall be maintained. Visibility for transportation and pedestrian access shall be maintained.

d. The limited duration of the mobile vendor shall be established as a condition of approval of any applicable permits.

e. A sign permit is required for exterior signage in accordance with the sign code, Chapter 18.42 KMC.

9 Campgrounds and RV parks shall not be permitted.

10 A conditional use permit is required if the building footprint is greater than 65,000 sq. ft.

11 Prohibited east of 80th Avenue NE. Standalone surface parking lots for vehicles, boats or boat racks shall not exceed 10,000 sq. ft. in size west of 80th Avenue NE.

12 Permitted only within 250 feet of the intersection of 80th Avenue NE and SR-522. Prohibited in other portions of the east subarea.

[Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 16-0426 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.25A.050 Accessory uses.

Accessory uses, when consistent with the definition in Chapter 18.20 KMC, are allowed as determined by the city manager. [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.25A.060 Zoning standards.

The following zone-specific development standards in Table C apply in the urban corridor zone:

Table C. Urban Corridor Zone Development Standards  

	STANDARD	REQUIREMENT

	Base Density: Dwelling Units/Acre	48 du/ac

	Maximum Density: Dwelling Units/Acre	72 du/ac1

	Minimum Street Setback	10 ft.2

	Minimum Interior Setback	20 ft.3

	Maximum Height:

	Urban corridor east subarea	55 ft.

	Urban corridor west subarea:

	• south of SR-522	35 ft.

	• north of SR-522 west of 63rd Ave. NE	35 ft.

	• north of SR-522 east of 63rd Ave. NE	35 ft.4

	Maximum Impervious Surface: Percentage	90%

1 This density may only be achieved through the application of residential density incentives or transfer of density credits in mixed use developments. See Chapter 18.80 KMC.

2 Gas station pump islands shall be placed no closer than 25 feet to street front lines.

3 Required on property lines adjoining residential zones.

4 The maximum height on a site north of SR-522 east of 63rd Avenue NE may be increased up to a maximum of 55 feet if (1) there is no intervening parcel between the site and the NE 181st Street right-of-way, and (2) if the applicant can demonstrate, based on ground elevation data, that a topographic change is adequate to protect views of Lake Washington from uphill lots. The measurement shall be taken as follows: a) determine average existing ground elevation along the centerline of the NE 181st Street right-of-way abutting the site; b) determine average existing ground elevation along an artificial east-west line 60 feet north of and paralleling the SR-522 right-of-way abutting the site; c) subtract the elevation calculated in b) from the elevation calculated in a). If this difference is more than 35 feet, the maximum height for the site may be increased to that difference. In no case, however, shall the maximum allowable height exceed 55 feet.

[Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.25A.070 Additional development standards.

A. Where the urban corridor zone abuts a residential zone, the city manager may require additional landscaping pursuant to Chapter 18.35 KMC, blank wall treatments pursuant to Chapter 18.52 KMC, and/or measures to address building mass and bulk pursuant to KMC 18.52.310 and/or 18.52.330 in order to mitigate impacts of new development on neighboring residential areas.

B. In the urban corridor west subarea, parcels on the south side of SR-522 shall provide a public view corridor from SR-522 to Lake Washington. The intent of the corridor is to provide an unobstructed view from SR-522 to the lake. A minimum view corridor equivalent to 30 percent of the average east-west dimension of the development proposal site shall be maintained. The location of the view corridor shall be designed to meet the following standards and must be approved by the city manager:

1. The view corridor must be adjacent to one of the two side property lines, whichever will result in the widest view corridor, considering the following in order of priority:

a. Locations of existing view corridors;

b. Existing development or potential development on adjacent properties, given the topography, access and likely location of future improvements;

c. Locations of existing sight-obscuring structures, parking areas or vegetation that are likely to remain in place in the foreseeable future.

2. The view corridor must be in one continuous piece.

3. For land divisions, the view corridor shall be established as part of the land division and shall be located to create the largest view corridor on the subject property.

4. The following shall be permitted within a view corridor:

a. Areas provided for public access, such as public pedestrian walkways, public use areas, or viewing platforms;

b. Parking lots for passenger vehicles and subsurface parking structures; provided, that the parking does not completely obstruct the view of the lake from the public right-of-way;

c. Structures, if the slope of the subject property permits full, unobstructed views of the lake over the structures from the public right-of-way;

d. Vegetation, including required vegetation screening, provided it is designed and of a size that will not obscure the view from the public right-of-way to the lake at the time of planting or upon future growth. Low growing, native vegetation is encouraged. In the event of a conflict between required landscaping and view preservation, view preservation shall take precedence over landscaping requirements;

e. Open fencing that is designed not to obscure the view from the public right-of-way to the lake.

5. The applicant shall execute a covenant or similar legal agreement, in a form acceptable to the city attorney, and record the agreement with the county records and elections division to protect the view corridor. Land survey information shall be provided by the applicant for this purpose in a format approved by the city manager.

C. Drive-through service is permitted as an accessory use. Drive-through service shall be oriented to the side and/or rear of the building, and integrated into the exterior wall. Drive-through lanes shall not be located between the street and the main pedestrian access to the buildings. Modifications to these requirements may be reviewed through the site plan or building permit review process when meeting the intent of pedestrian orientation pursuant to Chapter 18.52 KMC, Downtown Design Standards.

D. Outdoor storage is prohibited in the urban corridor zone, west subarea, and in the urban corridor zone, east subarea, east of 80th Avenue NE. In the urban corridor zone, east subarea, west of 80th Avenue NE, accessory outdoor storage is limited to a maximum of 50 percent of the site area. [Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.25A.075 Wireless communication facilities.

Use allowances and development regulations for wireless communication facilities are located in Chapter 18.60 KMC. [Ord. 16-0426 § 6 (Att. D).]


18.25A.080 Conflict with design standards.

In the event of a conflict between Chapter 18.52 KMC, Downtown Design Standards, and urban corridor zone standards, the Kenmore downtown design standards shall prevail. [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 18.25B WATERFRONT COMMERCIAL ZONE

Sections:

18.25B.010    Intent.

18.25B.020    Use allowances.

18.25B.030    Accessory uses.

18.25B.040    Zoning standards.

18.25B.050    Additional development standards.

18.25B.060    Wireless communication facilities.


18.25B.010 Intent.

The intent of the waterfront commercial zone is to support existing water-dependent uses while also allowing eating and drinking places, temporary lodging and other complementary uses. Compatible light manufacturing is appropriate. Office and mixed use multifamily development are desirable for the future. [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.25B.020 Use allowances.

The following uses listed in Table A are identified as permitted, conditionally permitted or prohibited uses in the waterfront commercial zone:

Table A. Waterfront Commercial Use Allowances  

	PERMITTED	CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED	PROHIBITED

	Adult entertainment business1

Ambulatory surgery center

Animal kennel/shelter2

Arts, entertainment, indoor

Arts, entertainment, outdoor3

Automotive sales and service, marine

Business service, standard

Cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum4

Community residential facility (CRF)

Day care

Eating and drinking place5

Educational service

Funeral home/crematory

Health care and social assistance

Laboratory6

Manufacturing, light

Marijuana business

Mobile food service7

Multiple-family dwelling8

Office

Park

Personal service

Recreational facility, indoor

Recreational facility, outdoor3,9

Religious institution

Retail sales

Standalone parking10

Supportive living facility

Temporary lodging	Air transportation service

College/university

Fire or police facility

Hospital

Laboratory6

Regional land use	Auction house

Automotive sales and service, nonmarine

Business service, intensive

Construction and trade

Family child-care home

Manufactured housing community

Manufacturing, heavy

Marijuana cooperative

Resource land use

Retail sales, bulk

Secure facility

Single detached dwelling unit

Utility facility

Warehousing

Wholesale trade

	Transportation11

Vehicle or equipment rental12

Vehicle refueling station	 	 

1 It shall be unlawful for any person to establish an adult entertainment business or to relocate an adult entertainment business within 330 feet, measured from the property line of the parcel or parcels proposed to contain the adult entertainment business to the property line of the parcels containing the uses in this subsection, without regard to intervening structures or objects, of any:

a. Residentially zoned property;

b. Public or private school for general education of any grade K through 12;

c. School bus stop;

d. Licensed day care or licensed preschool facility;

e. Public park;

f. Publicly dedicated trail; provided, however, that the setback distance shall apply only on the south side of the Burke-Gilman Trail, and that there shall be no setback on the north side of that trail due to the separation provided by Highway 522;

g. Sports fields or playgrounds;

h. Recreation or community center;

i. Religious institution;

j. Public library.

It shall be unlawful for any person to establish an adult entertainment business or to relocate an adult entertainment business within 500 feet of another adult entertainment business, measured from the property line of the parcel or parcels containing the adult entertainment business and the proposed adult entertainment business.

2 Provided:

a. No burning of refuse or dead animals is allowed;

b. The portion of the building or structure in which animals are kept or treated shall be soundproofed. All run areas, excluding confinement areas for livestock, shall be surrounded by an eight-foot solid wall and surfaced with concrete or other impervious material;

c. Outdoor runs shall be prohibited on properties adjacent to residential zones; and

d. The provisions of Chapter 18.70 KMC relative to animal keeping shall be met.

3 Outdoor activities shall be at least 50 feet from adjoining residential zones and lighting shall be directed away from adjoining residential zones. Hours of operation may be restricted to ensure compatibility.

4 Limited to indoor columbariums and mausoleums only.

5 Social card games, as defined by this title, are prohibited.

6 Laboratories that must comply with special containment procedures for large quantities of hazardous materials are subject to a conditional use permit.

7 Provided:

a. No permanent fencing, walls, or other structures shall be installed which hinder removal of the structure from the site, unless the structure is permanently permitted.

b. No required parking stall shall be blocked or rendered unusable as a result of the mobile vendor.

c. Safe ingress and egress shall be maintained. Visibility for transportation and pedestrian access shall be maintained.

d. The limited duration of the mobile vendor shall be established as a condition of approval of any applicable permits.

e. A sign permit is required for exterior signage in accordance with the sign code, Chapter 18.42 KMC.

8 Allowed only as part of a mixed use development subject to the conditions of Chapter 18.50 KMC.

9 Campgrounds and RV parks shall not be permitted.

10 Standalone surface parking lots for vehicles, boats or boat racks shall not exceed 10,000 sq. ft. in size.

11 Only passenger transportation uses shall be permitted (no trucking or towing).

12 Equipment rental is prohibited.

[Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 16-0426 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.25B.030 Accessory uses.

Accessory uses, when consistent with the definition in Chapter 18.20 KMC, are allowed as determined by the city manager. [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.25B.040 Zoning standards.

The following zone-specific development standards in Table B apply in the waterfront commercial zone:

Table B. Waterfront Commercial Development Standards  

	STANDARD	REQUIREMENT

	Base Density: Dwelling Units/Gross Acre	48

	Maximum Density: Dwelling Units/Gross Acre 	72 du/ac1

	Street Setback	10 ft.2

	Minimum Interior Setback	20 ft.3

	Maximum Height	40 ft.

	Maximum Impervious Surface: Percentage	90%

1 This density may only be achieved through the application of residential density incentives or transfer of density credits in mixed use developments. See Chapter 18.80 KMC.

2 Fuel pump islands shall be placed no closer than 25 feet to street front lines.

3 Required on property lines adjoining residential zones.

[Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.25B.050 Additional development standards.

A. Where the waterfront commercial zone abuts a residential zone, the city manager may require additional landscaping pursuant to Chapter 18.35 KMC, blank wall treatments pursuant to Chapter 18.52 KMC, and/or measures to address building mass and bulk pursuant to KMC 18.52.310 and/or 18.52.330 in order to mitigate impacts of new development on neighboring residential areas. Native vegetation is preferred for these screening treatments.

B. Drive-through service is permitted as an accessory use. Drive-through service shall be oriented to the side and/or rear of the building, and integrated into the exterior wall. Drive-through lanes shall not be located between the street and the main pedestrian access to the buildings. [Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.25B.060 Wireless communication facilities.

Use allowances and development regulations for wireless communication facilities are located in Chapter 18.60 KMC. [Ord. 16-0426 § 6 (Att. D).]


Chapter 18.26 REGIONAL BUSINESS ZONE

Sections:

18.26.010    Intent.

18.26.020    Subareas.

18.26.030    Use allowances – Regional business north subarea.

18.26.040    Use allowances – Regional business east subarea.

18.26.050    Use allowances – Regional business west subarea.

18.26.060    Accessory uses.

18.26.070    Zoning standards.

18.26.080    Additional development standards.

18.26.085    Wireless communication facilities.

18.26.090    Conflict with design standards.


18.26.010 Intent.

The regional business zone is intended to provide the broadest mix of retail, office, wholesale, and service uses, with compatible storage and light manufacturing uses, serving regional market areas and offering significant employment opportunities. These purposes are accomplished by supporting existing businesses while encouraging compact and mixed use development that is supportive of transit and pedestrian travel for the future. In the east and west subareas, public access to the waterfront is particularly desirable. [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.26.020 Subareas.

The regional business zone is divided into three subareas: regional business north, regional business east, and regional business west as depicted in Figure 18.26.020.1.


[IMAGE]


[Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.26.030 Use allowances – Regional business north subarea.

The following uses listed in Table A are identified as permitted, conditionally permitted, or prohibited uses in the regional business north subarea:

Table A. Regional Business North Subarea Use Allowances  

	PERMITTED	CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED	PROHIBITED

	Adult entertainment business1

Ambulatory surgery center

Animal kennel/shelter2

Arts, entertainment, indoor

Arts, entertainment, outdoor

Automotive sales and service, marine3

Automotive sales and service, nonmarine4

Business service, standard

Community residential facility

Construction and trade

Day care

Eating and drinking place5

Educational service

Fire or police facility

Health care and social assistance

Laboratory6

Manufacturing, light

Marijuana business

Mobile food service7

Multiple-family dwelling8

Office

Park

Personal service

Recreational facility, indoor

Religious institution

Retail sales

Standalone parking9

Supportive living facility

Temporary lodging

Transportation10

Vehicle or equipment rental11

Wholesale trade	College/university

Laboratory6

Recreational facility, outdoor13

Regional land use

Utility facility	Air transportation service

Auction house

Automotive sales and service, nonmarine4

Business service, intensive

Cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum

Family child-care home

Funeral home/crematory

Hospital

Manufactured housing community

Manufacturing, heavy

Marijuana cooperative

Resource land use

Retail sales, bulk

Secure facility

Single detached dwelling unit

Vehicle or equipment rental11

Vehicle refueling station

Warehousing

1 It shall be unlawful for any person to establish an adult entertainment business or to relocate an adult entertainment business within 330 feet, measured from the property line of the parcel or parcels proposed to contain the adult entertainment business to the property line of the parcels containing the uses in this subsection, without regard to intervening structures or objects, of any:

a. Residentially zoned property;

b. Public or private school for general education of any grade K through 12;

c. School bus stop;

d. Licensed day care or licensed preschool facility;

e. Public park;

f. Publicly dedicated trail; provided, however, that the setback distance shall apply only on the south side of the Burke-Gilman Trail, and that there shall be no setback on the north side of that trail due to the separation provided by Highway 522;

g. Sports fields or playgrounds;

h. Recreation or community center;

i. Religious institution;

j. Public library.

It shall be unlawful for any person to establish an adult entertainment business or to relocate an adult entertainment business within 500 feet of another adult entertainment business, measured from the property line of the parcel or parcels containing the adult entertainment business and the proposed adult entertainment business.

2 Provided:

a. No burning of refuse or dead animals is allowed;

b. The portion of the building or structure in which animals are kept or treated shall be soundproofed. All run areas, excluding confinement areas for livestock, shall be surrounded by an eight-foot solid wall and surfaced with concrete or other impervious material;

c. Outdoor runs shall be prohibited on properties adjacent to residential zones; and

d. The provisions of Chapter 18.70 KMC relative to animal keeping shall be met.

3 Outdoor sales lots shall not exceed 20,000 sq. ft. in size.

4 Automotive sales are prohibited. Service of trucks exceeding eight-ton capacity (FHWA Classes 5-8) and heavy equipment is prohibited.

5 Social card games, as defined by this title, are prohibited.

6 Laboratories that must comply with special containment procedures for large quantities of hazardous materials are subject to a conditional use permit.

7 Provided:

a. No permanent fencing, walls, or other structures shall be installed which hinder removal of the structure from the site, unless the structure is permanently permitted.

b. No required parking stall shall be blocked or rendered unusable as a result of the mobile vendor.

c. Safe ingress and egress shall be maintained. Visibility for transportation and pedestrian access shall be maintained.

d. The limited duration of the mobile vendor shall be established as a condition of approval of any applicable permits.

e. A sign permit is required for exterior signage in accordance with the sign code, Chapter 18.42 KMC.

8 Allowed only as part of a mixed use development subject to the conditions of Chapter 18.50 KMC.

9 Standalone surface parking lots and boat racks are not permitted.

10 Trucking and freight hauling businesses are not permitted.

11 Equipment rental is prohibited.

12 Reserved.

13 Campgrounds and RV parks shall not be permitted.

[Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 16-0426 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).] 


18.26.040 Use allowances – Regional business east subarea.

The following uses listed in Table B are identified as permitted, conditionally permitted, or prohibited uses in the regional business east subarea:

 

Table B. Regional Business East Subarea Use Allowances  

	PERMITTED	CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED	PROHIBITED

	Adult entertainment business1

Ambulatory surgery center

Animal kennel/shelter2

Arts, entertainment, indoor

Arts, entertainment, outdoor3

Auction house4

Automotive sales and service, marine

Automotive sales and service, nonmarine5

Business service, standard

Cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum6

Community residential facility

Construction and trade

Day care

Eating and drinking place7

Educational service

Fire or police facility

Funeral home/crematory

Health care and social assistance

Laboratory8

Manufacturing, light

Marijuana business

Mobile food service9

Multiple-family dwelling10

Office

Park

Personal service

Recreational facility, indoor

Recreational facility, outdoor3,11

Religious institution

Retail sales12

Standalone parking13

Supportive living facility

Temporary lodging

Transportation14

Vehicle or equipment rental

Warehousing15

Wholesale trade	College/university

Hospital

Laboratory8

Regional land use

Secure facility17

Utility facility

	Air transportation service

Automotive sales and service, nonmarine5

Business service, intensive

Family child-care home

Manufactured housing community

Manufacturing, heavy

Marijuana cooperative

Resource land use

Retail sales, bulk

Single detached dwelling unit

Vehicle refueling station

1 It shall be unlawful for any person to establish an adult entertainment business or to relocate an adult entertainment business within 330 feet, measured from the property line of the parcel or parcels proposed to contain the adult entertainment business to the property line of the parcels containing the uses in this subsection, without regard to intervening structures or objects, of any:

a. Residentially zoned property;

b. Public or private school for general education of any grade K through 12;

c. School bus stop;

d. Licensed day care or licensed preschool facility;

e. Public park;

f. Publicly dedicated trail; provided, however, that the setback distance shall apply only on the south side of the Burke-Gilman Trail, and that there shall be no setback on the north side of that trail due to the separation provided by Highway 522;

g. Sports fields or playgrounds;

h. Recreation or community center;

i. Religious institution;

j. Public library.

It shall be unlawful for any person to establish an adult entertainment business or to relocate an adult entertainment business within 500 feet of another adult entertainment business, measured from the property line of the parcel or parcels containing the adult entertainment business and the proposed adult entertainment business.

2 Provided:

a. No burning of refuse or dead animals is allowed;

b. The portion of the building or structure in which animals are kept or treated shall be soundproofed. All run areas, excluding confinement areas for livestock, shall be surrounded by an eight-foot solid wall and surfaced with concrete or other impervious material;

c. Outdoor runs shall be prohibited on properties adjacent to residential zones; and

d. The provisions of Chapter 18.70 KMC relative to animal keeping shall be met.

3 Outdoor activities shall be at least 50 feet from adjoining residential zones and lighting shall be directed away from adjoining residential zones. Hours of operation may be restricted to ensure compatibility.

4 Excluding animal auctions.

5 Automotive sales are prohibited. Service of trucks exceeding eight-ton capacity (FHWA Classes 5-8) and heavy equipment is prohibited.

6 Limited to indoor columbariums and mausoleums.

7 Social card games, as defined by this title, are prohibited.

8 Laboratories that must comply with special containment procedures for large quantities of hazardous materials are subject to a conditional use permit.

9 Provided:

a. No permanent fencing, walls, or other structures shall be installed which hinder removal of the structure from the site, unless the structure is permanently permitted.

b. No required parking stall shall be blocked or rendered unusable as a result of the mobile vendor.

c. Safe ingress and egress shall be maintained. Visibility for transportation and pedestrian access shall be maintained.

d. The limited duration of the mobile vendor shall be established as a condition of approval of any applicable permits.

e. A sign permit is required for exterior signage in accordance with the sign code, Chapter 18.42 KMC.

10 Allowed only as part of a mixed use development subject to the conditions of Chapter 18.50 KMC.

11 Campgrounds and RV parks shall not be permitted.

12 Allowed only as part of a mixed use development.

13 Only standalone boat parking is permitted. Parking lots are limited in size to 10,000 sq. ft.

14 Trucking and freight hauling businesses are not permitted.

15 A warehouse shall not exceed 20,000 sq. ft. in size. Standalone outdoor storage shall not be permitted.

16 Reserved.

17 Jails are prohibited. Secure community transition facilities as defined in RCW 71.09.020 are subject to the following restrictions:

a. Maximum Number of Residents. No SCTF shall house more than three persons, excluding resident staff.

b. Siting Criteria.

(1) SCTFs should be located in relationship to transportation facilities in a manner appropriate to their transportation needs.

(2) No SCTF shall be allowed within the following distances from the following specified uses, areas or zones, whether such uses, areas or zones are located within or outside the City limits:

(a) In or within 250 feet of any residential zone district, or any residentially zoned property.

(b) Adjacent to, immediately across a street or parking lot from, or within the line of sight of a “risk potential activity” as defined in RCW 71.09.020, as amended, including, but not limited to, public and private schools; school bus stops; licensed day care and licensed preschool facilities; public parks, publicly dedicated trails and sports fields; recreational and community centers; playgrounds; religious institutions; and public libraries.

(c) One mile from any existing SCTF, work release, prerelease, or similar facility.

(3) The distances specified in subsection (17)(b)(2) of this footnote shall be measured by following a straight line from the nearest point of the property parcel upon which the SCTF is to be located to the nearest point of the parcel of property or land use district boundary line from which the proposed land use is to be separated.

c. On-Site Facilities Required. Each SCTF shall provide on-site dining, on-site laundry or laundry service, and on-site recreational facilities to serve the residents.

d. Conditional Use Permit Application Process. A conditional use permit application for an SCTF shall be accompanied by the following:

(1) The siting process used for the SCTF, including alternative locations considered. At least three alternative locations must be considered.

(2) An analysis showing that utmost consideration was given to potential sites such that siting of the facility will have no unreasonable impact on any one racial, cultural, or socio-economic group, and that there will not be a resulting concentration of similar facilities in a particular neighborhood, community, jurisdiction or region.

(3) Proposed mitigation measures including the use of extensive buffering from adjacent uses.

(4) A detailed security plan for the facility and the residents.

(5) Proposed operating rules for the facility.

(6) A schedule and analysis of all public input solicited or to be solicited during the siting process.

[Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 16-0426 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.26.050 Use allowances – Regional business west subarea.

The following uses listed in Table C are identified as permitted, conditionally permitted, or prohibited uses in the regional business west subarea:

Table C. Regional Business West Subarea Use Allowances  

	PERMITTED	CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED	PROHIBITED

	Adult entertainment business1

Ambulatory surgery center

Arts, entertainment, indoor

Arts, entertainment, outdoor

Automotive sales and service, marine2

Business service, standard

Community residential facility

Day care

Eating and drinking place3

Educational service

Fire or police facility

Health care and social assistance

Laboratory4

Marijuana business

Mobile food service5

Multiple-family dwelling6

Office	College/university

Laboratory4

Manufacturing, light

Regional land use	Air transportation service

Animal kennel/shelter

Auction house

Automotive sales and service, nonmarine

Business service, intensive

Cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum

Construction and trade

Family child-care home

Funeral home/crematory

Hospital

Manufactured housing community

Manufacturing, heavy

Marijuana cooperative

Resource land use

Retail sales, bulk

Secure facility

	Park

Personal serviceRecreational facility, indoor

Recreational facility, outdoor7

Religious institution

Retail sales8

Standalone parking9

Supportive living facility

Temporary lodging

Transportation10

Vehicle or equipment rental11

Vehicle refueling station12	 	Single detached dwelling unit

Utility facility

Warehousing

Wholesale trade

1 It shall be unlawful for any person to establish an adult entertainment business or to relocate an adult entertainment business within 330 feet, measured from the property line of the parcel or parcels proposed to contain the adult entertainment business to the property line of the parcels containing the uses in this subsection, without regard to intervening structures or objects, of any:

a. Residentially zoned property;

b. Public or private school for general education of any grade K through 12;

c. School bus stop;

d. Licensed day care or licensed preschool facility;

e. Public park;

f. Publicly dedicated trail; provided, however, that the setback distance shall apply only on the south side of the Burke-Gilman Trail, and that there shall be no setback on the north side of that trail due to the separation provided by Highway 522;

g. Sports fields or playgrounds;

h. Recreation or community center;

i. Religious institution;

j. Public library.

It shall be unlawful for any person to establish an adult entertainment business or to relocate an adult entertainment business within 500 feet of another adult entertainment business, measured from the property line of the parcel or parcels containing the adult entertainment business and the proposed adult entertainment business.

2 Repair work or service shall only be performed in an enclosed building, with no outdoor storage of materials.

3 Social card games, as defined by this title, are prohibited.

4 Laboratories that must comply with special containment procedures for large quantities of hazardous materials are subject to a conditional use permit.

5 Provided:

a. No permanent fencing, walls, or other structures shall be installed which hinder removal of the structure from the site, unless the structure is permanently permitted.

b. No required parking stall shall be blocked or rendered unusable as a result of the mobile vendor.

c. Safe ingress and egress shall be maintained. Visibility for transportation and pedestrian access shall be maintained.

d. The limited duration of the mobile vendor shall be established as a condition of approval of any applicable permits.

e. A sign permit is required for exterior signage in accordance with the sign code, Chapter 18.42 KMC.

6 Allowed only as part of a mixed use development subject to the conditions of Chapter 18.50 KMC.

7 Campgrounds and RV parks shall not be permitted.

8 Allowed only as part of a mixed use development.

9 All standalone surface parking lots for vehicles, boats and/or boat racks are limited in size to 10,000 sq. ft.

10 Only passenger transportation uses are permitted.

11 Equipment rental is prohibited. Vehicle rental is allowed only as an accessory to a permitted use.

12 Allowed only as an accessory to a permitted use.

[Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 16-0426 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.26.060 Accessory uses.

Accessory uses, when consistent with the definition in Chapter 18.20 KMC, are allowed as determined by the city manager. [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.26.070 Zoning standards.

The following zone-specific development standards in Table D apply in the regional business zone:

Table D. Regional Business Zone Development Standards  

	STANDARD	REQUIREMENT

	Base Density: Dwelling Units/Acre	48 du/ac

	Maximum Density: Dwelling Units/Acre	72 du/ac1

	Minimum Street Setback	10 ft.2

	Minimum Interior Setback	20 ft.3

	Maximum Height	55 ft.

	Maximum Impervious Surface: Percentage	90%

1 This density may only be achieved through the application of residential density incentives or transfer of density credits in mixed use developments. See Chapter 18.80 KMC.

2 Gas station pump islands shall be placed no closer than 25 feet to street front lines.

3 Required on property lines adjoining residential zones.

[Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.26.080 Additional development standards.

A. Where the regional business zone abuts a residential zone, the city manager may require additional landscaping pursuant to Chapter 18.35 KMC, blank wall treatments pursuant to Chapter 18.52 KMC, and/or measures to address building mass and bulk pursuant to KMC 18.52.310 and/or 18.52.330 in order to mitigate impacts of new development on neighboring residential areas.

B. Drive-through service is permitted as an accessory use. Drive-through service shall be oriented to the side and/or rear of the building, and integrated into the exterior wall. Drive-through lanes shall not be located between the street and the main pedestrian access to the buildings. Modifications to these requirements may be reviewed through the site plan or building permit review process when meeting the intent of pedestrian orientation pursuant to Chapter 18.52 KMC, Downtown Design Standards.

C. Outdoor storage is prohibited in the regional business zone, west subarea. In the regional business zone, north subarea, accessory outdoor storage is limited to a maximum of 50 percent of the site area. [Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.26.085 Wireless communication facilities.

Use allowances and development regulations for wireless communication facilities are located in Chapter 18.60 KMC. [Ord. 16-0426 § 6 (Att. D).]


18.26.090 Conflict with design standards.

In the event of a conflict between Chapter 18.52 KMC, Downtown Design Standards, and regional business zone standards, the Kenmore downtown design standards shall prevail. [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 18.27 PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC ZONE

Sections:

18.27.010    Public and semi-public zone – Intent.

18.27.020    Public and semi-public zone – Use allowances.

18.27.030    Accessory uses.

18.27.040    Public and semi-public zone – Development standards.

18.27.050    Public and semi-public zone – Additional development standards.

18.27.055    Wireless communication facilities.

18.27.060    Public and semi-public zone – Site plan review process.

18.27.070    Public and semi-public zone – Rezone criteria.


18.27.010 Public and semi-public zone – Intent.

The public and semi-public zone includes properties currently owned or operated by a public entity or private institution. Uses in the public and semi-public zone include but are not limited to the City Hall, fire stations, library properties, education facilities, public park-and-ride lots, utility facilities and other institutional uses. The purpose of the public and semi-public zone is to recognize that public and semi-public facilities and institutions provide necessary services to the community and have their own unique set of circumstances. Factors including size, technological processes, requirements for municipal comprehensive facility planning and budgeting, capital improvement programs, and compatibility with surrounding land uses must be considered when developing public and semi-public facilities. New facilities should include buffers, landscaping, and design standards to ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses and zones. Sidewalks, open public spaces and amenities should be provided to encourage a pedestrian-friendly atmosphere and connections with public transit stops, schools, shopping, services, and recreational facilities where appropriate to the character of the neighborhood. The public and semi-public zone is applied to lands used for public and semi-public facilities and institutions designated as public and private facilities on the comprehensive plan land use map. Master plans are encouraged for uses in the public and semi-public zone. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.27.020 Public and semi-public zone – Use allowances.

A. The following uses listed in Table A are identified as permitted, conditionally permitted, or prohibited uses in the public and semi-public zone:

Table A. Public and Semi-Public Zone Use Allowances 

	PERMITTED	CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED	PROHIBITED

	Arts, entertainment, indoor	College/university	Marijuana business

	Arts, entertainment, outdoor1	Construction and trade4	Marijuana cooperative

	Educational service	 	Regional land use5

	Fire or police facility	 	Secure facility

	Office2	 	 

	Park	 	 

	Recreational facility, indoor	 	 

	Recreational facility, outdoor	 	 

	Standalone parking3	 	 

	Utility facility	 	 

1. Except outdoor performance center which is conditionally permitted.

2. Limited to public agency offices.

3. Limited to commuter parking facilities for users of transit, carpools or ride-share programs.

4. Limited to public agency maintenance yards or facilities.

5. Landfill and transfer station are specifically prohibited. Consideration of all other regional land uses shall follow the process outlined in KMC Section 18.27.060.

B. Classified land uses not listed or prohibited in Table A may be allowed through completion of a site plan review process pursuant to KMC 18.27.060 and Chapter 18.105 KMC.

C. Uses Established by Master Plan. Adopted master plans that specify uses include the following:

1. Bastyr University Master Plan, December 2009, approved by City Ordinance 09-0304. [Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 16-0426 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0384 § 5; Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.27.030 Accessory uses.

Accessory uses, when consistent with the definition in Chapter 18.20 KMC, are allowed as determined by the city manager. [Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.27.040 Public and semi-public zone – Development standards.

A. Specific zone-based development standards for the public and semi-public zone in Table B shall apply to the public and semi-public zone as follows:

Table B. Public and Semi-Public Zone Development Standards  

	Standard	Requirement

	Maximum Density: Dwelling Units/Gross Acre	0.101

	Minimum Lot Size	4,500 sq. ft.2

	Minimum Lot Width	35 ft.

	Minimum Street Setback	0 ft., 10 ft., or 20 ft.3

	Minimum Interior Setback	0 ft., 5 ft., or 20 ft.3

	Base Height	35 ft.4

	Maximum Impervious Surface: Percentage	70%, 90%5

1 Dwelling unit, single detached uses: limited to one single detached dwelling unit per existing legal lot as of December 16, 2008.

2 The minimum lot size may be reduced if the city manager determines use on the site is compatible with adjoining property, does not impair development of adjoining property and does not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare.

3    a. Street setbacks: the minimum street setback varies depending on the adjacent zoning:

(1) Zero feet if adjacent zoning is downtown commercial or downtown residential.

(2) Twenty feet if adjacent zoning is R-1 to R-6.

(3) Ten feet in all other cases.

b. Interior setbacks: zero feet if adjacent zoning is downtown commercial or downtown residential; 20 feet if adjacent zoning is R-1 to R-6; five feet in all other cases.

4 Height limits may be increased when portions of the building which exceed the base height limit provide one additional foot of street and interior setback for each foot above the base height limit, provided the maximum height does not exceed 75 feet. Properties abutting downtown commercial or downtown residential zones or regional business zones may achieve the heights allowed by those abutting zones if meeting conditions for the maximum height as expressed in those abutting zones.

5    a. Ninety percent if abutting properties are zoned downtown commercial or downtown residential or regional business. Seventy percent in all other cases.

b. Measures to reduce impervious surfaces and to promote low impact development shall be employed unless infeasible, consistent with adopted Kenmore stormwater management standards.

B. Standards may be varied through a variance process pursuant to Chapter 19.25 KMC and KMC 18.115.030, or through the site plan review process in KMC 18.27.060. [Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.27.050 Public and semi-public zone – Additional development standards.

A. Where the public and semi-public zone abuts a residential zone, the city manager may require a landscaping screen pursuant to Chapter 18.35 KMC in order to screen views of parking lots, accessory buildings, or other features within the public and semi-public zone. Aesthetic safety, security, and maintenance factors shall be considered when considering the type of screen to be employed. Native vegetation is preferred for these screening treatments.

B. Accessory buildings and other structures shall be clustered together to the greatest extent feasible in order to reduce lengthy buildings and impervious surfaces. Measures to reduce impervious surfaces and to promote low impact development shall be employed where feasible, consistent with adopted Kenmore stormwater management standards.

C. Lighting shall be provided for safety of traffic and pedestrian circulation on the site. It shall be designed to minimize direct illumination of abutting properties and adjacent streets. The lighting standards of KMC 18.52.140 shall be met.

D. Properties abutting lands designated as downtown commercial, downtown residential, or regional business shall be subject to design standards of Chapter 18.52 KMC. [Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.27.055 Wireless communication facilities.

Use allowances and development regulations for wireless communication facilities are located in Chapter 18.60 KMC. [Ord. 16-0426 § 6 (Att. D).]


18.27.060 Public and semi-public zone – Site plan review process.

Project sponsors in the public and semi-public zone shall undergo site plan review for purposes of establishing classified land uses or activities not otherwise established in KMC 18.27.020 as permitted or conditionally permitted, in accordance with Chapter 18.105 KMC. Site plan review shall not be used to establish prohibited uses listed in KMC 18.27.020. A site plan review shall be processed consistent with Chapter 18.105 KMC. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.27.070 Public and semi-public zone – Rezone criteria.

A. The public and semi-public zone may be established by a Type 4 land use decision per Chapter 19.25 KMC, where the zone reclassification implements the public and private facilities comprehensive plan designation.

B. If a comprehensive plan amendment is required to establish the public and private facilities land use designation, and is proposed to be implemented by the public and semi-public zone, such comprehensive plan and zoning amendments shall be processed in accordance with Chapters 19.20 and 19.25 KMC.

C. Properties that are designated public and semi-public and that are less than one acre in size may be reclassified to the most prevalent zoning district surrounding the property through consideration of the Type 4 permit process, provided the requested zoning classification does not conflict with the overall intent of the public and private facilities comprehensive plan land use designation. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 18.28 PARKS ZONE

Sections:

18.28.010    Parks zone – Intent.

18.28.020    Parks zone – Use allowances.

18.28.030    Accessory uses.

18.28.040    Parks zone – Development standards.

18.28.050    Parks zone – Additional development standards.

18.28.055    Wireless communication facilities.

18.28.060    Parks zone – Site plan review process.

18.28.070    Parks zone – Rezone criteria.


18.28.010 Parks zone – Intent.

The parks zone provides for parks, recreational, open space, and resource uses within publicly owned lands, and establishes standards that allow for such uses to continue or be established while ensuring compatibility with surrounding uses. Secondary uses include utilities. The parks zone is applied to lands used for public parks, recreation, and open space purposes and designated as public and private facilities on the comprehensive plan land use map. Master plans are encouraged for park uses. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.28.020 Parks zone – Use allowances.

A. The following uses listed in Table A are identified as permitted, conditionally permitted, or prohibited uses in the parks zone:

 

Table A. Parks Zone Use Allowances 

	PERMITTED	CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED	PROHIBITED

	Arts, entertainment, indoor	 	Marijuana business

	Arts, entertainment, outdoor	 	Marijuana cooperative

	Construction and trade1	 	 

	Mobile food service2	 	 

	Office3	 	 

	Park	 	 

	Recreational facility, indoor	 	 

	Recreational facility, outdoor	 	 

	Single detached dwelling unit4	 	 

	Utility facility	 	 

1. City maintenance facility only.

2. Mobile Food Service Requirements.

a. No permanent fencing, walls, or other structures are installed which hinder removal of the mobile food service from the site;

b. No required parking stall shall be blocked or rendered unusable as a result of the mobile food service;

c. Safe ingress and egress shall be maintained. Visibility for transportation and pedestrian access shall be maintained;

d. The duration of the mobile food service shall be established as a condition of approval of any applicable permits;

e. A sign permit is required for exterior signage in accordance with the sign code, Chapter 18.42 KMC.

3. City office only.

4. One dwelling unit allowed per existing legal lot as of December 11, 2006.

B. Classified land uses not listed or prohibited in Table A may be allowed through completion of a site plan review process pursuant to KMC 18.28.060 and Chapter 18.105 KMC. Proponents of projects that include land uses of different sizes or dimensions than those allowed in Table A may also request allowance of such uses pursuant to KMC 18.28.060 and Chapter 18.105 KMC. [Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 16-0417 § 4; Ord. 14-0384 § 5; Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.28.030 Accessory uses.

Accessory uses, when consistent with the definition in Chapter 18.20 KMC, are allowed as determined by the city manager. [Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.28.040 Parks zone – Development standards.

A. Specific zone-based development standards for the parks zone in Table B shall apply to the parks zone as follows:

Table B. Parks Zone Development Standards  

	STANDARD	REQUIREMENT

	Maximum Density: Dwelling Units/Gross Acre	0.101

	Minimum Lot Size	4,500 sq. ft.2

	Minimum Lot Width	35 ft.

	Minimum Street Setback	0 ft., 10 ft., or 20 ft.3

	Minimum Interior Setback	5 ft. or 20 ft.3

	Base Height	35 ft.4

	Maximum Impervious Surface: Percentage	2 – 30%5

1    Dwelling unit, single detached uses: limited to one single detached dwelling unit per existing legal lot as of December 11, 2006. Caretaker residence, accessory: when attached may only be allowed as a reuse of a surplus nonresidential facility subject to Chapter 18.50 KMC.

2    The minimum lot size may be reduced if the city manager determines use on the site is compatible with adjoining property, does not impair development of adjoining property and does not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare.

3    a. Street setbacks: the minimum street setback varies depending on the adjacent zoning:

(1) Zero feet if adjacent zoning is downtown commercial or residential.

(2) Twenty feet if adjacent zoning is R-1 to R-6.

(3) Ten feet in all other zones.

b. Interior setbacks: 20 feet if adjacent zoning is R-1 to R-6; five feet in all other zones.

4    Height limits may be increased when portions of the building which exceed the base height limit provide one additional foot of street and interior setback for each foot above the base height limit, provided the maximum height does not exceed 75 feet.

5    a. For the purposes of this zone, paved trails are not considered impervious surface; provided, that City stormwater and other applicable requirements are met.

b. The following maximum impervious surface standards apply based on the size of the park property:

(1) One hundred acres or greater: five percent.

(2) Thirty to 100 acres: 10 percent.

(3) Less than 30 acres: 30 percent.

c. Measures to reduce impervious surfaces and to promote low impact development shall be employed unless infeasible, consistent with adopted Kenmore stormwater management standards.

B. Standards may be varied through a variance process pursuant to Chapter 19.25 KMC and KMC 18.115.030, or through a site plan review process in KMC 18.28.060. [Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.28.050 Parks zone – Additional development standards.

A. Where the parks zone abuts a residential zone, the city manager may require a landscaping screen pursuant to Chapter 18.35 KMC in order to screen views of parking lots, accessory buildings, or other features within the parks zone. Aesthetic, safety, security, and maintenance factors shall be considered when considering the type of screen to be employed. Native vegetation is preferred for these screening treatments.

B. Accessory buildings and other structures shall be clustered together to the greatest extent feasible in order to reduce lengthy buildings and impervious surfaces. Measures to reduce impervious surfaces and to promote low impact development shall be employed where feasible, consistent with adopted Kenmore stormwater management standards.

C. Lighting shall be provided for safety of traffic and pedestrian circulation on the site. It shall be designed to minimize direct illumination of abutting properties and adjacent streets. The lighting standards of KMC 18.52.140 shall be met. The city manager shall have the authority to waive the requirement to provide lighting. [Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.28.055 Wireless communication facilities.

Use allowances and development regulations for wireless communication facilities are located in Chapter 18.60 KMC. [Ord. 16-0426 § 6 (Att. D).]


18.28.060 Parks zone – Site plan review process.

Project sponsors in the parks zone shall undergo site plan review for purposes of establishing classified land uses or activities not otherwise established in KMC 18.28.020 as permitted or conditionally permitted, in accordance with Chapter 18.105 KMC. Site plan review shall not be used to establish prohibited uses listed in KMC 18.28.020. A site plan review shall be processed consistent with Chapter 18.105 KMC. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.28.070 Parks zone – Rezone criteria.

A. The parks zone may be established by a Type 4 land use decision per Chapter 19.25 KMC, where the zone reclassification implements the public and private facilities comprehensive plan designation.

B. If a comprehensive plan amendment is required to establish the public and private facilities land use designation, and is proposed to be implemented by the parks zone, such comprehensive plan and zoning amendments shall be processed in accordance with Chapters 19.20 and 19.25 KMC. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 18.28A GOLF COURSE ZONE

Sections:

18.28A.010    Golf course zone – Intent.

18.28A.020    Golf course zone – Use allowances.

18.28A.030    Accessory uses.

18.28A.040    Golf course zone – Development standards.

18.28A.050    Golf course zone – Additional development standards.

18.28A.055    Wireless communication facilities.

18.28A.060    Golf course zone – Site plan review process.

18.28A.070    Golf course zone – Rezone criteria.


18.28A.010 Golf course zone – Intent.

The golf course zone provides for golf course activities and the protection and preservation of open space qualities of lands that are developed for golf course uses. The district allows for a mix of active golf-related recreational facilities and supporting infrastructure. Master plans are encouraged for recreational uses. The golf course zone is applied to lands used for golf course related purposes and designated as public and private facilities on the comprehensive plan land use map. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.28A.020 Golf course zone – Use allowances.

A. The following uses listed in Table A are identified as permitted, conditionally permitted, or prohibited uses in the golf course zone:

 

Table A. Golf Course Zone Use Allowances 

	PERMITTED	CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED	PROHIBITED

	Arts, entertainment, indoor	Arts, entertainment, outdoor	Marijuana business

	Park	 	Marijuana cooperative

	Recreational facility, indoor	 	Multiple-family dwelling

	Recreational facility, outdoor	 	Single detached dwelling unit

	Utility facility	 	 

B. Classified land uses not listed or prohibited in Table A may be allowed through completion of a site plan review process pursuant to KMC 18.28A.060 and Chapter 18.105 KMC. [Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 16-0426 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0384 § 5; Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.28A.030 Accessory uses.

Accessory uses, when consistent with the definition in Chapter 18.20 KMC, are allowed as determined by the city manager. [Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.28A.040 Golf course zone – Development standards.

A. Specific zone-based development standards for the golf course zone in Table B shall apply to the golf course zone as follows:

Table B. Golf Course Zone Development Standards  

	Standard	Requirement

	Maximum Density: Dwelling Units/Gross Acre	0.101

	Minimum Lot Size	4,500 sq. ft.2

	Minimum Lot Width	35 ft.

	Minimum Street Setback	20 ft. or 30 ft.3

	Minimum Interior Setback	10 ft. or 20 ft.3

	Base Height	35 ft.4

	Maximum Impervious Surface: Percentage	10%5

1 Dwelling unit, single detached uses: limited to one single detached dwelling unit per existing legal lot as of December 16, 2008.

2 The minimum lot size may be reduced if the city manager determines use on the site is compatible with adjoining property, does not impair development of adjoining property and does not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare.

3    a. Street setbacks: the minimum street setback varies depending on the adjacent zoning:

(1) Thirty feet if adjacent zoning is R-1 to R-6.

(2) Twenty feet in all other cases.

b. Interior setbacks: 20 feet if adjacent zoning is R-1 to R-6; 10 feet in all other cases.

c. Netting or fencing and support structures for the netting or fencing used to contain golf balls in the operation of golf courses or golf driving ranges are exempt from the interior setback requirements; provided, that the maximum height shall not exceed 75 feet.

4 Height limits may be increased when portions of the building which exceed the base height limit provide one additional foot of street and interior setback for each foot above the base height limit, provided the maximum height does not exceed 75 feet.

5    a. Measures to reduce impervious surfaces and to promote low impact development shall be employed unless infeasible, consistent with adopted Kenmore stormwater management standards.

B. Standards may be varied through a variance process pursuant to Chapter 19.25 KMC and KMC 18.115.030, or through a site plan review process in KMC 18.28A.060. [Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.28A.050 Golf course zone – Additional development standards.

A. Where the golf course zone abuts a residential zone, the city manager may require a landscaping screen pursuant to Chapter 18.35 KMC in order to screen views of parking lots, accessory buildings, or other features within the golf course zone. Aesthetic, safety, security, and maintenance factors shall be considered when considering the type of screen to be employed. Native vegetation is preferred for these screening treatments.

B. Accessory buildings and other structures shall be clustered together to the greatest extent feasible in order to reduce lengthy buildings and impervious surfaces. Measures to reduce impervious surfaces and to promote low impact development shall be employed where feasible, consistent with adopted Kenmore stormwater management standards.

C. Lighting shall be provided for safety of traffic and pedestrian circulation on the site. It shall be designed to minimize direct illumination of abutting properties and adjacent streets. The lighting standards of KMC 18.52.140 shall be met. The city manager shall have the authority to waive the requirement to provide lighting. [Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.28A.055 Wireless communication facilities.

Use allowances and development regulations for wireless communication facilities are located in Chapter 18.60 KMC. [Ord. 16-0426 § 6 (Att. D).]


18.28A.060 Golf course zone – Site plan review process.

Project sponsors in the golf course zone shall undergo site plan review for purposes of establishing classified land uses or activities not otherwise established in KMC 18.28A.020 as permitted or conditionally permitted, in accordance with Chapter 18.105 KMC. Site plan review shall not be used to establish prohibited uses listed in KMC 18.28A.020. A site plan review shall be processed consistent with Chapter 18.105 KMC. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.28A.070 Golf course zone – Rezone criteria.

A. The golf course zone may be established by a Type 4 land use decision per Chapter 19.25 KMC, where the zone reclassification implements the public and private facilities comprehensive plan designation.

B. If a comprehensive plan amendment is required to establish the public and private facilities land use designation, and is proposed to be implemented by the golf course zone, such comprehensive plan and zoning amendments shall be processed in accordance with Chapters 19.20 and 19.25 KMC. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 18.29 TRANSIT ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT (TOD) DISTRICT OVERLAY

Sections:

18.29.010    Intent.

18.29.020    Area.

18.29.030    Applicability.

18.29.040    Use allowances.

18.29.050    Zoning standards.

18.29.055    Wireless communication facilities.

18.29.060    Affordable housing requirements.

18.29.070    Parking.

18.29.080    Design requirements.

18.29.090    Connectivity requirements.

18.29.100    Significant tree grove retention.


18.29.010 Intent.

The purpose of the transit oriented development (TOD) district overlay is to reinforce the City’s planned concentration of pedestrian-oriented mixed use development at intensities that support and are supported by multi-modal transportation options, including high capacity transit. The TOD district overlay revitalizes the City’s core by creating incentives and opportunities for a mix of jobs and residences, cultivates a respectful relationship among development within the district, the natural environment, and nearby traditional neighborhoods, and provides a framework for future infrastructure and service decisions. The TOD district overlay provides public benefits in the form of encouraging housing affordable to all economic groups, increased pedestrian connectivity, quality design, and incentive to preserve significant tree groves where they exist. [Ord. 15-0406 § 1 (Att. A).]


18.29.020 Area.

The area of the TOD district overlay is shown on Figure 18.29.020.1. In order to develop under the TOD district overlay, at least 50 percent of a parcel shown on Figure 18.29.020.1 shall be located within the TOD district overlay.


[IMAGE]


[Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 15-0406 § 1 (Att. A).]


18.29.030 Applicability.

A. The TOD district overlay is an incentive-based zoning overlay. Applicants who elect to develop under the provisions of the TOD district overlay shall adhere to all development standards set forth in this chapter; except that development standards not addressed in this chapter shall be governed by provisions of the underlying zone.

B. In order to be eligible to develop under the TOD district overlay regulations, a development application shall meet the following criteria:

1. The property must be located within the TOD district overlay area as described in KMC 18.29.020;

2. The proposed development must either:

a. Be considered a mixed use development as defined in KMC 18.20.1740; or

b. Be a residential-only development or mixed use development with commercial permitted only on the ground floor if located in the R-12, R-18, or R-24 underlying zones, which are areas designated as primarily residential.

C. Eligible properties within the TOD district overlay that do not choose to develop under the provisions of this chapter shall comply with the provisions of the underlying zone in their entirety. [Ord. 15-0406 § 1 (Att. A).]


18.29.040 Use allowances.

The following uses listed in Table A are identified as permitted, conditionally permitted or prohibited uses for properties electing to develop under provisions of the TOD district overlay.

All uses not specifically listed in this section shall be prohibited.

Table A – TOD District Overlay  Use Allowances  

	Permitted	Conditionally Permitted	Prohibited

	Arts, entertainment, indoor1,3	Ambulatory surgery center2	Adult entertainment business

	Business service, standard1,3	Animal kennel/ shelter2,5	Air transportation service

	Day care	College/ university2	Arts, entertainment, outdoor

	Eating and drinking place1	Fire or police facility2	Auction house

	Educational service1	Laboratory2	Automotive sales and service, marine

	Health care and social assistance1,3	Park	Automotive sales and service, nonmarine

	Manufacturing, light1,3,5	Regional land use	Business service, intensive

	Mobile food service4	Religious institution2	Cemetery, columbarium or mausoleum

	Multiple-family dwelling	Supportive living facility2	Community residential facility

	Office1	 	Construction and trade

	Personal service1,3	 	Family child-care home

	Recreational facility, indoor1,3	 	Funeral home/ crematory

	Retail sales1,3,5	 	Hospital

	Temporary lodging1,3	 	Manufactured housing community

	 	 	Manufacturing, heavy

	 	 	Marijuana business

	 	 	Recreational facility, outdoor

	 	 	Resource land use

	 	 	Retail sales, bulk

	 	 	Secure facility

	 	 	Single detached dwelling unit

	 	 	Standalone parking

	 	 	Transportation

	 	 	Utility facility

	 	 	Vehicle or equipment rental

	 	 	Vehicle refueling station

	 	 	Warehousing

	 	 	Wholesale trade

1    Commercial use limitations in residentially oriented underlying zones: If these uses are proposed for property with underlying zoning of R-12, R-18, or R-24, then each use is limited to maximum 5,000 square feet per use and 15,000 square feet total contiguous nonresidential area within the development.

2    Conditional use permit required in underlying urban corridor, downtown commercial, and public/semi-public zones. Prohibited in all other underlying zones within the TOD district overlay area.

3    Conditional use permit required in underlying R-12, R-18, R-24 zones. Permitted in underlying urban corridor, downtown commercial, and public/semi-public zones within the TOD district overlay area.

4    Mobile food service is permitted subject to the following requirements:

a. For a stand, location shall be on a sidewalk or near a storefront consistent with barrier-free regulations;

b. For a stand, location on the sidewalk or near a storefront shall provide for at least four feet of unobstructed sidewalk between the stand and the sidewalk edge for pedestrian movement;

c. No permanent fencing, walls, or other structures are installed which hinder removal of the structure from the site;

d. No required parking stall shall be blocked or rendered unusable as a result of the mobile food service;

e. Safe ingress and egress to the site shall be maintained. Visibility for transportation and pedestrian access shall be maintained;

f. The limited duration of the mobile food service shall be established as a condition of approval of any applicable permits; if accessory to a use, such operation is removed daily at the time of or prior to the close of business hours;

g. A sign permit is required for exterior signage in accordance with the sign code, Chapter 18.42 KMC.

5    No outdoor storage of materials shall be permitted.

[Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 16-0426 § 5 (Att. C); Ord. 15-0406 § 1 (Att. A).]


18.29.050 Zoning standards.

The following development standards in Table B apply to properties electing to develop under provisions of the TOD district overlay:

Table B – TOD Overlay District Development Standards  

	STANDARD	REQUIREMENT

	Minimum Density: Dwelling Units/Gross Acre	601

	Maximum Density: Dwelling Units/Gross Acre	1501

	Maximum Height	65'2

1     Portions of any property developing under the TOD district overlay regulations with an underlying zoning of R-1 shall cluster development away from critical areas or corridors such as urban separators or the wildlife habitat network to the extent possible and the open space shall be placed in a separate tract that includes at least 50 percent of the site. The open space tract shall be permanent and meet the provisions of KMC 17.20.130(B). 

2    Portions of any property developing under the TOD district overlay regulations that are within 50 feet of a single-family zone (R-1, R-4, R-6) shall have a maximum height of 35 feet within that area to provide a transition in height to the lower intensity uses.

[Ord. 15-0406 § 1 (Att. A).]


18.29.055 Wireless communication facilities.

Use allowances and development regulations for wireless communication facilities in the TOD district overlay shall be as specified in Chapter 18.60 KMC for the underlying zoning district. [Ord. 16-0426 § 6 (Att. D).]


18.29.060 Affordable housing requirements.

For properties choosing to develop under the TOD district overlay, development shall provide affordable housing as described in Chapter 18.77 KMC. Development choosing to develop under the TOD district overlay shall not utilize the provisions of residential density incentives found in Chapter 18.80 KMC to achieve maximum densities. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 15-0406 § 1 (Att. A).]


18.29.070 Parking.

Parking in the TOD district overlay should be sufficient to support local businesses and residential development, while at the same time promoting transit ridership, walkable streets, and efficient use of land. Proposed development choosing to develop under the TOD district overlay shall provide parking as follows:

A. Minimum parking requirements for nonresidential uses may be reduced to 75 percent of the minimum requirement computed according to the provisions of KMC 18.40.030. 

B. Minimum residential parking shall be supplied at the following ratios:

1. 1.0 parking spaces per market-rate dwelling unit, except as follows:

a. Pioneer Project Incentive. For purposes of this section, a pioneer project consists of the first 100 bonus housing units provided in the city under the TOD district overlay regulations. The first 100 bonus housing units in a pioneer project(s) may elect to provide parking spaces for market rate bonus units at 0.6 parking spaces per dwelling unit.

2. 1.0 additional parking space per every five market rate dwelling units shall be provided and designated as guest parking for use by all guests.

3. 0.6 parking spaces per dwelling unit for affordable or senior dwelling units. 

4. Affordable housing shall be as defined under KMC 18.29.060. Senior housing shall be defined as housing restricted to those meeting the definition of “senior citizen” as found in KMC 18.20.2500.

C. The following factors shall count towards minimum parking standards for residential and nonresidential development:

1. On-street parking immediately adjoining a property proposed for development or provided as part of the proposed development may be counted toward the minimum parking requirement. 

2. Minimum on-site parking may be reduced further by provisions of KMC 18.40.090(B) for properties within the TOD district overlay that meet the requirements of KMC 18.40.090(B) for accessibility to high frequency transit service.

3. Shared parking among uses is encouraged within the TOD district overlay. Developments that propose shared parking arrangements shall submit a parking management plan as defined in KMC 18.20.1995 that describes the terms and conditions of shared parking arrangements on site.

D. Parking Provided in Excess of Minimum. Provision of parking in excess of the minimum parking requirements outlined in subsections A and B of this section shall require the excess parking be included in a structured parking garage, or under building and screened from the street frontage, unless the additional parking is associated with a phased, mixed use development, is interim in nature, and is temporarily located on land reserved for future phases not yet built.

E. Maximum parking within the TOD district overlay shall not exceed the minimum requirement calculated under the provisions of KMC 18.40.030.

1. Applicants may be allowed to exceed the maximum parking if the applicant can produce a parking study that demonstrates probable on-site parking needs that are significantly higher than similar uses. This traffic study shall be subject to review by the city manager before approval for additional parking is granted. All parking granted in excess of the maximum shall be provided in a structured parking garage or under building and screened from the street frontage.

F. All other parking requirements shall be as provided in Chapter 18.40 KMC. [Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 15-0406 § 1 (Att. A).]


18.29.080 Design requirements.

Development within the TOD district overlay shall comply with Standard 1 provisions of the downtown design standards, as set forth in Chapter 18.52 KMC.

In addition, the following design requirements shall apply:

A. Relational Setback Requirements. Any proposed development within the TOD district overlay adjacent to an existing single-family zone (R-1, R-4, or R-6) shall be required to provide an interior ground-level setback of 15 feet on the side of the property facing the single-family zone, unless a larger setback is required in the underlying zone. In that event, the larger of the two setback requirements shall govern. The setback required by this subsection shall be landscaped with Type II landscaping as defined in KMC 18.35.040(B) to provide a visual buffer. [Ord. 15-0406 § 1 (Att. A).]


18.29.090 Connectivity requirements.

The TOD district overlay should remove impediments to pedestrian use of the district and the downtown area by fostering the creation of an extensive network of sidewalks and pedestrian walkways. 

Development proposals within the boundaries of the TOD district overlay that elect to develop under the provisions of this chapter shall:

A. Provide any direct pedestrian connections between proposed development and transit facilities, or arterials providing transit access in order to minimize walking distances to transit. 

B. Comply with the downtown design standards pertaining to pedestrian walkways, as set forth in KMC 18.52.100.

C. Properties abutting water bodies (i.e., wetlands, rivers, lakes, or streams) shall provide a public access trail paralleling the water body from one property line to the next with setbacks that are consistent with the requirements of KMC Title 16 and Chapter 18.55 KMC. The public access trail shall connect to a public right-of-way. 

1. Where a development proposal abuts a property with a public access trail segment, the public access segment on the subject property shall connect to abutting property public access segment(s).

2. The public access easement for public access trails shall be documented on the face of the plat or plan and recorded with the King County Department of Records and Elections. Public access easements shall run with the land in perpetuity. [Ord. 15-0406 § 1 (Att. A).]


18.29.100 Significant tree grove retention.

A. Definitions.

1. Significant Tree Grove Definition. A “significant tree grove” shall consist of two or more trees with a minimum of five and one-half tree units total. A qualifying tree has two tree units minimum. The maximum distance measured in feet between qualifying trees shall be equal to two times the critical root zone in order to be defined as a significant tree grove. For example a 24-inch d.b.h. tree must be within 24 feet of another tree in the grove to be included in the significant tree grove. A tree of any size that is topped or considered a “hazard tree” as defined in KMC 18.20.3084 may not qualify as part of a significant tree grove as herein defined. For purposes of this chapter, a significant tree grove may not contain trees that are located within a critical area or critical area buffer protected under Chapter 18.55 KMC. A significant tree grove is not the same as a “grove,” as defined in KMC 18.20.1273.

2. Tree Units. See KMC 18.57.060(A) for translation of diameter at breast height (d.b.h.) to tree units.

B. Applicability.

1. If the underlying zone within the TOD district overlay requires tree retention as provided in Chapter 18.57 KMC, then the provisions of Chapter 18.57 KMC shall be retained. If Chapter 18.57 KMC exempts a property from tree retention then it shall remain exempt.

2. Development proposals within the boundaries of the TOD district overlay that elect to develop under the provisions of this chapter shall be eligible to benefit from providing less parking or more dwelling units or any combination of the two if the development retains one or more significant tree grove(s) as defined in this section in perpetuity. A development may be able to benefit from both reduced parking and additional dwelling units by preserving a significant tree grove so long as the same tree credits are not counted towards both reductions in parking and additional bonus dwellings. Trees or groves retained through the provision of Chapter 18.57 KMC may count towards the significant tree grove retention if they meet the definitions found in subsection A of this section.

3. Tree on Property Line. In instances where one or more trees that would qualify as part of a significant tree grove is located on a property line such that the tree is on more than one property, and the properties are in separate ownerships, the tree shall qualify to be counted as part of a separate tree grove by each property owner.

C. Reduced Parking. In order to retain qualifying significant tree groves, required parking may be reduced at the maximum rate of one stall per each five and one-half tree units. Parking quantities may be reduced up to a maximum of 20 percent from the parking requirement after other reductions are applied, if any.

D. Residential Bonus Units. In order to retain qualifying significant tree groves, residential units are offered at the rate of one bonus unit per each 11 tree units preserved. Grove bonus units are not included in maximum unit density calculations. Grove bonus units are not subject to the affordability requirements of KMC 18.29.060. 

E. Significant Tree Grove Preservation Requirements.

1. Tree Protection Plan Required. A tree protection plan as identified in KMC 18.57.050 shall be required for any development application proposing to protect one or more significant tree groves through this section.

2. Recorded on Title. The map of significant tree groves preserved through this section, along with a covenant preventing removal, shall be recorded and shown on the property title. 

3. Subject to Tree Protection Measures of Chapter 18.57 KMC. Significant tree groves protected under this section shall be subject to the tree protection measures during construction found in KMC 18.57.090, the post-construction replacement, financial guarantee, and maintenance requirements of KMC 18.57.100, and the penalties and enforcement of KMC 18.57.110. [Ord. 15-0406 § 1 (Att. A).]


Chapter 18.30 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – GENERAL

Sections:

18.30.010    Purpose.

18.30.015    Burke-Gilman Trail.

18.30.020    Density calculations – Allowable dwelling units, lots or floor area.

18.30.040    Fences.

18.30.050    Height – Measurement method.

18.30.060    Height – Exceptions to limits.

18.30.070    Light and glare.

18.30.080    Lot area – Prohibited reduction.

18.30.090    Lot area – Minimum lot area for construction.

18.30.100    Lot divided by zone boundary.

18.30.110    Lot width – Measurement method.

18.30.112    Marijuana businesses – Standards.

18.30.113    Outdoor storage for nonresidential uses.

18.30.115    Public nuisance – Prohibited activities.

18.30.130    Recreation space – On-site areas.

18.30.140    Recreation space – Maintenance.

18.30.150    Recreation space – Financial guarantees.

18.30.155    Recreational vehicles.

18.30.160    Setbacks – Measurement.

18.30.170    Setbacks – Specific building or use.

18.30.190    Setbacks – Modifications.

18.30.200    Setbacks – From regional utility corridors.

18.30.210    Setbacks – From alley.

18.30.220    Setbacks – Required modifications.

18.30.230    Setbacks – Projections and structures allowed.

18.30.240    Sight distance requirements.

18.30.250    Storage space and collection points for trash and recyclables.

18.30.260    Trail corridors – Applicability.

18.30.270    Trail corridors – Design standards.

18.30.280    Trail corridors – Maintenance of trail corridors/improvements.

18.30.290    Relocation plan for manufactured housing communities.


18.30.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish basic standards for development relative to residential density, dimensional requirements and specific rules for general application. The standards and rules are established to provide flexibility in project design, maintain privacy between adjacent uses and meet the on-site recreation needs of project residents. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.015 Burke-Gilman Trail.

A. RB-zoned properties which lie north of NE 175th Street shall provide 10 feet of Type II landscaping along the common property boundary with the Burke-Gilman public trail right-of-way. Property owners may negotiate with King County to have the Type II landscaping located within the Burke-Gilman public right-of-way.

B. The Burke-Gilman Trail shall be considered a public right-of-way for purposes of Sections 18.52.180, 18.52.200, 18.52.230, 18.52.240, and 18.52.310 of Chapter 18.52 KMC (Downtown Design Standards). [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.020 Density calculations – Allowable dwelling units, lots or floor area.

Permitted number of dwelling units or lots or floor area shall be determined as follows:

A. The allowed number of dwelling units or lots (base density) shall be computed by multiplying the site area by the applicable residential base density number;

B. The maximum density (unit or lot) limits shall be computed by adding the bonus or transfer units authorized by Chapter 18.80 KMC to the base units computed under subsection A of this section;

C. The allowed floor area shall be computed by applying the floor area ratio to the project site area; and

D. Except for short subdivisions of four or fewer lots, when density calculations result in a fraction, the fraction shall be rounded to the nearest whole number as follows:

1. Fractions of 0.50 or above shall be rounded up; and

2. Fractions below 0.50 shall be rounded down.

E. When density calculations result in a fraction, the permitted number of lots derived from short subdivisions of four or fewer lots shall be rounded as follows:

1. For a short subdivision resulting in less than two lots (base density) as described in subsection A of this section, fractions of 0.85 shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number and fractions below 0.85 shall be rounded down.

2. For a short subdivision resulting in more than two but less than three lots (base density) as described in subsection A of this section, fractions of 0.75 shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number and fractions below 0.75 shall be rounded down.

3. For a short subdivision resulting in more than three lots but less than four lots (base density) as described in subsection A of this section, fractions of 0.60 shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number and fractions below 0.60 shall be rounded down. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.040 Fences.

Fences are permitted as follows:

A. Fences exceeding a height of eight feet shall comply with the applicable street and interior setbacks of the zone in which the property is located;

B. Fences located on a rockery, retaining wall, or berm within a required setback area are permitted subject to the following requirements:

1. In R-1 through R-18, P and GC zones:

a. The total height of the fence and the rockery, retaining wall or berm upon which the fence is located shall not exceed a height of 12 feet. This height shall be measured from the top of the fence to the ground on the low side of the rockery, retaining wall or berm; and

b. The total height of the fence itself, measured from the top of the fence to the top of the rockery, retaining wall or berm, shall not exceed eight feet;

2. In the R-24, R-48, DR, PSP, and commercial zones, the height of the fence, measured from the top of the fence to the top of the rockery, retaining wall or berm, shall not exceed eight feet;

3. Any portion of the fence above a height of eight feet, measured to include both the fence and the rockery, retaining wall, or berm (as described in subsection (B)(1)(a) of this section), shall be an open-work fence;

C. Fences located on a rockery, retaining wall or berm outside required setback areas shall not exceed the building height for the zone, measured in accordance with the standards established in the City building code, KMC Title 15;


[IMAGE]


D. Electric fences shall:

1. Be permitted in all zones; provided, that when placed within R-4 through R-48 zones, additional fencing or other barriers shall be constructed to prevent inadvertent contact with the electric fence from abutting property;

2. Comply with the following requirements:

a. An electric fence using an interrupted flow of current at intervals of about one second on and two seconds off shall be limited to 2,000 volts at 17 milliamps;

b. An electric fence using continuous current shall be limited to 1,500 volts at seven milliamps;

c. All electric fences in the R-4 through R-48 zones shall be posted with permanent signs a minimum of 36 square inches in area at 50-foot intervals stating that the fence is electrified; and

d. Electric fences sold as a complete and assembled unit can be installed by an owner if the controlling elements of the installation are certified by an A.N.S.I. approved testing agency; and

E. Except as specifically required for the necessary security related to a nonresidential use, no barbed or razor-wire fence shall be located in any R-4 through R-48 zone. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.050 Height – Measurement method.

A. Building height shall be measured from the average finished grade to the highest point of the roof. The average finished grade shall be determined by first delineating the smallest square or rectangle which can enclose the building and then averaging the ground elevations taken at the midpoint of each side of the square or rectangle; provided, that the measured ground elevations do not include berms.

B. When a proposed building height is within one foot of the maximum allowable height, the applicant shall provide a survey prior to final inspection, performed by a licensed surveyor, demonstrating compliance with the City’s height regulations.


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


[Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.060 Height – Exceptions to limits.

The following structures may be erected above the height limits:

A. Roof structures housing or screening elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required for building operation and maintenance; and

B. Fire or parapet walls, skylights, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, church steeples, crosses, spires, utility line towers and poles, and similar structures. 

Development in the CB west zone (see KMC 18.23.040) is specifically excluded from the exceptions to height limitations of this section. All height provisions and exceptions to height limitations for the CB west zone are found in KMC 18.23.040. [Ord. 18-0454 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 16-0426 § 7 (Att. E); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.070 Light and glare.

A. To minimize adverse impacts of lighting on motorists, pedestrians and the surrounding area, the following site standards apply:

1. Exterior lighting shall be shielded or recessed so that direct glare and reflections are contained within the boundaries of the property and directed downward and away from adjoining properties, streets and public walkways.

2. Lighting shall not blink, flash, or be of unusually high intensity or brightness.

B. In no case shall more than one foot-candle power of light five feet above-ground cross a property line in a residential zone as measured by a light meter meeting the American National Standards Institute specifications for such instruments.

C. The owner of the property on which the light source is located shall bear the burden of proof that exterior lighting on their property meets these requirements, including the expense of a light meter reading. The meter reading shall be taken by a person deemed qualified by the city manager.

D. To reduce light and glare impacts, the city manager is authorized to require mitigating measures including, but not limited to, removal of the light; limiting the area and intensity of illumination; limiting the location or angle of illumination; limiting the hours of illumination; and/or requiring landscaping.

E. Residential and commercial holiday lighting; overhead street lighting and warning, emergency, or traffic signals; and lighting associated with permitted signs as described in Chapter 18.42 KMC are exempt from the provisions of this section. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.080 Lot area – Prohibited reduction.

Any portion of a lot that was used to calculate compliance with the standards and regulations of this title shall not be subsequently subdivided or segregated from such lot. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.090 Lot area – Minimum lot area for construction.

Except as provided for nonconformances in Chapter 18.100 KMC, in the R-1, R-4 and R-6 zones no construction shall be permitted on a lot that contains an area of less than 2,500 square feet or that does not comply with the applicable minimum lot width, except for a legal lot as determined through KMC 17.15.070 created prior to February 2, 1995, that since February 2, 1995, has not simultaneously been owned by the owner of a contiguous lot(s). [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.100 Lot divided by zone boundary.

When a lot is divided by a zone boundary, the following rules shall apply:

A. When a lot contains both residential and nonresidential zoning, the zone boundary between the zones shall be considered a lot line for determining permitted building height and required setbacks on the site;

B. When a lot contains residential zones of varying density:

1. Any residential density transfer within the lot shall be allowed from the portion with the lesser residential density to that of the greater residential density;

2. Residential density transfer from the higher density zone to the lower density zone may be allowed only when:

a. The units transferred from any R-12 to R-48 zoned portion of the lot are maintained in an attached dwelling unit configuration on the lower density portion receiving such units,

b. The transfer does not reduce the minimum density achievable on the lot,

c. The transfer enhances the efficient use of needed infrastructure,

d. The transfer does not result in significant adverse impacts to the low density portion of the lot,

e. The transfer contributes to preservation of critical areas, wildlife corridors, or other natural features, and

f. The transfer does not result in significant adverse impacts to adjoining lower density properties;

3. Compliance with these criteria shall be evaluated during review of any development proposals in which such a transfer is proposed; and

C. Uses on each portion of the lot shall only be those permitted in each zone. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.110 Lot width – Measurement method.

Lot width shall be measured by scaling a circle of the applicable diameter within the boundaries of the lot; provided, that an access easement, access tract, access panhandle and building setbacks shall not be included within the circle area. See KMC 17.20.120(C) for additional standards related to lot configuration. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.112 Marijuana businesses – Standards.

Nothing in this code or the ordinances of the City shall be construed as an authorization to violate any federal law. Affirmative terminology used in this section regarding permitting, licensing, authorization, and similar terms shall not be construed as approval, support, endorsement, or encouragement of the activities addressed in this code or City ordinances with regard to marijuana businesses. Such terms shall instead be construed only to describe circumstances under which there is conditional absence of local prohibition. The City does not intend to aid, abet, counsel, command, induce or procure any offense against the United States. The City also does not intend to conspire with any marijuana producer, processor, researcher, or retailer to commit any offense against the United States. The purpose of all regulations relating to marijuana businesses is to establish local laws which protect public safety, health and welfare to the greatest extent allowed by a Washington State law that cannot be reconciled with federal law. Nothing herein shall be construed to supersede federal law prohibiting the possession, use, manufacture, or sale of marijuana.

The following standards shall apply to marijuana businesses:

A. No person or entity may apply for, receive or maintain a permit to locate a marijuana business in the City unless that person or entity holds a valid marijuana business license from the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board verifying that the business complies with Chapter 314-55 WAC and all State laws relating to marijuana businesses. A marijuana business with an active administrative violation notice from the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board and/or a suspended license shall not be permitted to locate in the City until the violation is resolved and/or any associated fines have been paid or suspensions concluded.

B. Marijuana businesses shall maintain a 1,000-foot separation from the perimeter of the grounds of any of the following entities:

1. Elementary or secondary school;

2. Playground;

3. Recreation center or facility;

4. Child care center;

5. Public park;

6. Public transit center;

7. Library;

8. Any game arcade (where admission is not restricted to persons age 21 or older);

9. Properties owned or under contract by a public entity such as a school district or the City where a future elementary or secondary school or public park is planned when such plans have been approved or adopted by the public entities’ governing authority; or

10. Another marijuana business, except that a marijuana researcher shall not have this particular separation requirement.

Definitions of subsections (B)(1) through (8) of this section, and the methodology for measuring the buffers outlined above, shall be as provided in Chapter 314-55 WAC.

C. Marijuana businesses shall not be located on a parcel any portion of which is within 200 feet of a residential zone (R-1, R-4, R-6, R-12, R-18, R-24, or R-48).

D. Marijuana producers or marijuana processors shall not be located in a building that includes residential uses.

E. Outdoor marijuana production shall be prohibited.

F. Drive-through marijuana retail sales shall be prohibited.

G. Signage for marijuana businesses shall comply with Chapter 18.42 KMC and Chapter 314-55 WAC. In the event of a conflict between these regulations, the more restrictive regulation shall apply.

H. A marijuana business shall have a valid City business license.

I. By accepting a permit issued pursuant to this section, the licensee, its owners, officers, operators, and employees, waives and releases the City, its officers, officials, employees, volunteers and agents from any and all liability for injuries, damages, suits or liabilities, including attorneys’ fees, that result from any arrest or prosecution of licensees’ owners, officers, operators, employees, clients or customers for a violation of federal, State or local laws and regulations.

J. By accepting a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the licensee, its owners, officers, operators, and employees, indemnifies, defends and holds harmless the City, its officers, officials, employees, volunteers, agents, insurers and self-insurance pool against any and all liability, claims, injuries, damages, losses or suits, including attorneys’ fees, arising out of or in any manner connected with the marijuana business that is the subject of the license.

K. In addition to any other applicable remedy and/or penalty, any violation by a licensee, and persons associated with licensee as described in subsections I and J of this section, of this code or City ordinances is declared to be a public nuisance per se, and may be abated by the City under the applicable provisions of this code or State law including, but not limited to, Chapter 1.20 KMC. [Ord. 16-0421 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0384 § 7.]


18.30.113 Outdoor storage for nonresidential uses.*

A. Where outdoor storage is permitted, it shall meet the following standards:

1. Storage shall not be permitted in required setbacks and shall not be located between the building(s) and the primary street.

2. Storage shall be screened from view from the public right-of-way and adjacent residential zones using a minimum six-foot-high solid wood fence, masonry wall, or vegetation approved by the city manager.

3. Storage shall be maintained in a neat, orderly and safe manner.

4. Outdoor storage areas shall be graded and shall meet the requirements of the City’s Stormwater Pollution Prevention Manual. Outdoor storage areas may be surfaced with permeable materials if adequate drainage and erosion and dust control are provided.

5. Lighting shall be directed away from adjacent residential zones and shall be shielded as necessary to reduce impacts.

B. Exception: In cases where an outdoor storage area is used for purposes of product advertising, the city manager may make an exception to these standards. Exceptions shall be the minimum necessary to achieve the outdoor advertising purpose. [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1).]

*Code reviser’s note: Ord. 14-0391 added this section as KMC 18.30.112. It has been editorially renumbered to avoid duplication.


18.30.115 Public nuisance – Prohibited activities.

It is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or deposit on any property in the City a public nuisance including, but not limited to, the following:

A. Open storage of rubbish or junk including, but not limited to, refuse, garbage, scrap metal or lumber, concrete, asphalt, tin cans, tires and piles of earth, not including compost bins.

B. Combustible material likely to become easily ignited or debris resulting from any fire and which constitutes a fire hazard, as defined in the fire code as adopted by the City pursuant to KMC 15.10.010.

C. Abandoned vehicles, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or remnant parts thereof. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.130 Recreation space – On-site areas.

A. Single-family detached subdivisions, apartment, townhouse and mixed use development of more than nine units in the R-4 through R-48 and DR zones and standalone apartment or townhouse developments in the NB, UC or DC zone of more than nine units, excluding age restricted senior citizen housing, shall provide a common recreational open space area on site, except when facilities are available to the public that meet all of the following requirements:

1. Are developed as a county, municipal or regional park;

2. Are located within one-quarter mile walking distance; and

3. Are accessible without crossing any arterial street.

B. Common recreational open space area designs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Provide at least 45 square feet per dwelling unit, with a minimum size of 450 square feet;

2. Be adjacent to main pedestrian paths or near building entrances;

3. Be suitable and safe as a play space for children; and

4. Be graded and landscaped to encourage use by occupants of the development, including children. The applicant may provide permanent amenities (seating, picnic tables, play equipment, etc.). If play equipment is proposed, the equipment shall meet, at a minimum, the Consumer Product Safety Standards for equipment, soft surfacing and spacing.

C. Subdivisions with common recreational open space areas which are contained within the on-site stormwater tracts, but are located outside of the 100-year design water surface, may be credited for up to 50 percent of the required square footage of the on-site recreation space requirement on a foot-per-foot basis, subject to the following criteria:

1. The stormwater tract and any on-site recreation tract shall be contiguously located. At final plat recording, contiguous stormwater and recreation tracts shall be recorded as one tract and dedicated to the homeowners’ association or other organization as approved by the city manager;

2. The stormwater facilities shall be constructed to meet the following conditions:

a. The side slope of the stormwater facilities shall not exceed 33 percent unless slopes are existing, natural and covered with vegetation;

b. A bypass system or an emergency overflow pathway shall be designed to handle flow exceeding the facility design and located so that it does not pass through active recreation areas or present a safety hazard;

c. The stormwater facilities shall be landscaped and developed for passive recreation opportunities such as trails, picnic areas and aesthetic viewing; and

d. The stormwater facilities shall be designed so they do not require fencing pursuant to the Surface Water Design Manual.

D. In the case of joint use of the tract for stormwater facilities and recreation space, the City shall be responsible for maintenance of the stormwater facilities only and will require a drainage easement for that purpose.

E. A recreational open space plan shall be submitted to the department and reviewed and approved with engineering plans.

1. The recreational open space plan shall address all portions of the site which will be used to meet recreation space requirements of this section (including stormwater facilities). The plan shall show dimensions, finished grade, landscaping and improvements, as required by the city manager, to demonstrate that the requirements of this section have been met.

2. If engineering plans indicate that the on-site stormwater facilities or stormwater tract must be increased in size from that shown in preliminary approvals, the recreation plans must show how the required minimum recreation space pursuant to subsection A of this section will be met. [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.140 Recreation space – Maintenance.

Maintenance of any common recreational open space provided under KMC 18.30.130 shall be the responsibility of the owner(s) or other separate entity capable of long-term maintenance and operation in a manner acceptable to the department. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.150 Recreation space – Financial guarantees.

Financial guarantees for construction of recreation facilities required by KMC 18.30.130 shall be provided consistent with the provisions of KMC Title 21. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.155 Recreational vehicles.

A. A single recreational vehicle (RV) may be occupied for temporary lodging for up to three weeks on a lot already containing another dwelling unit with the permission of the property owner subject to the following conditions:

1. No more than two three-week periods shall be permitted per calendar year per lot and the two periods shall be separated by a minimum of 30 calendar days;

2. Such use shall not create a public health hazard or nuisance;

3. The RV shall be parked on an approved parking pad;

4. No business occupation shall be conducted in said RV;

5. The RV shall not use generators.

B. An RV may be occupied for temporary lodging for up to 45 consecutive days if connected to approved utilities including potable water and wastewater disposal and approved through a temporary use permit.

1. The temporary use permit issued must be affixed to the RV in such a manner that it is prominently displayed and visible, to the extent possible, from a public right-of-way.

C. The city manager may approve use of an RV for temporary lodging not meeting the standards of subsections A and B of this section when necessary to provide emergency shelter. Approval timeframes and conditions of approval shall be as determined by the city manager. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.160 Setbacks – Measurement.

A. Street Setback. The street setback is measured from the existing edge of a street right-of-way or temporary turnaround or the edge of the street paving if it extends beyond the right-of-way, whichever is closer to the proposed structure, to a line parallel to and measured perpendicularly from the street right-of-way or temporary turnaround or the edge of the street paving which extends beyond the right-of-way at the depth prescribed for each zone. A lot may have more than one street setback. 

B. Rear Setback. The rear setback is measured from the line opposite the street lot line to which a building faces, to a line parallel to and measured perpendicularly from the rear lot line at the depth prescribed for the zone. On a corner lot, the street lot line to which a building faces shall be determined by the city manager to be the yard which best conforms to the pattern of the adjacent block faces. A lot shall have only one rear setback.

C. Side Setback. Any boundary of a lot which is not a street lot line or a rear lot line is considered a side lot line. The side setback is measured from side lot lines to a line parallel to and measured perpendicularly from the side lot lines at the depth prescribed for the zone. 

D. Interior Setback. Any boundary of a lot which is not a street lot line is considered an interior lot line. The interior setback is measured from interior lot lines to a line parallel to and measured perpendicularly from the interior lot lines at the depth prescribed for the zone. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.170 Setbacks – Specific building or use.

When a building or use is required to maintain a specific setback from a property line or other building, such setback shall apply only to the specified building or use. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.190 Setbacks – Modifications.

The following setback modifications are permitted:

A. When the common property line of two lots is covered by a building(s), the setbacks required by this chapter shall not apply along the common property line; and

B. When a lot is located between lots having nonconforming street setbacks, the required street setback for such lot may be the average of the two nonconforming setbacks or 60 percent of the required street setback, whichever results in the greater street setback.

C. The city manager may reduce setbacks in residential zones regulated by Chapter 18.21 KMC to 10 feet, and setbacks in other zones to five feet, in order to maximize the protection of a critical area or buffer and avoid exceptions or variances. [Ord. 19-0488 § 5 (Exh. 3); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.200 Setbacks – From regional utility corridors.

A. In subdivisions and short subdivisions, areas used as regional utility corridors shall be contained in separate tracts.

B. In other types of land development permits, easements shall be used to delineate such corridors.

C. All buildings and structures shall maintain a minimum distance of five feet from property or easement lines delineating the boundary of regional utility corridors, except for utility structures necessary to the operation of the utility corridor or when structures are allowed by mutual agreement in the utility corridor. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.210 Setbacks – From alley.

A. Structures may be built to a property line abutting an alley, except as provided in subsection B of this section.

B. Vehicle access points from garages, carports or fenced parking areas shall be set back from the alley property line to provide a straight line length of at least 26 feet, as measured from the centerline of the garage, carport or fenced parking area, from the access point to the opposite edge of the alley. No portion of the garage or the door in motion may cross the property line. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.220 Setbacks – Required modifications.

The following setback modifications are required:

A. In addition to providing the standard street setback, a lot adjoining a half-street or designated arterial shall provide an additional width of street setback sufficient to accommodate construction of the planned half-street or arterial; and

B. Where the standard setback for a property is modified within an adopted subarea or neighborhood plan area zoning, the applicable setback shall be that specified therein. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.230 Setbacks – Projections and structures allowed.

Provided that the required setbacks from regional utility corridors of KMC 18.30.200, the adjoining half-street or designated arterial setbacks of KMC 18.30.220 and the sight distance requirements of KMC 18.30.240 are maintained, structures may extend into or be located in required setbacks, including setbacks as required by KMC 18.21.060(B), as follows:

A. Fireplace structures, bay or garden windows, enclosed stair landings, closets, or similar structures may project into any setback, provided such projections are:

1. Limited to two per facade;

2. Not wider than 10 feet; and

3. Not more than 24 inches into an interior setback or 30 inches into a street setback;

B. Uncovered porches and decks which exceed 18 inches above the finished grade may project:

1. Eighteen inches into interior setbacks in the NB, CB, DR, DC, UC, WC, RB, PSP, P, and GC zones;

2. Eighteen inches into side setbacks in the R and MHC zones;

3. Eighteen inches into rear setbacks in the R-12 through R-24 and MHC zones;

4. Five feet into rear setbacks in the R-1 through R-6 zones; and

5. Five feet into street setbacks;

C. Uncovered porches and decks not exceeding 18 inches above the finished grade may project to the property line;

D. Eaves may not project more than:

1. Eighteen inches into an interior setback;

2. Twenty-four inches into a street setback; or

3. Eighteen inches across a lot line in a zero-lot-line development;

E. Facade antennas approved under Chapter 18.60 KMC may project into any setback, provided such projections are:

1. Limited to two per facade;

2. Not wider than three feet; and

3. Not more than 24 inches into an interior setback or 30 inches into a street setback;

F. Fences with a height of eight feet or less may project into or be located in any setback;

G. Rockeries, retaining walls and curbs may project into or be located in any setback, provided these structures:

1. Do not exceed a height of six feet in the R-1 through R-18, parks and golf course zones;

2. Do not exceed a height of eight feet in the R-24, R-48, MHC and downtown residential zones; and

3. Do not exceed the building height for the zone in commercial and public/semi-public zones, measured in accordance with the standards established in the City building code, KMC Title 15;

H. Fences located on top of rockeries, retaining walls or berms are subject to the requirements of KMC 18.30.040;

I. Telephone, power, light and flag poles;

J. The following may project into or be located within a setback, but may only project into or be located within a five-foot interior setback area if an agreement documenting consent between the owners of record of the abutting properties is recorded with the City prior to the installment or construction of the structure:

1. Sprinkler systems, electrical and cellular equipment cabinets, air conditioning units, and other similar utility boxes and vaults;

2. Security system access controls;

3. Structures, except for buildings, associated with trails and on-site recreation spaces required in KMC 18.30.130 such as benches, picnic tables and drinking fountains; and

4. Surface water management facilities as required by Chapter 13.35 KMC;

K. Mailboxes and newspaper boxes may project into or be located within street setbacks;

L. Fire hydrants and associated appendages;

M. Metro bus shelters may be located within street setbacks;

N. Unless otherwise allowed in KMC 18.42.090, freestanding and monument signs four feet or less in height, with a maximum sign area of 20 square feet, may project into or be located within street setbacks; and

O. Stormwater conveyance and control facilities, both above and below ground, provided such projections are:

1. Consistent with setback, easement and access requirements specified in the Surface Water Design Manual; or

2. In the absence of said specifications, not within five feet of a rear or interior lot line;

P. Minor improvements such as garden sculpture, landscape water features, trellises not attached to a building, and similar decorative structures;

Q. In a rear setback in the R-4 and R-6 residential zones, the following structures are permitted if it is determined by the city manager that they will not have any substantial detrimental effect on abutting properties or the City as a whole; and provided, that they shall be no closer than five feet to the rear lot line:

1. Children’s play structures not otherwise regulated by this title;

2. No more than one storage shed or similar use, limited in height to eight feet for a flat roof or 10 feet for a pitched roof, with a maximum dimension of 15 feet on any side and a total area not exceeding 200 square feet;

3. An arbor, not attached to a building and limited in height to eight feet, with a maximum footprint of 100 square feet, including eaves. If latticework is used, there shall be a minimum opening of two inches between crosspieces. 
[IMAGE]


[Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 16-0426 § 7 (Att. E); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.240 Sight distance requirements.

Except for utility poles and traffic control signs, the following sight distance provisions shall apply to all intersections and site access points:

A. A sight distance triangle area as determined by subsection B of this section shall contain no fence, berm, vegetation, on-site vehicle parking area, signs or other physical obstruction between 42 inches and eight feet above the existing street grade;


[IMAGE]


B. The sight distance triangle at:

1. A street intersection shall be determined by measuring 15 feet along both street property lines beginning at their point of intersection. The third side of the triangle shall be a line connecting the endpoints of the first two sides of the triangle; or

2. A site access point shall be determined by measuring 15 feet along the street lines and 15 feet along the edges of the driveway beginning at the respective points of intersection. The third side of each triangle shall be a line connecting the endpoints of the first two sides of each triangle; and

C. The city manager may require modification or removal of structures or landscaping located in required street setbacks, if:

1. Such improvements prevent adequate sight distance to drivers entering or leaving a driveway; and

2. No reasonable driveway relocation alternative for an adjoining lot is feasible. 

D. If an off-site sight distance triangle is created on adjoining property, the applicant shall obtain an easement from the neighboring property owner for the area of the sight distance triangle and make such modifications as are necessary to provide adequate sight distance for drivers.

E. The city manager may modify any of the requirements of this section as long as public safety is not compromised. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.250 Storage space and collection points for trash and recyclables.

Multiple-family dwelling and nonresidential developments shall provide storage space for the collection of trash and recyclables as follows (for all zones except in the DC and DR zones, or RB-zoned properties that are not subject to P-suffix condition NS-P4, and which lie north of NE 175th Street between 65th Avenue NE extended and 73rd Avenue NE, as described in subsection G of this section):

A. The storage space shall be provided at the following rates, calculated based on any new dwelling unit in multiple-family dwelling developments and any new square feet of building gross floor area in any other developments:

1. One and one-half square feet per dwelling unit in multiple-family dwelling developments except where the development is participating in a City-sponsored or approved direct collection program in which individual recycling bins are used for curbside collection;

2. Two square feet per every 1,000 square feet of building gross floor area in office, educational and institutional developments;

3. Three square feet per every 1,000 square feet of building gross floor area in manufacturing and other nonresidential developments; and

4. Five square feet per every 1,000 square feet of building gross floor area in retail developments.

B. The storage space for residential developments shall be apportioned and located in collection points as follows:

1. The required storage area shall be dispersed in collection points throughout the site when a residential development comprises more than one building.

2. There shall be one collection point for every 30 dwelling units.

3. Collection points may be located within residential buildings, in separate buildings/structures without dwelling units, or outdoors.

4. Collection points located in separate buildings/structures or outdoors shall be no more than 200 feet from a common entrance of a residential building.

5. Collection points shall be located in a manner so that the swing of any collection point gate does not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle traffic or access to parking or that the gate swing or any hauling truck does not project into any public right-of-way.

C. The storage space for nonresidential developments shall be apportioned and located in collection points as follows:

1. Storage space may be allocated to a centralized collection point.

2. Outdoor collection points shall not be located in any required setback areas.

3. Collection points shall be located in a manner so that the swing of any collection point gate does not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle traffic or access to parking or that the gate swing or any hauling truck does not project into any public right-of-way.

4. Access to collection points may be limited, except during regular business hours and/or specified collection hours.

D. The collection points shall be designed as follows:

1. Dimensions of the collection points shall be of sufficient width and depth to enclose containers for trash and recyclables.

2. Architectural design of any structure enclosing an outdoor collection point or any building primarily used to contain a collection point shall be consistent with the design of the primary structure(s) on the site.

3. Collection points shall be identified by signs not exceeding two square feet.

4. A minimum six-foot-tall wall or fence shall enclose any outdoor collection point.

5. Enclosures for outdoor collection points and buildings used primarily to contain a collection point shall have gate openings at least 12 feet wide for haulers. In addition, the gate opening for any building or other roofed structure used primarily as a collection point shall have a vertical clearance of at least 12 feet.

6. Weather protection of trash and recyclables shall be ensured by using weather-proof containers or by providing a roof over the storage area.

E. Only trash and recyclable materials generated on-site shall be collected and stored at such collection points. Except for initial sorting of recyclables by users, all other processing of such materials shall be conducted off-site.

F. The city manager may waive or modify specific storage space and collection point requirements set forth in this section if the city manager finds, in writing, that an alternate program design proposed by the applicant meets the needs of the development and provides an equivalent or better level of storage and collection for trash and recyclables.

G. For the DC and DR zones, or RB-zoned properties which lie north of NE 175th Street, the standards in this section above apply as an option. The downtown design standards offer additional options for screening of storage for these areas only. [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.260 Trail corridors – Applicability.

Trail easements shall be provided by any development, except for single detached residential permits, when such developments are located within any community or regional trail corridor identified by an adopted Kenmore plan identifying community and/or regional trail systems. The residents or tenants of the development shall be provided access to the trail easement. The area of the trail easement shall be counted as part of the site for purposes of density and floor area calculations. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.270 Trail corridors – Design standards.

Trail design shall be reviewed by the department for consistency with adopted standards, including the standards in KMC Title 12, for:

A. Width of the trail corridor;

B. Location of the trail corridor on the site;

C. Surfacing improvements; and

D. Use(s) permitted within the corridor. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.280 Trail corridors – Maintenance of trail corridors/improvements.

Maintenance of any trail corridor or improvements, retained in private ownership, shall be the responsibility of the owner or other separate entity capable of long-term maintenance and operation in a manner acceptable to the department. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.30.290 Relocation plan for manufactured housing communities.

Any development proposal to convert an existing manufactured housing community to another use shall include a relocation plan detailing, at a minimum, the pertinent laws related to manufactured housing community closure (City, county or State), an explanation of tenants’ rights according to State law, a list of potential sources of assistance (governmental, financial, etc.), a list of nearby manufactured housing communities with available spaces, and a list of companies that move manufactured, designated manufactured or mobile homes. The time period for the required State notice of closure of a manufactured housing community shall not commence until the relocation plan is approved by the city manager and copies are distributed to each tenant household in the manufactured housing community. An affidavit verifying such distribution shall be submitted to the City. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A).]


Chapter 18.35 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – LANDSCAPING

Sections:

18.35.010    Purpose.

18.35.020    Application.

18.35.030    Land use grouping.

18.35.040    Landscaping – Screen types and description.

18.35.045    Landscaping – General requirements.

18.35.050    Landscaping – Street trees for single-family subdivisions.

18.35.060    Repealed.

18.35.070    Landscaping – Surface parking areas.

18.35.080    Landscaping – General standards for all landscape areas.

18.35.090    Landscaping – Additional standards for required landscape areas.

18.35.100    Landscaping – Alternative options.

18.35.110    Landscaping – Plan design, design review, and installation.

18.35.120    Maintenance.

18.35.130    Financial guarantees.


18.35.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to preserve the aesthetic character of communities; to improve the aesthetic quality of the built environment; to promote retention and protection of existing vegetation; to promote water efficiency; to promote native wildlife; to reduce the impacts of development on drainage systems and natural habitats; and to increase privacy for residential zones by:

A. Providing visual relief from large expanses of parking areas and reduction of perceived building scale;

B. Providing physical separation between residential and nonresidential areas;

C. Providing visual screens and barriers as a transition between differing land uses;

D. Retaining existing vegetation and significant trees by incorporating them into the site design;

E. Providing increased areas of permeable surfaces to allow for:

1. Infiltration of surface water into groundwater resources;

2. Reduction in the quantity of stormwater discharge; and

3. Improvement in the quality of stormwater discharge;

F. Encouraging the use of native plant species by their retention or use in the landscape design;

G. Encouraging the use of a diversity of plant species which promote native wildlife habitat. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.35.020 Application.

Except for wireless communication facilities regulated pursuant to Chapter 18.60 KMC, all new development shall be subject to the landscaping provisions of this chapter; provided, that specific landscaping and tree retention provisions for uses established through a conditional use permit or special use permit shall be determined during the applicable review process. [Ord. 16-0426 § 7 (Att. E); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.35.030 Land use grouping.

To facilitate the application of this chapter, land uses have been grouped in the following manner:

A. “Residential development” refers to residential land uses.

B. “Attached/group residences” refers to:

1. Multiple-family dwellings, except as provided in subsection (C)(1) of this section;

2. Single detached dwelling units developed on common property at a density of 12 or more units per acre;

3. Supportive living facilities;

4. Temporary lodging;

5. Adult family homes; and

6. Manufactured housing communities.

C. “Single-family development” refers to:

1. Residential subdivisions and short subdivisions, including attached and detached dwelling units on individually platted or short platted lots;

2. Any detached dwelling units located on a lot;

3. Family child-care homes; and

4. Type I community residential facilities.

D. “Commercial development” refers to:

1. Recreational/cultural land uses, except library, museum, park and trail;

2. General services land uses, except recycling centers, health care and social assistance, hospital, laboratory, educational service, day care I, and religious institution; and

3. Retail land uses.

E. “Industrial development” refers to:

1. Government/business services land uses, except public agency or utility office; public agency or utility yard; public agency archive; court; fire or police facility; utility facility; commuter parking lot; private stormwater management facility; and vactor waste receiving facility;

2. Manufacturing land uses; and

3. Mineral extraction and processing.

F. “Institutional development” refers to:

1. Library, museum and conference center;

2. Religious institution, hospital, health care and social assistance, ambulatory surgery center, laboratory, and educational service; and

3. Public agency or utility office; public agency or utility yard; public agency archive; court; fire or police facility; commuter parking lot; private stormwater management facility; and vactor waste receiving facility.

G. “Utility development” refers to utility facility, except private stormwater management facility and vactor waste receiving facility.

H. Uses that are not listed in this section shall not be subject to landscaping requirements except as specified in any applicable review of a conditional use or special use permit. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.35.040 Landscaping – Screen types and description.

The three types of landscaping screens are described and applied as follows:

A. Type I Landscaping Screen.

1. Type I landscaping is a “full screen” that functions as a visual barrier.

2. Type I landscaping shall minimally consist of:

a. A mix of primarily evergreen trees and shrubs generally interspersed throughout the landscape strip and spaced to form a continuous screen;

b. Between 70 and 90 percent evergreen trees;

c. Trees provided at the rate of one per 10 linear feet of landscape strip and spaced no more than 30 feet apart on center;

d. Evergreen shrubs provided at the rate of one per four linear feet of landscape strip and spaced no more than eight feet apart on center; and

e. Ground cover pursuant to KMC 18.35.090;

3. Landscape-based stormwater management facilities are permitted within Type I landscaping screen areas; provided, that the screening objectives in subsections (A)(1) and (2) of this section are achieved.

B. Type II Landscaping Screen.

1. Type II landscaping is a “filtered screen” that functions as a visual separator.

2. Type II landscaping shall minimally consist of:

a. A mix of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs generally interspersed throughout the landscape strip spaced to create a filtered screen;

b. At least 50 percent deciduous trees and at least 30 percent evergreen trees;

c. Trees provided at the rate of one per 20 linear feet of landscape strip and spaced no more than 30 feet apart on center;

d. Shrubs provided at the rate of one per four linear feet of landscape strip and spaced no more than eight feet apart on center; and

e. Ground cover pursuant to KMC 18.35.090;

3. Landscape-based stormwater management facilities are permitted within Type II landscaping screen areas; provided, that the screening objectives in subsections (B)(1) and (2) of this section are achieved.

C. Type III Landscaping Screen.

1. Type III landscaping is a “see-through screen” that functions as a partial visual separator to soften the appearance of parking areas and building elevations.

2. Type III landscaping shall minimally consist of:

a. A mix of evergreen and deciduous trees generally interspersed throughout the landscape strip and spaced to create a continuous canopy;

b. At least 70 percent deciduous trees;

c. Trees provided at the rate of one per 25 linear feet of landscape strip and spaced no more than 30 feet apart on center;

d. Shrubs provided at the rate of one per four linear feet of landscape strip and spaced no more than eight feet apart on center; and

e. Ground cover pursuant to KMC 18.35.090.

3. Landscape-based stormwater management facilities are permitted within Type III landscaping screen areas; provided, that the screening objectives in subsections (C)(1) and (2) of this section are achieved. [Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.35.045 Landscaping – General requirements.

 

	 	Street frontage perimeter landscaping (average width)9	Interior lot line perimeter landscaping (average width)14	Surface parking lots of 10 or more stalls

	Residential development1	10' Type III8	5' Type II8

10' Type II11	20 sq. ft. per stall in common parking areas.

	Commercial development2	10' Type III	20' Type I10	20 sq. ft. per stall if 10 – 30 stalls provided;

25 sq. ft. per stall if 31 or more stalls provided.

	Industrial development3	10' Type II	10' Type II12

20' Type I10	20 sq. ft. per stall if 10 – 30 stalls provided;

25 sq. ft. per stall if 31 or more stalls provided.

	Institutional development4	20' Type II6	10' Type II	20 sq. ft. per stall if 10 – 30 stalls provided;

25 sq. ft. per stall if 31 or more stalls provided.

	Utility development5	10' Type II7	10' Type II13	20 sq. ft. per stall if 10 – 30 stalls provided;

25 sq. ft. per stall if 31 or more stalls provided.

1 As described in KMC 18.35.030(A).

2 As described in KMC 18.35.030(D).

3 As described in KMC 18.35.030(E).

4 As described in KMC 18.35.030(F).

5 As described in KMC 18.35.030(G).

6 Excluding playgrounds and playfields.

7 For an above-ground utility facilities development only, excluding distribution and transmission corridors.

8 Only for attached/group residence development as described in KMC 18.35.030(B).

9 For all zones except the DC and DR zones. In the CB zone, where street frontage setbacks are required, the area within the setback must contain Type II landscaping. 

10 Along any portion adjacent to a residential development as described in KMC 18.35.030(A).

11 Along portions of an attached/group residence development as described in KMC 18.35.030(B) adjacent to property developed with single detached residences or vacant property that is zoned R-1 through R-6.

12 Along any portion adjacent to a commercial or institutional development as described in KMC 18.35.030(D) and (F).

13 Excluding distribution or transmission corridors.

14 In the DC zone, where interior setbacks are required and/or provided, setbacks shall be landscaped with Type II landscaping. In the CB zone, where interior setbacks are required and/or provided, setbacks shall be landscaped with Type II landscaping.

[Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.35.050 Landscaping – Street trees for single-family subdivisions.

For single-family subdivisions:

A. Trees shall be planted at the rate of one tree for every 40 feet of frontage along a neighborhood collector street or arterial street. Native vegetation cultivars are preferred;

B. The trees shall be:

1. Located within the street right-of-way if permitted by the City;

2. No more than 20 feet from the street right-of-way line if located within a lot;

3. Maintained by the adjacent landowner unless part of a City maintenance program; and

4. A species approved by the City if located within the street right-of-way and compatible with overhead utility lines;

C. The trees may be spaced at irregular intervals to accommodate sight distance requirements for driveways and intersections. [Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.35.060 Landscaping along the Burke-Gilman public trail.

Repealed by Ord. 14-0391. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.35.070 Landscaping – Surface parking areas.

A. Trees shall be provided and distributed throughout the parking area at a rate of:

1. One tree for every three parking stalls for a commercial or industrial development; and

2. One tree for every five parking stalls for residential or institutional development;

B. The maximum distance between any parking stall and landscaping shall be no more than 100 feet;

C. Permanent curbs or structural barriers shall be provided to protect the plantings from vehicle overhang;

D. Landscaping around the perimeter of a site that is in addition to the perimeter landscaping required by KMC 18.35.045 may count toward 10 percent of the required surface parking area landscaping in all zones except the DC and DR zones, or RB-zoned properties that are not subject to P-suffix condition NS-P4, and which lie north of NE 175th Street (see subsection F of this section), if it is adjacent to the parking area;

E. Parking area landscaping shall consist of:

1. Canopy-type deciduous trees, evergreen trees, evergreen shrubs and ground covers planted in islands or strips. Native vegetation cultivars are preferred;

2. Internal parking lot landscaping shall be configured as landscape-based stormwater management feature unless infeasible;

3. Shrubs that do not exceed a maintained height of 42 inches;

4. Plantings contained in planting islands or strips having an area of at least 100 square feet and with a minimum dimension of not less than five feet;

5. Ground cover in accordance with KMC 18.35.090; and

6. At least 70 percent of trees are deciduous;

F. Standards for perimeter landscaping and screening of surface parking lots for the DC and DR zones, or RB-zoned properties that are not subject to P-suffix condition NS-P4, and which lie north of NE 175th Street, are defined in Chapter 18.52 KMC, Downtown Design Standards. All other landscape requirements for surface parking lot landscaping in this section apply to the DC and DR zones, and RB-zoned properties that are not subject to P-suffix condition NS-P4, and which lie north of NE 175th Street. [Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.35.080 Landscaping – General standards for all landscape areas.

All new landscape areas proposed for a development shall be subject to the following provisions:

A. Berms shall not exceed a slope of two horizontal feet to one vertical foot (2:1).

B. All new turf areas, except all-weather, sand-based athletic fields, shall:

1. Be augmented with a two-inch layer of organic material cultivated a minimum of six inches deep; or

2. Have an organic content of five percent or more to a depth of six inches.

C. Except as specifically outlined for turf areas in subsection B of this section, the organic content of soils in any landscape area shall be as necessary to provide adequate nutrient and moisture-retention levels for the establishment of plantings.

D. Landscape areas, except turf or areas of established ground cover, shall be covered with at least two inches of mulch to minimize evaporation.

E. Plants having similar water use characteristics shall be grouped together in distinct hydrozones.

F. Plant selection shall consider adaptability to climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of the site. Preservation of existing vegetation is encouraged.

G. Landscape areas proposed as stormwater management facilities shall be designed in accordance with the Kenmore stormwater management standards. [Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.35.090 Landscaping – Additional standards for required landscape areas.

In addition to the general standards of KMC 18.35.080, landscape areas required pursuant to KMC 18.35.045 through 18.35.070 shall conform to the following standards:

A. All plants shall conform to American Association of Nurserymen (AAN) grades and standards as published in the “American Standard for Nursery Stock” manual; provided, that existing healthy vegetation used to augment new plantings shall not be required to meet the standards of this manual;

B. Single-stemmed trees required pursuant to this chapter shall at the time of planting conform to the following standards:

1. In parking area landscaping and in street rights-of-way:

a. Deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper of one and three-quarters inches and a height of 10 feet in all zones except the DC and DR zones, or RB-zoned properties that are not subject to P-suffix condition NS-P4, and which lie north of NE 175th Street between 65th Avenue NE extended and 73rd Avenue NE, which shall have a minimum caliper of three inches, and

b. Coniferous and broadleaf evergreen trees shall be at least five feet in height; 

2. In all other required landscape areas: 

a. Deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper of one and one-half inches and a height of 10 feet in all zones except the DC and DR zones, or RB-zoned properties that are not subject to P-suffix condition NS-P4, and which lie north of NE 175th

Street between 65th Avenue NE extended and 73rd Avenue NE, which shall have a minimum caliper of three inches, and

b. Coniferous and broadleaf evergreen trees shall be at least five feet in height except in the DC and DR zones, or RB-zoned properties that are not subject to P-suffix condition NS-P4, and which lie north of NE 175th Street between 65th Avenue NE extended and 73rd Avenue NE, where they shall be at least 10 feet in height;

C. Multiple-stemmed trees shall be permitted as an option to single-stemmed trees in all zones except the DC and DR zones, or RB-zoned properties that are not subject to P-suffix condition NS-P4, and which lie north of NE 175th Street between 65th Avenue NE extended and 73rd Avenue NE; provided, that such multiple-stemmed trees are: 

1. At least six feet in height, and 

2. Not allowed within street rights-of-way; 

D. When the width of any landscape strip is 20 feet or greater, the required trees shall be staggered in two or more rows;

E. Shrubs shall be:

1. At least an AAN container class No. 2 (two-gallon) size at time of planting in Types II, III and parking area landscaping,

2. At least 24 inches in height at the time of planting for Type I landscaping, and

3. Maintained at a height not exceeding 42 inches when located in Type III or parking area landscaping except in the DC and DR zones where they shall not exceed a maximum height of 48 inches;

F. Ground covers shall be planted and spaced to result in total coverage of the majority of the required landscape area within three years;

G. All fences shall be placed on the inward side of any required perimeter landscaping along the street frontage;

H. Required street landscaping may be placed within City street rights-of-way subject to the City street design standards, provided adequate space is maintained along the street line to replant the required landscaping should subsequent street improvements require the removal of landscaping within the rights-of-way;

I. Required street landscaping may be placed within Washington State rights-of-way subject to permission of the Washington State Department of Transportation; and

J. New landscape material provided within areas of undisturbed vegetation or within the protected area of significant trees shall give preference to utilizing indigenous plant species. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.35.100 Landscaping – Alternative options.

The following alternative landscape options may be allowed, subject to City approval, only if they accomplish equal or better levels of screening, or when existing conditions on or adjacent to the site, such as significant topographic differences, vegetation, structures or utilities would render application of this chapter ineffective or result in scenic view obstruction:

A. The amount of required landscape area may be reduced to ensure that the total area for required landscaping, and/or the area remaining undisturbed for the purpose of wildlife habitat or corridors does not exceed 15 percent of the net developable area of the site. For the purpose of this subsection, the net developable area of the site shall not include areas deemed unbuildable due to their location within critical areas and any associated buffers;

B. The average width of the perimeter landscape strip may be reduced up to 25 percent along any portion where:

1. Berms at least three feet in height or architectural barriers at least six feet in height are incorporated into the landscape design; or

2. The landscape materials are incorporated elsewhere on-site;

C. Where a local or subarea plan with design guidelines has been adopted, the city manager shall base the landscaping modifications on the policies and guidelines of such plan;

D. When an existing structure precludes installation of the total amount of required site perimeter landscaping, such landscaping material shall be incorporated on another portion of the site;

E. Single-stemmed deciduous tree species that cannot generally be planted and established in larger sizes may have a caliper of less than one and one-half inches;

F. The number of trees and shrubs to be provided in required perimeter and parking area landscaping may be reduced up to 25 percent when a development uses landscaping materials consisting of species typically associated with the Puget Sound Basin in the following proportions:

1. Seventy-five percent of ground cover and shrubs, and

2. Fifty percent of trees;

G. In the DC and DR zones, alternative landscape requirements may be proposed in order to retain trees (over 12 inches DBH if deciduous or eight inches DBH if evergreen, measured as average trunk diameter at chest height; measured four and one-half feet above grade). This alternative requirement applies only to trees which are beyond what is already required in the City’s significant tree ordinance. Interior parking lot landscape requirements may be reduced at a 1:1 ratio equal to the land area within the drip line of the tree being retained. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.35.110 Landscaping – Plan design, design review, and installation.

A. The landscape plan submitted to the department shall be drawn on the same base map as the development plans and shall identify the following:

1. Total landscape area and separate hydrozones;

2. Landscape materials botanical/common name and applicable size;

3. Property lines;

4. Impervious surfaces;

5. Natural or manmade water features or bodies;

6. Existing or proposed structures, fences, and retaining walls;

7. Natural features or vegetation left in natural state; and

8. Designated recreational open space areas.

B. The proposed landscape plan shall be certified by a Washington State registered landscape architect, Washington State certified nurseryman, or Washington State certified landscaper.

C. An affidavit signed by an individual specified in subsection B of this section, certifying that the landscaping has been installed consistent with the approved landscaping plan, shall be submitted to the department within 30 days of installation completion, unless the installed landscaping has been inspected and accepted by the department.

D. The required landscaping shall be installed no later than three months after issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the project or project phase. However, the time limit for compliance may be extended to allow installation of such required landscaping during the next appropriate planting season. A financial guarantee shall be required prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy, if landscaping is not installed and inspected prior to occupancy. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.35.120 Maintenance.

A. All landscaping shall be maintained for the life of the project;

B. All landscape materials shall be pruned and trimmed as necessary to maintain a healthy growing condition or to prevent primary limb failure;

C. With the exception of dead, diseased or damaged trees specifically retained to provide wildlife habitat, other dead, diseased, damaged or stolen plantings shall be replaced within three months or during the next planting season if the loss does not occur in a planting season; and

D. Landscape areas shall be kept free of trash. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.35.130 Financial guarantees.

Financial guarantees shall be required consistent with the provisions of KMC Title 21. This time period may be extended to one year by the city manager, if necessary to cover a planting and growing season. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 18.40 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – PARKING AND CIRCULATION

Sections:

18.40.010    Purpose.

18.40.020    Authority and application.

18.40.030    Computation of required off-street parking spaces.

18.40.040    Shared parking requirements.

18.40.050    Exceptions for community residential facilities (CRF) and senior citizen assisted living.

18.40.060    Parking for the disabled.

18.40.070    Loading space and loading dock requirements.

18.40.080    Stacking spaces for drive-through facilities.

18.40.090    Transit and rideshare provisions.

18.40.100    Pedestrian and bicycle circulation and access.

18.40.110    Off-street parking plan design standards.

18.40.120    Off-street parking construction standards.

18.40.130    Compact car allowance requirements.

18.40.140    Internal circulation road standards.


18.40.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide adequate parking for all uses allowed in this title; to reduce demand for parking by encouraging alternative means of transportation including public transit, rideshare and bicycles; and to increase pedestrian mobility in urban areas by:

A. Setting minimum off-street parking standards for different land uses that assure safe, convenient and adequately sized parking facilities within activity centers;

B. Providing incentives to rideshare through preferred parking arrangements;

C. Providing for parking and storage of bicycles;

D. Requiring the use of permeable surfacing unless infeasible;

E. Providing safe, direct pedestrian access from public rights-of-way to structures and between developments; and

F. Requiring uses which attract large numbers of employees or customers to provide transit stops. [Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.40.020 Authority and application.

A. Before an occupancy permit may be granted for any new or enlarged building or for a change of use in any existing building, the use shall be required to meet the provisions of this chapter.

B. If this chapter does not specify a parking requirement for a land use, the city manager shall establish the minimum requirement based on a study of anticipated parking demand. Transportation demand management actions taken at the site shall be considered in determining anticipated demand. If the site is located in an activity center or community business center, the minimum requirement shall be set at a level less than the anticipated demand, but at no less than 75 percent of the anticipated demand. In the study the applicant shall provide sufficient information to demonstrate that the parking demand for a specific land use will be satisfied. Parking studies shall be prepared by a professional engineer with expertise in traffic and parking analyses, or an equally qualified individual as authorized by the city manager.

C. If the required amount of off-street parking has been proposed to be provided off-site, the applicant shall provide written contracts with affected landowners showing that required off-street parking shall be provided in a manner consistent with the provisions of this chapter. The contracts shall be reviewed by the city manager for compliance with this chapter, and if approved, the contracts shall be recorded with the county records and elections division as a deed restriction on the title to all applicable properties. These deed restrictions may not be revoked or modified without authorization by the city manager.

D. Where a neighborhood or subarea plan with design guidelines that includes the subject property has been adopted, the city manager shall base allowable waivers or modifications on the policies and guidelines in such plan. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.40.030 Computation of required off-street parking spaces.

A. Except as modified in KMC 18.40.040, 18.40.050 or 18.40.090, off-street parking areas shall contain at a minimum the number of parking spaces as stipulated in the following table. Off-street parking ratios expressed as number of spaces per square feet means the usable or net square footage of floor area, exclusive of nonpublic areas. Nonpublic areas include but are not limited to building maintenance areas, storage areas, closets, restrooms and exterior walls. If the formula for determining the number of off-street parking spaces results in a fraction, the number of off-street parking spaces shall be rounded to the nearest whole number with fractions of 0.50 or greater rounding up and fractions below 0.50 rounding down.

	LAND USE	MINIMUM PARKING SPACES REQUIRED

Citywide, Except in Downtown Commercial and Downtown Residential Zones West of 68th Avenue NE	MINIMUM PARKING SPACES REQUIRED

Downtown Commercial and Downtown Residential Zones West of 68th Avenue NE

	RESIDENTIAL:

	Single detached dwelling unit	2.0 per dwelling unit	2.0 per dwelling unit; tandem stalls permitted

	Townhouse	2.0 per dwelling unit	1.5 per dwelling unit; tandem stalls permitted

	Guest parking	1 space for every 5 units	1 space for every 5 units

	Apartment:	 	 

	Microhousing dwelling unit	Within 1/4 mile of SR-522: 0.75 per dwelling unit. Otherwise, 1.2 per dwelling unit	Within 1/4 mile of SR-522: 0.75:du. Otherwise, 1.0:du. Tandem stalls permitted

	Studio unit	1.2 per dwelling unit	1.0:du; tandem stalls permitted

	One-bedroom unit	1.5 per dwelling unit	1.0:du; tandem stalls permitted

	Two-bedroom unit	1.7 per dwelling unit	1.5:du; tandem stalls permitted

	Three-bedroom unit or larger	2.0 per dwelling unit	1.7:du; tandem stalls permitted

	Guest parking	1 space for every 5 units	1 space for every 5 units

	Manufactured housing community	2.0 per dwelling unit	2.0 per dwelling unit

	Senior citizen assisted living	1 per 2 dwelling or sleeping units	1 per 2 dwelling or sleeping units

	Community residential facility	1 per 2 bedrooms	1 per 2 bedrooms

	Dormitory, including religious	1 per 2 bedrooms	1 per 2 bedrooms

	Hotel/motel	1 per bedroom	1 per bedroom

	Bed and breakfast guesthouse	1 per guest room, plus 2 per facility	1 per guest room, plus 2 per facility

	Other residential land uses	(city manager)	(city manager)

	RECREATIONAL/CULTURAL:

	Recreational/cultural land uses	1 per 300 square feet	1 per 300 square feet

	Exceptions:	 	 

	Bowling center	5 per lane	5 per lane

	Golf course	3 per hole, plus 1 per 300 square feet of clubhouse facilities	–

	Tennis club	4 per tennis court, plus 1 per 300 square feet of clubhouse facility	–

	Golf driving range	1 per tee	–

	Park/playfield	(city manager)	(city manager)

	Theater	1 per 3 fixed seats	1 per 3 fixed seats

	Conference center	1 per 3 fixed seats, plus 1 per 50 square feet used for assembly purposes without fixed seats, or 1 per bedroom, whichever results in the greater number of spaces	1 per 3 fixed seats, plus 1 per 50 square feet used for assembly purposes without fixed seats, or 1 per bedroom, whichever results in the greater number of spaces

	Artist studio	0.9 per 1,000 square feet of area used for studios	0.9 per 1,000 square feet of area used for studios

	GENERAL SERVICES:

	General services land uses	1 per 300 square feet	1 per 300 square feet

	Exceptions:	 	 

	Funeral home/crematory	1 per 50 square feet of chapel area	–

	Day care I	2 per facility	2 per facility

	Day care II	2 per facility, plus 1 space for each 20 children	2 per facility, plus 1 space for each 20 children

	Religious institution	1 per 5 fixed seats, plus 1 per 50 square feet of gross floor area without fixed seats used for assembly purposes	1 per 5 fixed seats, plus 1 per 50 square feet of gross floor area without fixed seats used for assembly purposes

	Outpatient and veterinary clinic office	1 per 300 square feet of office, labs and examination rooms	1 per 300 square feet of office, labs and examination rooms

	Nursing and personal care facility	1 per 4 beds	–

	Hospital	1 per bed	1 per bed

	Elementary school	1 per school classroom, plus 1 per 50 students	1 per school classroom, plus 1 per 50 students

	Secondary schools:	 	 

	Middle/junior high school	1 per school classroom, plus 1 per 50 students	1 per school classroom, plus 1 per 50 students

	High school	1 per school classroom, plus 1 per 10 students	1 per school classroom, plus 1 per 10 students

	High school with stadium	Greater of 1 per school classroom, plus 1 per 10 students, or 1 per 3 fixed seats in stadium	Greater of 1 per school classroom, plus 1 per 10 students, or 1 per 3 fixed seats in stadium

	Vocational school	1 per school classroom, plus 1 per 5 students	1 per school classroom, plus 1 per 5 students

	Specialized instruction school	1 per school classroom, plus 1 per 2 students	1 per school classroom, plus 1 per 2 students

	College/university	1 per 2 commuting students, faculty and staff	–

	GOVERNMENT/BUSINESS SERVICES:

	Government/business services land uses	1 per 300 square feet	1 per 300 square feet

	Exceptions:	 	 

	Public agency yard	1 per 300 square feet of offices, plus 0.9 per 1,000 square feet of indoor storage or repair areas	–

	Public agency archive	0.9 per 1,000 square feet of storage area, plus 1 per 50 square feet of waiting/reviewing areas	–

	Court	3 per courtroom, plus 1 per 50 square feet of fixed seat or assembly areas	3 per courtroom, plus 1 per 50 square feet of fixed seat or assembly areas

	Fire or police facility	(city manager)	(city manager)

	Construction and trade	1 per 300 square feet of office, plus 1 per 3,000 square feet of storage area	1 per 300 square feet of office, plus 1 per 3,000 square feet of storage area

	Warehousing and storage	1 per 300 square feet of office, plus 0.9 per 1,000 square feet of storage area	1 per 300 square feet of office, plus 0.9 per 1,000 square feet of storage area

	Self-service storage	1 per 3,500 square feet of storage area, plus 2 for any resident director’s unit	1 per 3,500 square feet of storage area, plus 2 for any resident director’s unit

	Outdoor advertising services	1 per 300 square feet of office, plus 0.9 per 1,000 square feet of storage area	–

	Heavy equipment repair	1 per 300 square feet of office, plus 0.9 per 1,000 square feet of indoor repair areas	–

	RETAIL/WHOLESALE:

	Retail land uses	1 per 300 square feet	1 per 300 square feet

	Exceptions:	 	 

	Food stores, less than 15,000 square feet	3 plus 1 per 350 square feet	3 plus 1 per 350 square feet

	Vehicle refueling stations w/o grocery	3 per facility, plus 1 per service bay	3 per facility, plus 1 per service bay

	Vehicle refueling stations w/grocery, no service bays	1 per facility, plus 1 per 300 square feet of store	1 per facility, plus 1 per 300 square feet of store

	Restaurants	1 per 75 square feet in dining or lounge areas	1 per 75 square feet in dining or lounge areas

	Wholesale trade uses	0.9 per 1,000 square feet	0.9 per 1,000 square feet

	Retail sales and wholesale trade mixed use	1 per 300 square feet	1 per 300 square feet

	MANUFACTURING:

	Manufacturing land uses	0.9 per 1,000 square feet	–

	Exceptions:	 	 

	Winery/brewery	0.9 per 1,000 square feet, plus 1 per 50 square feet of tasting area	–

	RESOURCES:

	Resource land uses	(city manager)	–

	REGIONAL:

	Regional land uses	(city manager)	(city manager)

B. An applicant may request a modification of the minimum required number of parking spaces by providing a parking demand analysis demonstrating that parking demand can be met with a reduced parking requirement. In such cases, the city manager may approve a reduction of up to 50 percent of the minimum required number of spaces.

C. When the City has received a shell building permit application, off-street parking requirements shall be based on the possible tenant improvements or uses authorized by the zone designation and compatible with the limitations of the shell permit. When the range of possible uses results in different parking requirements, the city manager will establish the amount of parking based on a likely range of uses.

D. Where other provisions of this code stipulate maximum parking allowed or reduced minimum parking requirements, those provisions shall apply.

E. In any development required to provide six or more parking spaces, bicycle parking shall be provided. Bicycle parking shall be bike rack or locker-type parking facilities unless otherwise specified.

1. Off-street parking areas shall contain at least one bicycle parking space for every 12 spaces required for motor vehicles except as follows:

a. The city manager may reduce bike rack parking facilities for patrons when it is demonstrated that bicycle activity will not occur at that location.

b. The city manager may require additional spaces when it is determined that the use or its location will generate a high volume of bicycle activity. Such a determination will include but not be limited to the following uses:

(1) Park/playfield;

(2) Marina;

(3) Library/museum/arboretum;

(4) Elementary/secondary school;

(5) Sports club; or

(6) Retail business (when located along a developed bicycle trail or designated bicycle route).

2. Bicycle facilities for patrons shall be located within 100 feet of the building entrance and shall be designed to allow either a bicycle frame or wheels to be locked to a structure attached to the pavement.

3. All bicycle parking and storage shall be located in safe, visible areas that do not impede pedestrian or vehicle traffic flow, and shall be well lit for nighttime use.

4. When more than 10 people are employed on-site, enclosed locker-type parking facilities for employees shall be provided. The city manager shall allocate the required number of parking spaces between bike rack parking and enclosed locker-type parking facilities.

5. One indoor bicycle storage space shall be provided for every two dwelling units in townhouse and apartment residential uses, unless individual garages are provided for every unit. The city manager may reduce the number of bike rack parking spaces if indoor storage facilities are available to all residents.

F. Exceedance of Minimum Parking – Downtown Commercial and Downtown Residential Zones West of 68th Avenue NE. Provision of parking in excess of the minimum parking requirements shall require the excess parking be included in a structured parking garage, or under building and screened from the street frontage, unless the additional parking is associated with a phased, mixed use development and is interim in nature.

G. Exceedance of Minimum Parking – Zones Other Than Downtown Commercial and Downtown Residential Zones West of 68th Avenue NE. Provision of parking shall not exceed 30 percent more than the minimum parking requirements unless the excess parking spaces are included in a structured parking garage, or under building and screened from the street frontage, unless the additional parking is associated with a phased, mixed use development and is interim in nature.

H. Tree Retention – DC and DR Zones. Where an applicant proposes retention of trees in accordance with KMC 18.35.100(G) in the DC and DR zones, the city manager may reduce parking requirements by one parking space for every two significant trees that are saved in excess of the significant tree ordinance requirements.

I. Critical Area or Buffer Protection. When unavoidable, the city manager may reduce minimum parking requirements in order to maximize the protection of a critical area or its buffer. The reduction in the number of parking stalls or alternative stall or drive aisle dimensional requirements shall be in proportion to the area to be retained in the buffer or critical area. [Ord. 19-0488 § 5 (Exh. 3); Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 16-0415 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.40.040 Shared parking requirements.

The amount of off-street parking required by KMC 18.40.030 may be reduced by an amount determined by the city manager when shared parking facilities for two or more uses are proposed, provided:

A. The total parking area exceeds 5,000 square feet;

B. The parking facilities are designed and developed as a single on-site common parking facility, or as a system of on-site and off-site facilities, if all facilities are connected with improved pedestrian facilities and no building or use involved is more than 800 feet from the most remote shared facility;

C. The amount of the reduction shall not exceed 10 percent for each use, unless: 

1. The normal hours of operation for each use are separated by at least one hour; or

2. A parking demand study is prepared by a professional traffic engineer and submitted by the applicant documenting that the hours of actual parking demand for the proposed uses will not conflict and those uses will be served by adequate parking if shared parking reductions are authorized;

3. The use is a mixed use development pursuant to KMC 18.50.120, in which case a 25 percent reduction may be granted; 

4. The city manager will determine the amount of reduction subject to subsection D of this section;

D. The total number of parking spaces in the common parking facility is not less than the minimum required spaces for any single use;

E. A covenant or other contract for shared parking between the cooperating property owners is approved by the city manager. This covenant or contract must be recorded with the City as a deed restriction on both properties and cannot be modified or revoked without the consent of the city manager; and

F. If any requirements for shared parking are violated, the affected property owners must provide a remedy satisfactory to the city manager or provide the full amount of required off-street parking for each use, in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, unless a satisfactory alternative remedy is approved by the city manager. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.40.050 Exceptions for community residential facilities (CRF) and senior citizen assisted living.

A. The minimum requirement of one off-street parking space per two bedrooms for CRFs and one off-street parking space per two senior citizen assisted living units may be reduced by up to 50 percent, as determined by the city manager based on the following considerations:

1. Availability of private, convenient transportation services to meet the needs of the residents;

2. Accessibility to and frequency of public transportation; and

3. Pedestrian access to health, medical, and shopping facilities.

B. If a CRF facility or senior citizen assisted living facility is no longer used for such purposes, additional off-street parking spaces shall be required in compliance with this chapter prior to the issuance of a new certificate of occupancy. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.40.060 Parking for the disabled.

Off-street parking and access for physically disabled persons shall be provided in accordance with the regulations adopted pursuant to Chapter 19.27 RCW, State Building Code, and Chapter 70.92 RCW, Public Buildings – Provisions for Aged and Disabled. See Chapter 11 of the International Building Code as adopted by the City. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.40.070 Loading space and loading dock requirements.

A. Every nonresidential building engaged in retail, wholesale, manufacturing or storage activities, excluding self-service storage facilities, shall provide loading spaces in accordance with the standards listed below.

	GROSS FLOOR AREA	REQUIRED NUMBER OF LOADING SPACES

	10,000 to 16,000 square feet	1

	16,001 to 40,000 square feet	2

	40,001 to 64,000 square feet	3

	64,001 to 96,000 square feet	4

	96,001 to 128,000 square feet	5

	128,001 to 160,000 square feet	6

	160,001 to 196,000 square feet	7

	For each additional 36,000 square feet	1 additional

B. Every building engaged in hotel, office building, restaurant, hospital, auditorium, convention hall, exhibition hall, sports arena/stadium or other similar use shall provide loading spaces in accordance with the standards listed below.

	GROSS FLOOR AREA	REQUIRED NUMBER OF LOADING SPACES

	40,000 to 60,000 square feet	1

	60,001 to 160,000 square feet	2

	160,001 to 264,000 square feet	3

	264,001 to 388,000 square feet	4

	388,001 to 520,000 square feet	5

	520,001 to 652,000 square feet	6

	652,001 to 784,000 square feet	7

	784,001 to 920,000 square feet	8

	For each additional 140,000 square feet	1 additional

C. Each loading space required by this section shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide, 30 feet long, and have an unobstructed vertical clearance of 14 feet, six inches, and shall be surfaced, improved and maintained as required by this chapter. Loading spaces shall be located so that trucks shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle traffic movement or project into any public right-of-way. All loading space areas shall be separated from parking areas and shall be designated as truck loading spaces.

D. Any loading space, including loading docks, located within 100 feet of areas zoned for residential use shall be screened and operated as necessary to reduce noise and visual impacts. Noise mitigation measures may include architectural or structural barriers, berms, walls, or restrictions on the hours of operation.

E. Multi-story self-service storage facilities shall provide two loading spaces, and single-story facilities one loading space, adjacent to each building entrance that provides common access to interior storage units. Each loading berth shall measure not less than 25 feet by 12 feet with an unobstructed vertical clearance of 14 feet, six inches, and shall be surfaced, improved and maintained as required by this chapter. Any floor area additions or structural alterations to a building shall be required to provide loading space or spaces as set forth in this chapter.

F. Loading docks shall be screened from view of the public right-of-way. Screening may include architectural or structural barriers, berms, walls or vegetation. [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.40.080 Stacking spaces for drive-through facilities.

A. A stacking space shall be an area measuring eight feet by 20 feet with direct forward access to a service window of a drive-through facility. A stacking space shall be located to prevent any vehicles from extending onto the public right-of-way, or interfering with any pedestrian circulation, traffic maneuvering, or other parking space areas. Stacking spaces for drive-through or drive-in uses may not be counted as required parking spaces.

B. Uses providing drive-up or drive-through services shall provide vehicle stacking spaces as follows:

1. For each drive-through lane of a bank/financial institution, business service, or other drive-through use not listed, a minimum of five stacking spaces shall be provided; and

2. For each drive-through lane of a restaurant, a minimum of seven stacking spaces shall be provided. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.40.090 Transit and rideshare provisions.

A. Government/business services land uses and manufacturing land uses, ambulatory surgery center, hospital, educational service and college/university shall be required to reserve one parking space of every 20 required spaces for rideshare parking as follows:

1. The parking spaces shall be located closer to the primary employee entrance than any other employee parking except disabled;

2. Reserved areas shall have markings and signs indicating that the space is reserved; and

3. Parking in reserved areas shall be limited to vanpools and carpools established through rideshare programs by public agencies and to vehicles meeting minimum rideshare qualifications set by the employer;

B. The city manager may reduce the number of required off-street parking spaces when one or more scheduled transit routes provide service within one-quarter mile (1,320 feet) of the site as measured linearly along streets or other pedestrian pathways. The amount of reduction shall be based on the number of scheduled transit runs between 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. each business day up to a maximum reduction as follows:

1. Four percent for each run serving government/business service land uses and manufacturing land uses, up to a maximum of 40 percent; and

2. Two percent for each run serving recreational/cultural land uses, general services land uses, retail land uses, and wholesale trade, up to a maximum of 20 percent; and

C. All uses which are located on an existing transit route and are required under the computation for required off-street parking spaces in KMC 18.40.030(A) to provide more than 200 parking spaces may be required to provide transit shelters, bus turnout lanes or other transit improvements as a condition of permit approval. Uses which reduce required parking under subsection B of this section shall provide transit shelters if transit routes adjoin the site. [Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. B); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.40.100 Pedestrian and bicycle circulation and access.

A. Nonresidential Uses. All permitted nonresidential uses shall provide pedestrian and bicycle access within and onto the site. Access points onto the site shall be provided (1) approximately every 800 to 1,000 feet along existing and proposed perimeter sidewalks and walkways, and (2) at all arrival points to the site, including abutting street intersections, crosswalks, and transit stops. In addition, access points to and from adjacent lots shall be coordinated to provide circulation patterns between developments.

B. Residential Uses.

1. All permitted residential uses of five or more dwelling units shall provide pedestrian and bicycle access within and onto the site. Access points onto the site shall be provided (a) approximately every 800 to 1,000 feet along existing and proposed perimeter sidewalks and walkways, and (b) at all arrival points to the site, including abutting street intersections, crosswalks, and transit and school bus stops. In addition, access points to and from adjacent lots shall be coordinated to provide circulation patterns between sites.

2. Residential uses of five or more dwelling units shall provide for nonmotorized circulation between cul-de-sacs or groups of buildings to allow pedestrian and bicycle access within and through the development to adjacent activity centers, parks, common tracts, dedicated open space intended for active recreation, schools or other public facilities, transit and school bus stops, and public streets.

3. Access shall only be required to school bus stops that are within or adjacent to a proposed residential use of five or more dwelling units and that are identified by the affected school district in response to a notice of application.


[IMAGE]


C. Walkways shall form an on-site circulation system that minimizes the conflict between pedestrians and traffic at all points of pedestrian access to on-site parking and building entrances. Walkways shall be provided when the pedestrian access point onto the site, or any parking space, is more than 75 feet from the building entrance or principal on-site destination and as follows:

1. All developments which contain more than one building shall provide walkways between the principal entrances of the buildings;

2. All nonresidential buildings set back more than 100 feet from the public right-of-way shall provide for direct pedestrian access from the building to buildings on adjacent lots; and

3. Walkways across parking areas shall be located as follows:

a. Walkways running parallel to the parking rows shall be provided for every six rows. Rows without walkways shall be landscaped or contain barriers or other means to encourage pedestrians to use the walkways; and

b. Walkways running perpendicular to the parking rows shall be no further than 20 parking spaces. Landscaping, barriers or other means shall be provided between the parking rows to encourage pedestrians to use the walkways.


[IMAGE]


D. Pedestrian and bicycle access and walkways shall meet the following minimum design standards:

1. Access and walkways shall be well lit and physically separated from driveways and parking spaces by landscaping, berms, barriers, grade separation or other means to protect pedestrians from vehicular traffic;

2. Access and walkways shall be a minimum of 48 inches of unobstructed width and meet the surfacing standards of the City street standards for walkways or sidewalks;

3. The minimum standard for walkways required to be accessible for persons with disabilities shall be designed and constructed to comply with the current State Building Code regulations for barrier-free accessibility;

4. A crosswalk shall be required when a walkway crosses a driveway or a paved area accessible to vehicles.

E. Blocks in excess of 660 feet shall be provided with a crosswalk at the approximate midpoint of the block.

F. The city manager may waive or modify the requirements of this section when:

1. Existing or proposed improvements would create an unsafe condition or security concern;

2. There are topographical constraints, or existing or required structures effectively block access;

3. The site is not contiguous to an activity center, park, common tract, dedicated open space, school, transit stop or other public facility;

4. The land use would not generate the need for pedestrian or bicycle access; or

5. The public is not allowed access to the subject land use.

The city manager’s waiver may not be used to modify or waive the requirements of this section relating to sidewalks and safe walking conditions for students.

G. The provisions of this section shall not apply on school district property. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.40.110 Off-street parking plan design standards.

A. Off-street parking areas shall not be located more than 600 feet from the building they are required to serve for all uses except those specified as follows; where an off-street parking area does not abut the building it serves, the required maximum distance shall be measured from the nearest building entrance that the parking area serves:

1. For all single detached dwellings the parking spaces shall be located on the same lot they are required to serve;

2. For all other residential dwellings at least a portion of parking areas shall be located within 150 feet from the building or building(s) they are required to serve;

3. For all nonresidential uses permitted in residential zones, the parking spaces shall be located on the same lot they are required to serve and at least a portion of parking areas shall be located within 150 feet from the nearest building entrance they are required to serve;

4. In the community business and neighborhood business zones, parking lots shall be located to the rear or sides of buildings. Relief from this subsection (A)(4) may be granted by the city manager only if the applicant can demonstrate that there is no practical site design to meet this requirement. The city manager may allow only the number of parking spaces that cannot be accommodated to the rear or sides of buildings to be located to the front of buildings;

5. Parking lots shall be so arranged as to permit the internal circulation of vehicles between parking aisles without re-entering adjoining public streets; and

6. Parking for the disabled shall be provided in accordance with KMC 18.40.060.

B. The minimum parking space and aisle dimensions for the most common parking angles are shown on the table in this subsection. For parking angles other than those shown on the chart, the minimum parking space and aisle dimensions shall be determined by the city manager. Regardless of the parking angle, one-way aisles shall be at least 10 feet wide, and two-way aisles shall be at least 20 feet wide. If dead-end aisles are used in the parking layout, they shall be constructed as two-way aisles. Parking plans for angle parking shall use space widths no less than eight feet, six inches for a standard parking space design and eight feet for a compact car parking space design.

MINIMUM PARKING STALL AND AISLE DIMENSIONS  

	A	B	C	D	E	F

	PARKING ANGLE	STALL WIDTH	CURB LENGTH	STALL DEPTH	AISLE WIDTH	UNIT DEPTH

	1-WAY	2-WAY	1-WAY	2-WAY

	0	8.0*

Min 8.5

Desired 9.0	20.0*

22.5

22.5	8.0

8.5

9.0	12.0

12.0

12.0	20.0

20.0

20.0	**

29.0

30.0	**

37.0

38.0

	30	8.0*

Min 8.5

Desired 9.0	16.0*

17.0

18.0	15.0

16.5

17.0	10.0

10.0

10.0	20.0

20.0

20.0	**

42.0

44.0	**

53.0

54.0

	45	8.0*

Min 8.5

Desired 9.0	11.5*

12.0

12.5	17.0*	12.0

12.0

12.0	20.0

20.0

20.0	**

50.0

51.0	**

58.0

59.0

	60	8.0*

Min 8.5

Desired 9.0	9.6*

10.0

10.5	18.0

20.0

21.0	18.0

18.0

18.0	20.0

20.0

20.0	**

58.0

60.0	**

60.0

62.0

	90	8.0*

Min 8.5

Desired 9.0	8.0*

8.5

9.0	16.0*

18.0

18.0	24.0

24.0

23.0	24.0

24.0

24.0	**

60.0

60.0	**

60.0

60.0 

* for compact stalls only

** variable with compact and standard combinations


[IMAGE]


C. Any parking spaces abutting a required landscaped area on the driver or passenger side of the vehicle shall provide an additional 18 inches above the minimum space width requirement to provide a place to step other than in the landscaped area. The additional width shall be separated from the adjacent parking space by a parking space division stripe.

D. The parking space depth may be reduced if vehicles overhang a walkway or landscaping under the following conditions:

1. Wheel stops or curbs are installed;

2. The remaining walkway provides a minimum of 48 inches of unimpeded passageway for pedestrians;

3. The amount of space depth reduction is limited to a maximum of 18 inches; and

4. Landscaping is designed in accordance with KMC 18.35.070(E).

E. Driveways providing ingress and egress between off-street parking areas and abutting streets shall be designed, located and constructed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 12.50 KMC, Street Standards. Driveways for single detached dwelling units, no more than 20 feet in width, may cross required setbacks or landscaped areas to provide access between the off-street parking areas and the street, provided no more than 15 percent of the required landscaping or setback area is eliminated by the driveway. Joint use driveways may be located within required landscaping or setback areas. Driveways for all other developments may cross or be located within required setbacks or landscaped areas to provide access between the off-street parking areas and the street, if no more than 10 percent of the required landscaping is displaced by the driveway and the driveway is located no closer than five feet from any property line except where intersecting the street.

F. Parking spaces required under this title shall be located as follows:

1. For single detached dwelling units the required parking spaces shall be outside of any required setbacks or landscaping, but driveways crossing setbacks and required landscaping may be used for parking. However, if the driveway is a joint use driveway, no vehicle parked on the driveway shall obstruct any joint user’s access to the driveway or parking spaces;

2. For all other developments, parking spaces may be permitted by the city manager in setback areas in accordance with an approved landscape plan; and

3. For nonresidential uses in residential zones, parking is permitted in setback areas in accordance with KMC 18.21.060.

G. Lighting shall be provided for safety of traffic and pedestrian circulation on the site. It shall be designed to minimize direct illumination of abutting properties and adjacent streets. The city manager shall have the authority to waive the requirement to provide lighting.

H. Tandem or end-to-end parking is allowed in residential developments. Apartment or townhouse developments may have tandem parking areas for each dwelling unit but shall not combine parking for separate dwelling units in tandem parking areas.

I. All vehicle parking and storage must be in a garage, carport or on an approved impervious surface. Any impervious surface used for vehicle parking or storage must have direct and unobstructed driveway access.

J. The total number of vehicles parked or stored outside of a building on a single-family lot in the R-4 through R-6 zones, excluding recreational vehicles and trailers, shall not exceed six vehicles on lots 12,500 square feet or less and eight vehicles on lots greater than 12,500 square feet.

K. Vanpool or carpool parking areas shall meet the following minimum design standards:

1. A minimum vertical clearance of seven feet, three inches shall be provided to accommodate van vehicles if designated vanpool or carpool parking spaces are located in a parking structure; and

2. A minimum turning radius of 26 feet, four inches with a minimum turning diameter, curb to curb, of 52 feet, five inches shall be provided from parking aisles to adjacent carpool or vanpool parking spaces.

L. Direct access from the street right-of-way to off-street parking areas shall be subject to KMC 18.45.070.

M. No dead-end alley may provide access to more than eight off-street parking spaces.

N. Any parking stalls located in enclosed buildings must be totally within the enclosed building. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.40.120 Off-street parking construction standards.

A. Off-street parking areas shall be paved in accordance with City street standards unless otherwise approved by the city manager.

B. Grading work for parking areas shall meet the requirements of KMC Title 15. Drainage and erosion/sedimentation control facilities shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 13.35 KMC.

C. Paved parking areas shall have parking spaces marked by surface paint lines or suitable substitute traffic marking material in accordance with the Washington State Department of Transportation Standards. Wheel stops are required where a parked vehicle would encroach on adjacent property, pedestrian access or circulation areas, right-of-way or landscaped areas. Typically approved markings and wheel stop locations are illustrated below.


[IMAGE]


[Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.40.130 Compact car allowance requirements.

In any development containing more than 20 parking spaces, up to 50 percent of the total number of spaces may be sized to accommodate compact cars, subject to the following:

A. Each space shall be clearly identified as a compact car space by painting the word “COMPACT” in capital letters, a minimum of eight inches high, on the pavement at the base of the parking space and centered between the striping;

B. Aisle widths shall conform to the standards set for standard size cars; and

C. Apartment developments with less than 20 parking spaces may designate up to 40 percent of the required parking spaces as compact spaces. [Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.40.140 Internal circulation road standards.

Internal access roads to off-street parking areas shall conform to City street standards set forth in Chapter 12.50 KMC. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 18.42 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – SIGNS

Sections:

18.42.010    Purpose.

18.42.020    Permit requirements.

18.42.030    Exempt signs.

18.42.040    Prohibited signs.

18.42.050    Sign area calculation.

18.42.060    General sign requirements.

18.42.070    Community bulletin board signs.

18.42.080    A-frame/sandwich board signs.

18.42.090    Residential zone signs.

18.42.100    Downtown commercial zone signs.

18.42.110    Neighborhood business and community business Juanita subarea zone signs.

18.42.120    Community business west subarea zone signs.

18.42.130    Urban corridor, waterfront commercial and regional business zone signs.

18.42.135    Signs in the public/semi-public, parks and golf course zones.

18.42.140    Signs or displays of limited duration.

18.42.150    Billboards – Location and height standards.

18.42.160    Repealed.

18.42.170    Repealed.

18.42.180    Repealed.

18.42.190    Repealed.

18.42.200    Repealed.


18.42.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to enhance the visual environment of the City by:

A. Establishing standards that regulate the type, number, location, size, and lighting of signs;

B. Recognizing the private purposes of signs for the identification of businesses and promotion of products and services; and

C. Recognizing the public purposes of signs, which include considerations of traffic safety and economic and aesthetic welfare. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.42.020 Permit requirements.

A. Except as otherwise permitted by this chapter, no sign shall be erected, altered or relocated without approval by the City.

B. No building permit shall be required for repainting, cleaning, or other normal maintenance and repair of a sign, or for sign face and copy changes that do not alter the size or structure of the sign. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.42.030 Exempt signs.

The following signs or displays are exempted from the regulations under this chapter:

A. Historic site markers or plaques, gravestones, and address numbers;

B. Signs required by law, including but not limited to:

1. Official or legal notices issued and posted by any public agency or court; or

2. Traffic directional or warning signs;

C. Plaques, tablets or inscriptions indicating the name of a building, date of erection, or other commemorative information, which are an integral part of the building structure or are attached flat to the face of the building, which are nonilluminated, and which do not exceed four square feet in surface area;

D. Incidental signs, which shall not exceed two square feet in surface area; provided, that said size limitation shall not apply to signs providing directions, warnings or information when established and maintained by a public agency;

E. State or federal flags;

F. Religious symbols;

G. The flag of a commercial institution, provided no more than one flag is permitted per business premises, and further provided the flag does not exceed 20 square feet in surface area; and 

H. Signs or banners installed in the right-of-way by the City for purposes of providing information, directions, or decoration. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.42.040 Prohibited signs.

Except as indicated by this chapter, the following signs or displays are prohibited:

A. Portable signs including, but not limited to, mobile readerboard signs, but excluding A-frame and sandwich board signs and other signs permitted under KMC 18.42.080 and 18.42.140;

B. Private signs on utility poles;

C. Signs which, by reason of their size, location, movement, content, coloring or manner of illumination, may be confused with traffic control signs or signals;

D. Signs located in the public right-of-way, except where permitted in this chapter or otherwise by law;

E. Posters, pennants, banners, strings of lights, blinking lights, balloons, searchlights and other displays of a carnival nature; except as architectural features, or on a limited basis as seasonal decorations or as provided for in KMC 18.42.140 as grand opening displays;

F. Changing message center signs, where the message changes more frequently than every three minutes; and

G. Billboards. [Ord. 17-0445B § 1; Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.42.050 Sign area calculation.

A. Sign area for nonmonument freestanding signs shall be calculated by determining the total surface area of the sign as viewed from any single vantage point, excluding support structures.

B. Sign area for letters or symbols painted or mounted directly on walls or monument signs or on the sloping portion of a roof shall be calculated by measuring the smallest single rectangle which will enclose the combined letters and symbols.

C. Sign area for signs contained entirely within a cabinet and mounted on a wall, roof or monument shall be calculated by measuring the entire area of the cabinet. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.42.060 General sign requirements.

A. All signs, except billboards, community bulletin boards, community identification signs, political signs, temporary real estate “A-frame” signs and special event signs, shall be on-premises signs; provided, that uses located on lots without public street frontage in business and office zones may have one off-premises directional sign of no more than 16 square feet.

B. Fuel price signs shall not be included in sign area or number limitations of KMC 18.42.100 through 18.42.135, provided such signs do not exceed 20 square feet per street frontage.

C. Projecting and awning signs shall not be permitted for uses in the residential zones. Signs mounted on the sloping portion of roofs shall not be permitted in the residential, downtown residential, and downtown commercial zones. Allowances for projecting and awning signs in the downtown commercial zone are found in KMC 18.42.100. In other zones, projecting and awning signs and signs mounted on the sloping portion of roofs may be used in lieu of wall signs, provided:

1. They maintain a minimum clearance of eight feet above finished grade;

2. They do not project more than six feet perpendicular from the supporting building facade;

3. They meet the standards of subsection J of this section if mounted on the roof of a building; and

4. They shall not exceed the number or size permitted for wall signs in a zone.

D. Changing message center signs, and time and temperature signs, which can be a wall or freestanding sign, shall not exceed the size permitted for a wall or freestanding sign, and shall be permitted only in the NB, CB west, UC, WC, and RB zones. Changing message center signs and time and temperature signs shall not exceed the maximum sign height permitted in the zone.

E. Directional signs shall not be included in the sign area or number limitation of KMC 18.42.080; provided, they shall not exceed six square feet in surface area and are limited to one for each entrance or exit to surface parking areas or parking structure.

F. Sign Illumination and Glare.

1. All signs in the NB, CB, UC, WC, RB or DC zone districts may be illuminated. Signs in all other zones may be indirectly illuminated, provided the light source for indirectly illuminated signs shall be no farther away from the sign than the height of the sign;

2. Indirectly illuminated signs shall be arranged so that no direct rays of light are projected from such artificial source into residences or any street right-of-way;

3. Electrical requirements for signs shall be governed by Chapter 19.28 RCW and WAC 296-46-910; and

4. Signs with an on/off operation shall be permitted only in the CB, UC, WC, and RB zones.

G. Maximum height for wall signs shall not extend above the highest exterior wall or structure upon which the sign is located, except in the DC zone which is governed by KMC 18.42.100.

H. Maximum height for projecting signs shall not extend above the highest exterior wall upon which the projecting sign is located.

I. Maximum height for awning signs shall not extend above the height of the awning upon which the awning sign is located.

J. Any sign attached to the sloping surface of a roof shall be installed or erected in such a manner that there are no visible support structures, shall appear to be part of the building itself, and shall not extend above the roof ridge line of the portion of the roof upon which the sign is attached.

K. Except as otherwise permitted by this chapter, off-premises directional signs shall not exceed four square feet in sign area.

L. Mixed use developments or multiple-family dwellings in the NB, CB, DC UC, WC, or RB zones are permitted one permanent residential identification sign not exceeding 32 square feet in addition to the maximum sign area requirements in the zone where the development is located. [Ord. 18-0454 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.42.070 Community bulletin board signs.

One community bulletin board sign is permitted at public schools, in addition to other permitted public school signage. Community bulletin board signs are subject to the following provisions:

A. Community bulletin board signs shall not exceed 32 square feet per side;

B. Community bulletin board signs may be internally illuminated;

C. Community bulletin board signs may be electrically controlled and may contain messages that change at intervals of five seconds or greater. All such signs shall be turned off between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.;

D. Community bulletin board sign messages are limited to those notifying the public of community events and public services. No commercial advertising shall be permitted on community bulletin board signs. Lettering shall be only one color;

E. Community bulletin board signs shall not be located in the right-of-way and shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic;

F. Wall signs and freestanding signs are permitted; and

G. The maximum height for freestanding signs shall not exceed 15 feet. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.42.080 A-frame/sandwich board signs.

A-frame/sandwich board signs shall be permitted throughout the City; provided, that:

A. Sign does not exceed six square feet per face;

B. Sign is only displayed during business hours;

C. Sign must be displayed on the property containing the business;

D. Sign must not be located in the right-of-way or impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic;

E. Only one sign for each street frontage shall be permitted, up to a maximum of two signs; and

F. No banners, streamers, balloons or pennants may be attached to any sign. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.42.090 Residential zone signs.

Signs in the downtown residential, R and MHC zones are limited as follows:

A. Nonresidential Use.

1. One sign identifying nonresidential uses, not exceeding 25 square feet and not exceeding six feet in height, is permitted;

2. Schools are permitted one sign per school or school facility entrance, which may be located in the setback. Two additional wall signs attached directly to the school or school facility are permitted;

3. Home occupation and home industry signs are limited to wall signs not exceeding six square feet.

B. Residential Use.

1. One residential identification sign not exceeding two square feet is permitted; and

2. One permanent residential development identification sign not exceeding 32 square feet is permitted per development. The maximum height for the sign shall be six feet. The sign may be freestanding or mounted on a wall, fence, or other structure. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.42.100 Downtown commercial zone signs.

Signs in the downtown commercial zones shall be limited as follows:

A. Wall signs are permitted, provided they do not total an area more than 10 percent of the building facade on which they are located and provided they are limited to building facades with street frontage or to building facades with a business entrance if the business has an exterior facade which does not face a street. A maximum of two wall signs may be permitted per allowed facade, except that multitenant buildings may have one wall sign per business. The wall sign shall be placed on the facade not more than 25 feet above grade, measured to the top of the sign, except that properties fronting SR-522 may have one wall sign above 25 feet above grade if the sign is limited to the name and/or logo of the business(es) or development. 

B. Freestanding Signs.

1. Number and Size.

a. One freestanding sign not exceeding 50 square feet is permitted for each street frontage of the lot, provided corner lots with a street frontage of less than 100 feet on each street shall be permitted only one freestanding sign. Properties fronting SR-522 may have one freestanding sign for the frontage along SR-522 that shall not exceed 75 square feet. 

b. Properties providing freestanding signs no greater than five feet in height are allowed a maximum sign size of 60 square feet, unless located on SR-522 where such signs shall not exceed 85 square feet; 

2. On lots where more than one freestanding sign is permitted, the sign area permitted for individual freestanding signs may be combined, provided the combined sign does not exceed 80 square feet, except that properties fronting SR-522 may combine signage to a maximum of 100 square feet; and

3. The maximum height for freestanding signs shall be 15 feet, unless the sign is placed along the frontage of SR-522 when it may be a maximum of 25 feet in height.

C. Awning Signs. An awning sign(s) may be used in place of a wall sign or freestanding sign. A maximum of 50 square feet of copy may appear on the vertical face area; the drop edge of the awning shall not exceed 12 inches in height. The maximum height of an awning shall be 10 feet. Awnings may extend over the right-of-way and have clearances according to the terms of the adopted International Building Code. The awning sign shall be unlit or externally illuminated. Directed lighting under an awning for purposes of lighting a business entrance is allowed. Backlighting of awnings for sign purposes shall not be permitted.

D. Projecting Signs. A projecting sign(s) may be used in place of a wall sign or freestanding sign. Such projecting signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in size if unlit or externally lit, or six square feet if internally lit. Such signs shall be located on building facades with street frontage or to building facades with a business entrance if the business has an exterior facade which does not face a street. A projecting sign may extend over the public right-of-way by no more than four feet from the wall it is mounted on. When projecting over a public right-of-way, a minimum of eight feet clearance above the surface of the sidewalk is required. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.42.110 Neighborhood business and community business Juanita subarea zone signs.

Signs in the NB and CB Juanita zones shall be limited as follows:

A. Wall signs are permitted, provided they do not total an area more than 10 percent of the building facade on which they are located;

B. Freestanding Signs.

1. One freestanding sign not exceeding 50 square feet is permitted for each street frontage of the lot, provided corner lots with a street frontage of less than 100 feet on each street shall be permitted only one freestanding sign;

2. Multiple-tenant developments that have more than 300 feet of street frontage on one street may have one additional freestanding sign for each 300 feet of street frontage, or portion thereof. Such signs shall be separated from one another by a minimum of 150 feet, if located on the same street frontage;

3. On lots where more than one freestanding sign is permitted, the sign area permitted for individual freestanding signs may be combined; provided the combined sign does not exceed 150 square feet; and

4. The maximum height for freestanding signs shall be 15 feet. [Ord. 18-0454 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.42.120 Community business west subarea zone signs.

Signs in the CB west zone shall be limited as follows:

A. Wall signs are permitted, provided they do not total an area more than 15 percent of the building facade on which they are located;

B. Freestanding Signs.

1. One freestanding sign not exceeding 85 square feet, plus an additional 20 square feet for each additional business in a multiple-tenant structure but not to exceed 145 square feet total, is permitted for each street frontage of the lot, provided corner lots with a street frontage of less than 100 feet on each street shall be permitted only one freestanding sign;

2. Multiple-tenant developments that have more than 300 feet of street frontage on one street may have one additional freestanding sign for each 300 feet of street frontage, or portion thereof. Such signs shall be separated from one another by a minimum of 150 feet, if located on the same street frontage;

3. On lots where more than one freestanding sign is permitted, the sign area permitted for individual freestanding signs may be combined, provided the combined sign area does not exceed 250 square feet; and

4. The maximum height for freestanding signs shall be 20 feet. [Ord. 18-0454 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.42.130 Urban corridor, waterfront commercial, and regional business zone signs.

Signs in the UC, WC and RB zones shall be limited as follows:

A. Wall signs are permitted, provided they do not total an area more than 15 percent of the building facade on which they are located;

B. Freestanding Signs.

1. One freestanding sign not exceeding 170 square feet is permitted for each street frontage of the lot, provided corner lots with a street frontage of less than 100 feet on each street shall be permitted only one freestanding sign;

2. Multiple-tenant developments that have more than 300 feet of street frontage on one street may have one additional freestanding sign for each 300 feet of street frontage, or portion thereof. Such signs shall be separated from one another by a minimum of 150 feet, if located on the same street frontage not exceeding 150 square feet;

3. On lots where more than one freestanding sign is permitted, the sign area permitted for individual freestanding signs may be combined; provided the combined sign area does not exceed 300 square feet; and

4. The maximum height for a freestanding sign shall be 25 feet. [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.42.135 Signs in the public/semi-public, parks and golf course zones.

Signs in the public/semi-public, parks or golf course zone shall meet the standards of the nearest adjoining zone to which the sign faces. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.42.140 Signs or displays of limited duration.

The following temporary signs or displays are permitted and except as required by the International Building Code, or as otherwise required by this chapter, do not require building permits:

A. Grand Opening Displays.

1. Signs, posters, pennants, banners, strings of lights, blinking lights, balloons and searchlights are permitted for a period of up to one month to announce the opening of a new enterprise, the opening of an enterprise under new management, or the re-opening of an enterprise following a substantial building remodel; and

2. All grand opening displays shall be removed upon the expiration of 30 consecutive days;

B. Construction Signs.

1. Construction signs identifying architects, engineers, planners, contractors or other individuals or firms involved with the construction of a building and announcing the character of the building or the purpose for which the building is intended may be displayed;

2. One nonilluminated, double-faced sign is permitted for each public street upon which the project fronts;

3. No sign shall exceed 32 square feet in surface area or 10 feet in height, or be located closer than 30 feet from the property line of the adjoining property; and

4. Construction signs must be removed by the date of first occupancy of the premises or one year after placement of the sign, whichever occurs first;

C. Political Signs.

1. Signs, posters or bills promoting or publicizing candidates for public office or issues that are to be voted upon in a general or special election may be displayed on private property with the consent of the property owner. Any such sign, poster or bill shall be removed within 10 days following the election; and

2. No sign, poster, bill or other advertising device shall be located on public property or within public easements or street right-of-way;

D. Real Estate Signs. All temporary real estate signs may be single- or double-faced signs:

1. Signs advertising an individual residential unit for sale or rent shall be limited to one sign per street frontage. The sign may not exceed eight square feet in area, and shall not exceed six feet in height. The sign shall be removed within five days after closing of the sale, lease or rental of the property.

2. Real estate open house A-frame/sandwich board residential directional signs announcing directions to an open house at a specified residence which is offered for sale or rent shall not exceed six square feet in area for each sign, and shall not exceed 42 inches in height. Such signs shall be permitted only when the agent or seller is in attendance at the property for sale or rent and may be located on the right-of-way outside of vehicular and bicycle lanes.

3. On-site commercial or industrial property for sale or rent signs shall be limited to one sign per street frontage, and shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. The sign shall not exceed 12 feet in height. The sign shall be removed within 30 days after closing of the sale, lease or rental of the property.

4. On-site residential development for sale or rent signs shall be limited to one sign per development. The sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, and shall not exceed 12 feet in height. The sign shall be removed within 30 days after closing of the sale or rental of the last lot or dwelling unit in the development or within three years of installation, whichever occurs first.

5. Off-site directional signs for residential developments shall be limited to six signs. Each sign shall not exceed 16 square feet in area, and shall include only the name of and directions to the residential development. The sign(s) shall be placed a maximum of two street miles from the nearest residential development entrance. No two signs for one residential development shall be located closer than 500 feet from one another on the same street. The sign(s) shall be removed within 30 days after closing of the sale or rental of the last lot or dwelling unit in the development or within three years of installation, whichever occurs first.

6. Residential on-premises informational signs shall be limited to one sign per feature, including but not limited to signs for information centers, model homes, parking areas or announcing features such as parks, playgrounds, or trails. Each sign shall not exceed 16 square feet in area, and shall not exceed six feet in height;

E. Community Event Signs.

1. Community event signs shall be limited to announcing or promoting a nonprofit sponsored community fair, festival or event;

2. Community event signs may be displayed no more than the time period specified in the temporary use permit issued pursuant to Chapter 18.100 KMC; and

3. Community event signs shall be removed by the event sponsor within two weeks following the end of the community fair, festival or event. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.42.150 Billboards – Location and height standards.

A. Any billboard which was legally in existence on the effective date of this section, which is December 5, 2017, is declared to be a nonconforming billboard and may remain, subject to the provisions of this section and any other applicable regulations.

1. A nonconforming billboard shall not be increased in height, size or elevation, or enlarged in any other manner. The billboard face(s) on a nonconforming billboard shall not be increased in size or number.

2. A nonconforming billboard shall not be relocated or moved to another location in the City, including other locations on the same property.

3. A nonconforming billboard shall not be replaced with another billboard; provided, that a nonconforming billboard may be replaced or reconstructed if the billboard is damaged or destroyed by fire, weather event, or other act of God or by another means beyond the owner’s control, such as a vehicle collision.

4. Installation of electronic changing message or reader boards on nonconforming billboards is prohibited.

5. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter or other applicable law or regulation, no billboard owner or his or her agent shall remove, cut, or otherwise alter any vegetative screening on public property or private landscaping required by code as a condition of permit approval in order to improve the visibility of a nearby billboard.

6. If the structural components of a nonconforming billboard deteriorate and the billboard becomes an unsafe structure, then the nonconforming billboard shall be removed within 30 days of the date that the City issues a notice and order to do so. Replacement or reinstallation of a billboard removed under this subsection shall not be allowed.

7. Nothing in this subsection A shall be construed to prohibit a billboard owner or his or her agent from making repairs to a billboard.

B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a nonconforming billboard that is not located within the jurisdiction of the Washington Scenic Vistas Act, Chapter 47.42 RCW, shall be discontinued and removed within 10 years from the effective date of this section, in order to allow the owner to amortize the value of the billboard over the 10-year period. Upon the expiration of this 10-year amortization period, the billboard shall be removed immediately. [Ord. 17-0445B § 2; Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.42.160 Billboards – General requirements.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0455B. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.42.170 Billboards – Special restrictions in the CB zone.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0455B. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.42.180 Billboards – Alteration or relocation limitations.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0455B. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.42.190 Billboards – View and vegetative screening protections.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0455B. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.42.200 Billboard free areas.

Repealed by Ord. 17-0455B. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 18.45 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – ADEQUACY OF PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES

Sections:

18.45.010    Purpose.

18.45.020    General requirements.

18.45.030    Adequate sewage disposal.

18.45.040    Adequate water supply.

18.45.050    Surface water management.

18.45.060    Adequate transportation system.

18.45.070    Adequate vehicular access.

18.45.080    Adequate fire protection.

18.45.090    School concurrency – Applicability and relationship to fees.

18.45.100    Findings, recommendations, and decisions regarding school capacities.

18.45.120    School concurrency standard.

18.45.130    Credit for improvements.


18.45.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that public facilities and services necessary to support development are adequate or will be provided in a timely manner consistent with the public facilities and services planning goal of the Washington State Growth Management Act of 1990 by:

A. Specifying the on-site and off-site facilities and services that must be in place or otherwise assured of timely provision prior to development;

B. Allocating the cost of those facilities and services fairly; and

C. Providing a general framework for relating development standards and other requirements of this code to:

1. Adopted service level standards for public facilities and services;

2. Procedural requirements for phasing development projects to ensure that services are provided as development occurs; and

3. The review of development permit applications. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.45.020 General requirements.

A. All new development proposals including any use, activity or structure that requires City approval shall be adequately served by the following facilities and services prior to the time of occupancy, recording or other land use approval, as further specified in this chapter:

1. Sewage disposal;

2. Water supply;

3. Surface water management;

4. Streets and access;

5. Fire protection service; and

6. Schools.

B. Applications for all new development proposals requiring water or sewer service shall include a certificate of water availability and a certificate of sewer availability from the department to demonstrate compliance with this chapter and other provisions of this code, the comprehensive plan and the Growth Management Act.

C. Regardless of the number of sequential permits required, the provisions of this chapter shall be applied only once to any single development proposal. If changes and modifications result in impacts not considered when the proposal was first approved, the City shall consider the revised proposal as a new development proposal. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.45.030 Adequate sewage disposal.

All new development shall be served by an adequate public or private sewage disposal system, including both collection and treatment facilities as follows:

A. A public sewage disposal system is adequate for a development proposal; provided, that:

1. For the issuance of a building permit, preliminary plat or short plat approval or other land use approval, the site of the proposed development is or can be served by an existing disposal system consistent with KMC Title 13, and the disposal system has been approved by the department as being consistent with applicable State and local design and operating guidelines;

2. For the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a building or change of use permit, the approved public sewage disposal system as set forth in subsection (A)(1) of this section is installed to serve each building or lot;

3. For a zone reclassification, the timing of installation of required sewerage improvements shall be contained in the approving ordinance; and

B. A private individual sewage system is adequate, if an on-site sewage disposal system for each individual building or lot is installed to meet the requirements and standards of Seattle/King County public health as to lot size, soils and system design prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a building or change of use permit. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]




18.45.040 Adequate water supply.

All new development shall be served by an adequate public or private water supply system as follows:

A. A public water system is adequate for a development proposal; provided, that:

1. For the issuance of a building permit, preliminary plat or short plat approval or other land use approval, the applicant must demonstrate that the existing water supply system available to serve the site:

a. Complies with the applicable planning, operating and design requirements of Chapter 246-290 WAC; Chapters 12.50 and 12.55 KMC and KMC Title 15; coordinated water system plans; KMC Titles 8, 9, and 13 and other applicable provisions of the rules and regulations of Seattle/King County public health; and any limitation or condition imposed by the City-approved comprehensive plan of the water purveyor; and

b. The proposed improvements to an existing water system have been reviewed by the department and determined to comply with the design standards and conditions specified in subsection (A)(1)(a) of this section; or

c. A proposed new water supply system has been reviewed by the department and determined to comply with the design standards and conditions specified in subsection (A)(1)(a) of this section;

2. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a building or change of use permit, the approved public water system and any system improvements set forth in subsection (A)(1) of this section shall be installed to serve each building or lot respectively;

3. For a zone reclassification, the timing of installation of required water system improvements shall be included in the approving ordinance.

B. An on-site, individual water system is adequate and the plat or short plat may receive preliminary and final approval, and a building or change of use permit may be issued, if:

1. The buildings or lots to be served are located outside of a City-approved water purveyor service area; or

2. The water purveyor has indicated that service cannot be provided in compliance with the purveyor’s approved comprehensive plan; and

3. Seattle/King County public health has approved the proposed method of water supply in accordance with the applicable health rules and regulations and this section. The applicant shall provide appropriate information to demonstrate to the department and Seattle/King County public health that a private individual water system will be adequate. Seattle/King County public health may require installation of private individual water systems prior to final approval of a plat or short plat where information is insufficient to show an adequate water supply can be made available. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.45.050 Surface water management.

All new development shall be served by an adequate surface water management system as follows:

A. The proposed system is adequate if the development proposal site is served by a surface water management system approved by the department as being consistent with the design, operating and procedural requirements of the Surface Water Design Manual and KMC Title 13;

B. For a subdivision, short subdivision, zone reclassification, site plan review or master plan, the phased installation of required surface water management improvements shall be stated in the conditions of project approval. Such phasing may require that a bond or similar security be deposited with the City; and

C. An adjustment from the requirements of the Surface Water Design Manual and KMC Title 13 shall be reviewed as set forth in KMC 13.35.050 and does not require a variance from this title unless relief is requested from a building height, setback, landscaping or other development standard set forth in this title. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.45.060 Adequate transportation system.

A. All new development shall be served by an adequate transportation system as described in KMC 12.80.020.

B. As a result of the impact created by a proposed development, dedication or deeding to the City of right-of-way or a portion thereof for public streets in accordance with City street standards shall be required within or along the boundaries of the site:

1. Where the six-year capital improvement plan indicates the necessity of a new right-of-way or portion thereof for street purposes;

2. Where necessary to extend or to complete the existing or future neighborhood street pattern as shown on the City street map (see KMC Title 12);

3. Where necessary to provide additions of right-of-way to existing City right-of-way;

4. Where necessary to conform to City street standards or City street improvement projects; or

5. Where necessary to provide a public transportation system that supports future development of abutting property consistent with the Kenmore comprehensive plan.

C. A variance request from the street cross-section or construction standards established by KMC Title 12, Streets and Bridges, shall be reviewed as set forth in KMC 12.50.060 and does not require a variance from this title unless relief is requested from a building height, setback, landscaping or other development standard set forth in this title. [Ord. 16-0420 § 5 (Exh. 3); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.45.070 Adequate vehicular access.

All new development shall be served by adequate vehicular access as follows:

A. The property upon which the development proposal is to be located has direct access to:

1. A public or private street that meets City street standards or is formally declared acceptable by the city manager; or

2. The property has access to such a street over a private driveway approved by the City;

B. Every lot upon which one or more buildings is proposed to be erected, or traffic generating use is proposed to be established, shall establish safe access as follows:

1. Safe passage from the street right-of-way to building entrances for transit patrons and other pedestrians, in accordance with the design standards set forth in Chapter 18.40 KMC;

2. Direct access from the street right-of-way, fire lane or a parking space to any part of the property as needed to provide public services in accordance with adopted standards (e.g., fire protection, emergency medical service, mail delivery or trash collection); and

3. Direct access from the street right-of-way, driveway, alley or other means of ingress/egress approved by the City, to all required off-street parking spaces on the premises. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.45.080 Adequate fire protection.

All new development shall be served by adequate fire protection as set forth below:

A. The site of the development proposal shall be served by a water supply system that provides at least minimum fire flow and a street system or fire lane system that provides life safety/rescue access, and other fire protection requirements for buildings as required by KMC Title 15;

B. For a zone reclassification, the timing of installation of required fire protection improvements shall be stated in the approving ordinance, secured with a bond or similar security, and deposited with the City; and

C. A variance request from the requirements established by KMC Title 15 shall be reviewed as set forth in KMC 15.15.090 and/or in Article 2 of the currently adopted edition of the fire code and does not require a variance from this title unless relief is requested from a building height, setback, landscaping or other development standard set forth in this title. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.45.090 School concurrency – Applicability and relationship to fees.

A. The school concurrency standard set out in KMC 18.45.120 shall apply to applications for preliminary plat, short plats of more than four lots, manufactured housing communities, requests for multifamily zoning, and land use and building permits for multifamily housing projects which have not been previously evaluated for compliance with the concurrency standard.

B. The City’s finding of concurrency shall be made at the time of preliminary plat, short plat or other land use permit approval, at the time that a request to actualize potential multifamily zoning is approved, at the time a manufactured housing community site plan is approved, or prior to building permit issuance for multifamily housing projects which have not been previously established for compliance with the concurrency standard. Once such a finding has been made, the development shall be considered as vested for purposes of the concurrency determination.

C. Excluded from the application of the concurrency standard are:

1. Building permits for individual single-family dwellings;

2. Any form of housing exclusively for senior citizens, including nursing homes and retirement centers;

3. Shelters for temporary placement, relocation facilities and transitional housing facilities;

4. Replacement, reconstruction or remodeling of existing dwelling units;

5. Short subdivisions of four or less lots; and

6. Any residential building permit for any development proposal for which a concurrency determination has already been made pursuant to the terms of this title.

D. All of the development activities which are excluded from the application of the concurrency standard are subject to school impact fees imposed pursuant to KMC Title 20.

E. The assessment and payment of impact fees are governed by and shall be subject to the provisions in KMC Title 20 addressing school impact fees.

F. A certification of concurrency for a school district shall not preclude the City from collecting impact fees for the district. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.45.100 Findings, recommendations, and decisions regarding school capacities.

A. The city manager and/or the hearing examiner, in the course of reviewing proposals for residential development including applications for plats, short plats, or land use approvals for multifamily housing projects, manufactured housing communities, or multifamily zoning, and multifamily building permits, shall consider the school district’s capital facilities plan.

B. The school district is authorized to present testimony and documents demonstrating a lack of concurrency in the district and the inability of the district to accommodate the students to be generated by a specific development.

C. Based upon a finding that the impacts generated by the plat, short plat, manufactured housing community or the multifamily development were generally not anticipated at the time of the last approval of a school district capital facilities plan and were not included in the district’s long-range forecast, the city manager may require or recommend phasing or provision of the needed facilities and/or sites as appropriate to address the deficiency or deny or condition approval, consistent with the provisions of this chapter, the State Subdivision Act, and the State Environmental Policy Act.

D. Determinations of the hearing examiner or city manager regarding concurrency can be appealed only pursuant to the provisions for appeal of the development permit process for which the determination has been made. Where no other administrative appeal process is available, an appeal may be taken to the hearing examiner using the appeal procedures for variances. Any errors in the formula identified as a result of an appeal should be referred to the council for possible modifications.

E. Where the council has not adopted an impact fee ordinance for a particular school district, the language of this section shall not affect the authority or duties of the hearing examiner or the city manager pursuant to the State Environmental Policy Act or the State Subdivision Act. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.45.120 School concurrency standard.

A. Schools shall be considered to have been provided concurrently with the development which will impact the schools if:

1. The permanent and interim improvements necessary to serve the development are planned to be in place at the time the impacts of development are expected to occur; or

2. The necessary financial commitments are in place to assure the completion of the needed improvements to meet the school district’s standard of service within three years of the time that the impacts of development are expected to occur. Necessary improvements are those facilities identified by the school district in its capital facilities plan.

B. Any combination of the following shall constitute the “necessary financial commitments” for the purposes of subsection A of this section:

1. The district has received voter approval of and/or has bonding authority;

2. The district has received approval for federal, State, or other funds;

3. The district has received a secured commitment from a developer that the developer will construct the needed permanent school facility, and the school district has found such facility to be acceptable and consistent with its capital facilities plan; and/or

4. The district has other assured funding, including but not limited to school impact fees which have been paid.

C. Compliance with this concurrency requirement of this section shall be sufficient to satisfy the provisions of RCW 58.17.060 and 58.17.110. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.45.130 Credit for improvements.

Whenever a development is granted approval subject to a condition that the development proponent actually provide a permanent school facility acceptable to the district, the development proponent may be entitled to a credit for the actual cost of providing the facility against the fee that would be chargeable under the formula provided by KMC Title 20. [Ord. 18-0463 § 3 (Exh. 2); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 18.47 PROPERTY-SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS/SPECIAL DISTRICT OVERLAYS

Sections:

18.47.010    Purpose.

18.47.030    Property-specific (P-suffix) development standards.

18.47.040    Special district overlays (SO) development standards.


18.47.010 Purpose.

The purposes of this chapter are to provide for alternative development standards to address unique site characteristics and to address development opportunities which can exceed the quality of standard developments, by:

A. Identifying property-specific development standards for increasing minimum requirements of this title on individual sites; or

B. Identifying special district overlays with alternative standards for special areas designated by the comprehensive plan. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.47.030 Property-specific (P-suffix) development standards.

A. Adopted property-specific development standards are maintained by the department in the property-specific development standards notebook. The property-specific development standards apply to any development proposal on the subject properties. The following P-suffix development standards are in effect: NS-P1, NS-P4, NS-P10, and NS-P19.

B. Property-specific development standards address problems unique to individual properties or a limited number of neighboring properties that are not addressed or anticipated by general minimum requirements of this title or other regulations.

C. Property-specific development standards include street addresses, tax lot numbers or other clear means of identifying the properties subject to the additional standards. [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.47.040 Special district overlays (SO) development standards.

Special district overlays include policies that prescribe the purposes and location of the overlay.

A. Adopted special district overlays are maintained by the department in the property-specific development standards notebook. The special district overlay development standards apply to any development proposal on the subject properties. The following SO development standards are in effect: SO-050;

B. Unless they are specifically modified by the provisions of this chapter, the standard requirements of this title and other City ordinances and regulations govern all development and land uses within special district overlays; and

C. A special district overlay on an individual site may be modified by property-specific development standards as provided in KMC 18.47.030. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 18.50 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS – DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIFIC USES

Sections:

18.50.010    Purpose.

18.50.050    Townhouse development.

18.50.060    Attached dwellings and group residences – Applicability.

18.50.070    Attached dwellings and group residences – Vehicular access and parking location.

18.50.080    Attached dwellings and group residences – Building facade modulation.

18.50.090    Mixed use development – Percentages of residential uses.

18.50.100    Mixed use development – Residential density.

18.50.110    Repealed.

18.50.120    Mixed use development – Design features.

18.50.140    Manufactured housing communities – Standards for existing parks.

18.50.150    Manufactured housing communities – Standards for new parks.

18.50.160    Manufactured housing communities – Alternative design standards.

18.50.180    Re-use of facilities – Purpose.

18.50.200    Re-use of facilities – General standards.

18.50.210    Re-use of facilities – Re-establishment of closed public school facilities.

18.50.220    Re-use of facilities – Standards for conversion of historic buildings.

18.50.230    Hazardous liquid and gas transmission pipelines.


18.50.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to improve the quality of development by providing building and site design standards for specific uses that:

A. Reduce the visual impact of large residential buildings from adjacent streets and properties;

B. Enhance the aesthetic character of large residential buildings;

C. Contain sufficient flexibility of standards to encourage creative and innovative site and building design;

D. Enhance aesthetics and environmental protection through site design; and

E. Allow for continued or adaptive re-use of historic resources while preserving their historic and architectural integrity. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.50.050 Townhouse development.

In the R-1 through R-6 zones and in the NB zone, a building that contains a grouping of attached townhouse units shall not exceed a 200-foot maximum length without a separation of at least 10 feet from other groupings or rows of townhouses. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.50.060 Attached dwellings and group residences – Applicability.

The standards of KMC 18.50.070 and 18.50.080 shall apply to all new apartment developments exceeding four dwelling units, new townhouse development and new group residences except Class I community residential facilities (CRF-I). Expansions of existing development that involve four or more dwelling units shall be subject to compliance with KMC 18.50.070 and 18.50.080. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.50.070 Attached dwellings and group residences – Vehicular access and parking location.

Except for development located in the downtown commercial or downtown residential zones, or RB-zoned properties that are not subject to P-suffix condition NS-P4 and which lie north of NE 175th Street, which must comply with Chapter 18.52 KMC, Downtown Design Standards, the following requirements apply:

A. On sites abutting an alley constructed to a width of at least 20 feet, apartment and townhouse development and all group residences except Class I community residential facilities (CRF-I) shall have parking areas placed to the rear of buildings with primary vehicular access via the alley, except when waived by the city manager due to physical site limitations.

B. When alley access is provided, no additional driveway access from the public street shall be allowed except as necessary to access parking under the structure or for fire protection.

C. When the number of uncovered common parking spaces for attached dwellings and group residences exceeds 30 spaces and when there is alley access, no more than 50 percent of these uncovered parking spaces shall be permitted between the street property line and any building, except when authorized by the city manager due to physical site limitations. [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.50.080 Attached dwellings and group residences – Building facade modulation.

Except for development located in the downtown commercial or downtown residential zones, or RB-zoned properties that are not subject to P-suffix condition NS-P4 and which lie north of NE 175th Street, which must comply with Chapter 18.52 KMC, Downtown Design Standards, apartment and townhouse developments and all group residences shall provide building facade modulation on facades exceeding 60 feet and facing abutting streets or properties zoned R-1 through R-6. The following standards shall apply:

A. The maximum wall length without modulation shall be 30 feet; and

B. The sum of the modulation depth and the modulation width shall be no less than eight feet. Neither the modulation depth nor the modulation width shall be less than two feet;

C. Any other technique approved by the city manager that achieves the intent of this section. [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.50.090 Mixed use development – Percentages of residential uses.

Residential uses in mixed use developments shall be limited to a maximum of 75 percent of the total built floor area when located in NB, CB, UC, WC, RB and DC zones; provided, that the total percentage may be increased by an additional 10 percent with the approval of the city manager. [Ord. 18-0454 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.50.100 Mixed use development – Residential density.

Base residential density for mixed use developments shall be determined using total site area according to KMC 18.30.020. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.50.110 Mixed use development – Building floor area.

Repealed by Ord. 14-0391. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.50.120 Mixed use development – Design features.

Mixed use development shall provide off-street parking behind or to the side of buildings, or enclosed within buildings, consistent with KMC 18.40.030 and any applicable design standards for the district. Relief from this requirement may be granted by the city manager only if the applicant can demonstrate that there is no practical site design to meet this requirement, or subject to exceptions for properties subject to Chapter 18.52 KMC, Downtown Design Standards. A 25 percent reduction of required parking is allowed if a mixed use development meets the criteria of KMC 18.40.040 for shared parking. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.50.140 Manufactured housing communities – Standards for existing parks.

A. Manufactured housing communities established prior to the effective date of this code shall continue to be governed by all standards relating to density, setbacks, landscaping and off-street parking in effect at the time they were approved.

B. Placement of new accessory structures and replacement mobile homes in these manufactured housing communities shall be governed by the dimensional standards in effect when the parks were approved, unless two or more replacement mobile homes are proposed to be installed adjacent to each other under the flexible setback option set forth in KMC 18.50.160. Where internal setbacks are not specified, the average of the prevailing setbacks on the pads to either side of the proposed new or replacement structure shall apply.

C. No spaces or pads in an existing manufactured housing community shall be used to accommodate recreational vehicles (RVs), except when the spaces or pads were specifically for RVs at the time the park was established.

D. An existing manufactured housing community may be enlarged, provided the proposed enlargement meets the standards set forth in KMC 18.50.150 and 18.50.160.

E. Both insignia and noninsignia mobile homes may be installed in established parks; provided, that all mobile homes supported by piers shall be fully skirted, and that nonstandard mobile homes shall meet the minimum livability and safety requirements set forth in KMC Title 15. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.50.150 Manufactured housing communities – Standards for new parks.

New manufactured housing communities shall be developed subject to the following standards:

A. A manufactured housing community shall be at least three acres in area;

B. Residential densities in a manufactured housing community shall be as follows:

1. Six dwellings per acre in R-4 zone;

2. The base density of the zone in which the park is located in all R-6 through R-48 zones; and

3. Manufactured housing communities shall be eligible to achieve the maximum density permitted in the zone by providing the affordable housing benefit for manufactured housing communities set forth in Chapter 18.80 KMC;

C. Both insignia and noninsignia mobile homes may be installed in manufactured housing communities; provided, that noninsignia mobile homes shall meet the minimum livability and safety requirements set forth in KMC Title 15;

D. A manufactured housing community shall not exceed 90 percent impervious surface coverage;

E. At least one of the off-street parking spaces required for each mobile home shall be located on or adjacent to each mobile home pad;

F. Internal roads and sidewalks shall provide access to each mobile home space and shall be constructed in accordance with the City street standards for residential minor access streets;

G. There shall be a minimum of 10 feet of separation maintained between all mobile homes on the site, unless the flexible setback option set forth in KMC 18.50.160 is used. Accessory structures shall be located no closer than:

1. Ten feet to mobile homes on adjacent spaces, unless constructed of noncombustible materials, in which case the minimum setback shall be five feet;

2. Five feet to accessory structures of mobile homes on adjacent spaces; and

3. Five feet to the mobile home or other accessory structures on the same space, except a carport or garage may be attached to the mobile home, and the separation may be waived when such structures are constructed of noncombustible materials;

H. All mobile homes and RVs supported by piers shall be fully skirted; and

I. A manufactured housing community may include a storage area for RVs owned by residents of the park, provided the storage area contains no utility hookups and no RV within the storage area shall be used as living quarters. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.50.160 Manufactured housing communities – Alternative design standards.

As an alternative to the building separation and internal street standards of KMC 18.50.150:

A. Building separation requirements or setbacks between mobile homes and accessory structures on adjacent spaces may be modified, provided:

1. The common walls meet the fire protection standards set forth in the International Building Code and the standards set forth in the International Fire Code for duplexes, multifamily and condominium developments, as applicable; and

2. Rental agreement clauses, by-laws or other legal mechanisms stipulate maintenance responsibilities for structures, fences and yards;

B. Private streets may be used with a minimum driving surface of 22 feet in width, provided:

1. The streets comply in all other respects with the street standards;

2. All required parking is located off-street and as specified in KMC 18.50.150(E); and

3. Such streets shall not:

a. Directly connect two or more points of vehicular access to the park; or

b. Serve over 100 dwelling units within the park. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.50.180 Re-use of facilities – Purpose.

The purposes of KMC 18.50.200 through 18.50.220 are to:

A. Encourage the adaptive re-use of existing public facilities which will continue to serve the community, and ensure public review of redevelopment plans, by allowing:

1. Temporary re-use of closed public school facilities retained in school district ownership, and the reconversion of a temporary re-use back to a school use;

2. Permanent re-use of surplus nonresidential facilities (e.g., schools, fire stations, government facilities) not retained in school district or public agency ownership; or

3. Permanent re-use of historic structures listed on the National Register or designated as City landmarks. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.50.200 Re-use of facilities – General standards.

The interim or permanent re-use of surplus nonresidential facilities in residential zoned areas shall require that no more than 50 percent of the original floor area be demolished for either permanent or interim re-use of facilities. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.50.210 Re-use of facilities – Re-establishment of closed public school facilities.

The re-establishment or reconversion of an interim nonschool use of school facilities back to school uses shall require a site plan and the issuance of a change of use permit pursuant to KMC Title 15. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.50.220 Re-use of facilities – Standards for conversion of historic buildings.

In order to ensure that significant features of the property are protected pursuant to Chapter 2.20 KMC, the following standards shall apply to conversion of historic buildings:

A. Gross floor area of building additions or new buildings required for the conversion shall not exceed 20 percent of the gross floor area of the historic building, unless allowed by the zone;

B. Conversions to apartments shall not exceed one dwelling unit for each 3,600 square feet of lot area, unless allowed by the zone; and

C. Any construction required for the conversion shall require certification of appropriateness from the City landmark commission. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.50.230 Hazardous liquid and gas transmission pipelines.

A. Tracts and easements containing hazardous liquid and gas transmission pipelines and required setbacks from such pipelines may include the following uses, subject to other regulations applicable to each use and approval of the holder of the easement: utility structures not normally occupied necessary for the operation of the pipeline, landscaping, trails, open space, keeping of animals, agriculture, forestry, commercial signage, wireless communication facilities, and other compatible uses as specified on the face of the recorded plat or short plat; provided, that structures designed for human occupancy shall never be allowed within pipeline tracts, easements or setbacks.

B. Hazardous liquid and gas transmission pipelines shall not be located in aquifer recharge areas, landslide hazard areas or erosion hazard areas. When it is impractical to avoid such areas, special engineering precautions should be taken to protect public health, safety and welfare. [Ord. 16-0426 § 7 (Att. E); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 18.52 DOWNTOWN DESIGN STANDARDS

Sections:

Article I. Introduction and Applicability

18.52.010    Purpose and intent.

18.52.020    Pedestrian-oriented streets and uses.

18.52.030    Scale of downtown development.

18.52.040    Example images included in standards.

18.52.050    Recommended guiding principles – General.

18.52.060    Additional principles – Northwest Quadrant.

18.52.070    Applicability.

18.52.075    Design review process.

Article II. Site Design – Standards for All Uses

18.52.100    Pedestrian walkways.

18.52.110    Northwest Quadrant circulation plan.

18.52.120    Public spaces and plazas.

18.52.130    Furnishings.

18.52.140    Site lighting.

18.52.150    Building location/setbacks (for commercial/mixed use buildings).

18.52.160    Building setbacks (for residential/primarily residential uses).

18.52.170    Surface parking lot location.

18.52.180    Parking lot screening.

18.52.190    Location of driveways.

18.52.200    Outdoor service and storage areas.

Article III. Building Design – Standards for All Uses

18.52.210    Corner features.

18.52.220    Roof form.

18.52.230    Structured parking.

18.52.240    Blank wall and side wall screening.

18.52.250    Pedestrian bridges.

Article IV. Building Design – Standards for Commercial/Mixed Use Buildings

18.52.260    Visible building entrances.

18.52.270    Ground floor facades.

18.52.280    Ground floor transparency and visibility.

18.52.290    Weather protection.

18.52.300    Building materials.

18.52.310    Upper level stepbacks, mass, and bulk.

Article V. Building Design – Standards for Residential/Primarily Residential Uses

18.52.320    Primary residential entrances.

18.52.330    Building mass and bulk.

18.52.340    Materials.

18.52.350    Windows.

Article I. Introduction and Applicability 


18.52.010 Purpose and intent.

The Kenmore downtown design standards are intended to implement the City’s comprehensive plan and vision for the creation of “...a community with an attractive, vital, pedestrian-oriented City center offering commercial, civic, cultural and park spaces, integrated with higher density housing...” and “...a community with clear design standards creating attractive, functional, and enduring buildings and places...”

The purpose of the downtown design standards is to create a pedestrian-oriented downtown by identifying appropriate site and development standards, including green infrastructure, for new development.

The Kenmore design standards are structured in the following manner. [Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.020 Pedestrian-oriented streets and uses.

The highest priority is to provide as much guidance to those elements that affect the development pattern and pedestrian orientation: building orientation and location on-site, relationship to the street, and circulation. Standards relating to these topics are more specific and relate to: 

A. A sidewalk environment which is lively, attractive, comfortable, and safe;

B. Rich visual detail in the built environment which tells the user how buildings and places are used; 

C. Visual predominance of buildings, walkways, and landscape, less prominent signs, and parking lots and structures which are generally concealed from view. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.030 Scale of downtown development.

Standards relating to the character of development are structured to provide greater flexibility in development and building design. They provide a palette of options to consider during the design process and address: 

A. Ground floors of buildings; 

B. Buildings of several stories which create continuity along the streetscape and walkways; 

C. Detail in building mass and form which creates human scale with the parts of larger buildings. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.040 Example images included in standards.*

The photographs in this document are included to visually depict the type of site or building design considerations that could meet the intent of the Kenmore design standards. The images are examples only and are not intended to be interpreted as the only design approach possible. 

These photographs correspond to the intent of the visioning process and visual preference survey conducted during the comprehensive plan process and independent research efforts by the planning commission conducted in May 2002. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]

*Code reviser’s note: Exhibit A to Ordinance 03-0176 contains the photographs for the Kenmore downtown design standards. A copy for public review and examination is on file and available in the office of the city clerk.


18.52.050 Recommended guiding principles – General.

A. Plan for and implement an attractive, vital, pedestrian-oriented, transit friendly City center offering commercial, civic, cultural and park spaces, integrated with higher density housing. 

B. Address the different characteristics of downtown by encouraging regional serving development south of SR-522 and local serving development north of SR-522. 

C. Support redevelopment in accordance with the vision for the downtown through investment in public infrastructure including transportation, utility, and civic infrastructure. 

D. Give priority to creating indoor and outdoor public spaces, promote community activities meeting the needs of a range of ages and interests. Outdoor spaces should include plazas, parks, and public green spaces. Encourage the efficient use of space and shared uses where appropriate. 

E. Give priority consideration to strong linkages between the four downtown quadrants and the surrounding neighborhoods. Pedestrian crossings, including a bridge(s), over SR-522, linking the north and south quadrants, should be readily accessible, functional, visually attractive, safe, and inviting links to key destinations, and should provide a Kenmore identity. 

F. Create a downtown circulation system that promotes mobility for all modes of travel, emphasizing a loop road circulation system. 

G. Create an interconnected system of trails, sidewalks, bikeways, and open spaces in downtown. 

H. Promote the revitalization and expansion of business and retail compatible with the character of the downtown districts. Encourage businesses that draw patrons during both the day and evening. Provide an adequate mix of on-street, surface and structured parking, and encourage shared parking options. 

I. Provide high density, high amenity (includes public spaces and private facilities) pedestrian-oriented residential neighborhoods meeting the housing needs of a variety of income levels, and developed at densities high enough to support transit and commercial uses. Off-street parking should be encouraged. 

J. Coordinate public and private investment to achieve optimal leverage of public funds. 

K. Create an identity for the downtown and SR-522 by giving priority consideration to improving the appearance of the physical environment through design guidelines, sidewalks, landscaping, street trees, public art and signage.

L. The downtown should acknowledge and create a beneficial and symbiotic relationship with SR-522. 

M. Integrate and manage downtown development to support sound ecological principles by responding to natural landforms, providing stormwater management, improving water quality, and retaining and adding green spaces. 

N. Identify downtown view corridors of significant off-site features (i.e., Lake Washington, Cascades, and surrounding hillsides), giving priority consideration to provision of public physical and visual access from the downtown quadrants to the waterfront. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.060 Additional principles – Northwest Quadrant.

A. Locate the Civic Center facility (including City Hall, a community center and library) in the Northwest Quadrant to provide the greatest stimulus to redevelopment. If there is a truly unique opportunity in another quadrant of the downtown that would meet the balance of the Civic Center criteria, it should not be ruled out. 

B. Locate a multi-modal transportation facility in the Northwest Quadrant linked with other public facilities and spaces, functioning as a key node within a larger regional system. 

C. Locate the Civic Center facility at a highly visible and/or accessible location, if possible taking advantage of view corridors to Lake Washington. The facility should provide long-term expansion potential and opportunities for private use of public space. Additional potential civic uses should be considered. The facility should be prominent, distinguishable and visually attractive. 

D. A large, functional, open, outdoor space should be created to function as a focal point and “public square,” providing opportunities for public and private gatherings. 

E. Give priority consideration to public purchase of parcels in the Northwest Quadrant where desired private investment is least likely to occur. Public investment may include purchase, long-term lease or other owner/tenant options. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.070 Applicability.

A. Design standards shall apply as depicted in Figure 18.52.070.A.1.

B. A property owner or developer electing to develop under Chapter 18.29 KMC, Transit Oriented Development (TOD) District Overlay, shall comply with Standard 1 as described in subsection C of this section.

C. The components of the design standards shall apply as follows: (X = design component required under the specific standard)

 

	Design Standard	Standard 1	Standard 2	Standard 3

	Article II. Site Design – Standards for All Uses	 	 	 

	18.52.100	Pedestrian walkways	X	X	X

	18.52.110	Northwest Quadrant circulation plan	X1	 	 

	18.52.120	Public spaces and plazas	X	 	X

	18.52.130	Furnishings	X	 	X

	18.52.140	Site lighting	X	X	X

	18.52.150	Building location/setbacks (for commercial/mixed use buildings)	X	X	X

	18.52.160	Building setbacks (for residential/primarily residential uses)	X	 	X

	18.52.170	Surface parking lot location	X	X	X

	18.52.180	Parking lot screening	X	X	X

	18.52.190	Location of driveways	X	X	X

	18.52.200	Outdoor service and storage areas	X	X	X

	Article III. Building Design – Standards for All Uses	 	 	 

	18.52.210	Corner features	X	X	X

	18.52.220	Roof form	X	X	X

	18.52.230	Structured parking	X	X	X

	18.52.240	Blank wall and side wall screening	X	X2	X

	18.52.250	Pedestrian bridges	X	X	 

	Article IV. Building Design – Standards for Commercial/Mixed Use Buildings	 	 	 

	18.52.260	Visible building entrances	X	X	X

	18.52.270	Ground floor facades	X	 	X

	18.52.280	Ground floor transparency and visibility	X	 	X

	18.52.290	Weather protection	X	 	 

	18.52.300	Building materials	X	X	X

	18.52.310	Upper level stepbacks, mass, and bulk	X	X	X

	Article V. Building Design – Standards for Residential/Primarily Residential Uses	 	 	 

	18.52.320	Primary residential entrances	X	X	X

	18.52.330	Building mass and bulk	X	X	X

	18.52.340	Materials	X	X	X

	18.52.350	Windows	X	X	X

1 Applicable to the portion of the downtown identified in the Northwest Quadrant Circulation Plan.

2 KMC 18.52.240(B)(1), (B)(3) and (C) only.

D. In the event of conflict between the downtown design standards and any other applicable code, the city manager shall determine the appropriate application of the conflicting codes, recognizing the need to protect public health, safety, and welfare, any specific interpretation criteria, as well as furtherance of the intent of the comprehensive plan and these downtown design standards.

E. The following categories of improvements shall comply with applicable design standards:

1. New construction;

2. Exterior remodels of existing structures;

3. Parking reconfigurations;

4. Building expansions.

F. The following categories of improvements are exempt from applicable design standards:

1. Re-roofing that does not modify the roof structure;

2. Repainting;

3. Interior remodels;

4. Mechanical equipment replacement;

5. Parking lot pavement patching, or stall repainting that does not involve reconfiguration;

6. Normal maintenance or minor repair;

7. Any activity in which the total cost or fair market value (whichever is higher) of labor and materials combined does not exceed $15,000; provided, that the improvement does not involve priority standards listed in subsection G of this section. This cost/fair market value figure shall be adjusted upward by five percent annually to address a cost of living increase; provided, that within a three-year period, if the total $15,000 amount is exceeded, future improvements shall be subject to applicable design standards.

G. The degree to which each standard applies to a redevelopment project shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis in an effort to achieve an overall design which meets the purpose and intent of the downtown design standards. In determining the degree of applicability, the city manager shall give priority to design standards which address building placement, parking standards, window/door treatments, and first floor facades.

H. For proposed existing structure exterior remodels, or existing structure expansions, parking reconfigurations, or other activities subject to design standards that are less than new construction, the city manager shall determine the extent of compliance with the design standards as appropriate to recognize current conditions and further the intent of the downtown design standards. The required design or development standards shall be related to the improvement proposed. For example, if a parking reconfiguration is proposed, the required design standards should address pedestrian walkways between parking lots and building entrances or parking lot screening; or if a building entrance is modified, visible building entrance requirements should be applied.


[IMAGE]


[Ord. 18-0454 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 15-0406 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.075 Design review process.

A. Applications subject to design review shall be reviewed and processed following the permit procedures for the primary permit application(s) consistent with Chapter 19.25 KMC. 

B. Design Departure. The city manager may grant approval to depart from strict adherence to the design regulations for new construction/development if:

1. The proposal results in superior design and fulfills the policy basis for the applicable design regulations and design guidelines; and

2. The departure will not have any substantial detrimental effect on nearby properties and the City or the neighborhood. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]

Article II. Site Design – Standards for All Uses 


18.52.100 Pedestrian walkways.

A. Intent.

1. Pedestrian Network. To create on-site pedestrian networks from streets and drives to building entrances, through parking lots to connect buildings to the street (see surface parking location standards), and between sites. 

2. Through Block Connections. To create through block connections between blocks of development, between streets, and connecting streets to public spaces. 

B. Standards – Required.

1. Locations. Clear and visible pedestrian walkways shall be provided in the following locations: 

a. Through Block Connections. 

(1) Northwest Quadrant. If the property abuts a proposed pedestrian route designated in the Northwest Quadrant circulation plan, see KMC 18.52.110. In areas not identified on the circulation plan, one pedestrian walkway shall be provided for an average of every 300 feet or less of street frontages in the north-south and east-west directions to create a linked pedestrian walkway system around and through the Northwest Quadrant. Distances may vary from exactly 300 feet to accommodate linking adjacent development on a case-by-case basis.

(a) Public spaces shall be linked to adjacent streets and developments.

(b) Exact locations of pedestrian walkways shall be determined at the time of development to accommodate linkages between adjacent developments.

(2) Northeast Quadrant and TOD District Overlay. In the Northeast Quadrant and for properties electing to develop under Chapter 18.29 KMC in the TOD district overlay, one pedestrian walkway shall be provided between the north and south end of the property, spaced an average of every 300 feet or less of street frontages. The walkway must connect with walkways located on other properties established in accordance with this condition. Distances may vary from exactly 300 feet to accommodate linking adjacent developments on a case-by-case basis. The comprehensive plan downtown circulation concept shall be a general guide to priority pedestrian links. 

(a) Public spaces shall be linked to adjacent streets and developments. 

(b) Exact locations of pedestrian walkways shall be determined at the time of development to accommodate linkages between adjacent developments. 

b. Street to Building Entrances. Between a public right-of-way and building entrances where the building is set back from the street, sidewalk, or parking area.

c. Parking Lots to Building Entrances. Between parking lots and building entrances.

d. Building to Building. Between buildings where multiple structures are a part of a single development project. 

e. As identified on the Northwest Quadrant circulation plan, which is located in KMC 18.52.110.

2. Minimum/Average Width.

a. For buildings up to three stories in height, pedestrian walkways shall be a minimum of four feet wide with a minimum average width of six feet. The minimum/average walkway width does not include additional areas which may be required for landscaping or site furnishings. 

b. For buildings greater than three stories in height, one of the following shall be used: 

(1) A minimum of eight feet wide with a minimum average width of 12 feet. The minimum/average walkway width does not include additional areas which may be required for landscaping or site furnishings.

(2) Building walls above three stories in height shall be stepped back from the first three stories by 10 feet. (See building locations/setbacks, KMC 18.52.150 and 18.52.160.) 

3. Lines of Sight. Locate walkways with clear sight lines for safety. Landscaping and site furnishings in the walkway shall not obstruct visibility of the walkway or sight lines to building entrances. 

4. Clearly Defined Walkways. Define all pedestrian walkways using a combination of one or more of the following techniques: 

a. Special Paving. Scored concrete, stained/colored concrete, concrete pavers, paving inlays, mosaics, or other special paving material. Not all portions of the pedestrian walkway are required to be paved; however, a minimum of 60 percent of the pedestrian walkway shall provide an all-weather walking surface;

b. Architectural Features. Trellises, railing, low seat walls, weather protection, bollards, or other architectural features. Chain link fences are not allowed; 

c. Landscaped Edges. A continuous, landscaped area a minimum of three feet wide flanking at least one side of the pedestrian walkway. Landscaping shall meet the City’s landscaping requirements. In the case of through block connections, this subsection (B)(4)(c) shall apply in all cases, in addition to either subsection (B)(4)(a) or (b) of this section.

5. Lighting. Pedestrian walkways shall include lighting such as pedestrian lights, bollards, and accent lighting to assist pedestrian navigation and promote a safe and comfortable walking space. 

6. Pedestrian Walkways in Parking Lots. Where a walkway abuts or intersects a vehicular route (a driveway or driving aisle within a parking lot), landscaping shall be required consistent with subsection (B)(4)(c) of this section. If the walk-way abuts a driveway or driving aisle on both sides, subsection (B)(4)(c) of this section shall apply to both sides. 

C. Not Allowed. Narrow breezeways between buildings without architectural embellishments or site furnishings shall not be allowed. [Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 15-0406 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.110 Northwest Quadrant circulation plan.


[IMAGE]


Notes: This map is intended for planning purposes only and is not guaranteed to show accurate measurement. Signals at pedestrian crossings will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. 

Source: Arai/Jackson Architects and Planners and Berger/ABAM Engineers. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.120 Public spaces and plazas.

A. Intent.

1. Comfortable and Usable Public Space. Create usable, accessible, and inviting public open space for pedestrians. 

B. Standards – Required.

1. Access. Public spaces shall be visible and accessible to the public. All public spaces shall have pedestrian access from the primary public right-of-way or designated pedestrian walkway. 

2. Public Space Amenities. Public spaces and plazas shall include at least one or more of each of the following elements (in subsections (B)(2)(a) through (c) of this section): 

a. Special Paving. Scored concrete, stained/colored concrete, concrete pavers, paving inlays, mosaics, or other special paving material. 

b. Landscaping. Trees, shrubs, trellises, flowers, or container plants.

c. Seating Area. Benches, low seating walls. Four linear feet or at least one seat per 60 square feet of plaza area or open space. 

In addition to the requirements in subsections (B)(2)(a) through (c) of this section, public spaces and plazas shall also contain one or more of the following elements: 

d. Public art, fountain, or sculpture; 

e. Drinking fountain; 

f. Gazebos or other covered/sheltered space;

g. Other elements which meet the intent of this section such as grade/elevation changes, historic markers, art elements, pools, or others.

3. Site Lighting. Use site lighting such as pedestrian lights, bollards, accent lighting, or building-mounted lighting to provide safe and comfortable public spaces. See site lighting standards, KMC 18.52.140.

4. Solar Access. Where feasible, locate public spaces and courtyards to maximize southern and western sun exposure. [Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.130 Furnishings.

A. Intent. 

1. Furnishings Add Comfort and Detail. To create inviting, pedestrian-friendly public spaces by incorporating site furnishings in plazas, public spaces, building entries, and in other pedestrian areas. 

B. Standards – Required.

1. Durable Furnishings. Site furnishings (benches, tables, bicycle racks, bollards, trash receptacles) and pedestrian amenities shall be made of durable, vandal resistant, and weather resistant materials which do not retain rainwater. 

2. Siting. Site furnishings shall be located in all required public spaces, such as: 

a. Plazas, pedestrian walkways and other pedestrian areas; 

b. Where building setbacks are allowed to: 

(1) Highlight building entrances (a minimum three and one-half feet recessed depth or greater than or equal to 16 square feet); 

(2) Provide seating in a landscaped public area. Seating shall be provided at a ratio of four linear feet or at least one seat per 60 square feet of plaza area or open space.

3. Placement. Site furnishings shall not impede or block pedestrian access to plazas, open spaces, or building entrances. 

4. Incorporate Site Furnishings. Use a combination of four or more site furnishings in required public spaces. Site furnishings include but are not limited to: 

a. Trash receptacles (required as one of the four site furnishings);

b. Benches/seating;

c. Tables; 

d. Bike racks; 

e. Drinking fountains;

f. Pedestrian-scaled lighting (other than street lights in the public right-of-way);

g. Public art; 

h. Container plants. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.140 Site lighting.

A. Intent.

1. Adequate Lighting Levels. To provide adequate lighting levels in pedestrian areas such as plazas, pedestrian walkways, parking areas, building entries, and other public areas. 

2. Complement Street Lighting. To provide pedestrian-scaled, accent, and festival lighting to accompany street lighting.

3. Safety. To provide well lit, comfortable, and safe pedestrian areas. 

4. Minimize Night Glow. To ensure adequate lighting is confined to the project site and minimizes night glow and impacts to adjacent properties. 

B. Standards – Required.

1. Light Pedestrian Areas. Use pedestrian-scaled lighting to define plazas, courtyards, pedestrian walkways, crosswalks, building entries, and other pedestrian areas. Pedestrian-scaled lighting includes but is not limited to: 

a. Pedestrian lights (maximum 14-foot height); 

b. Bollard lights; 

c. Accent lighting. 

2. Shielding. All site lighting shall be shielded and directed away from adjacent buildings to avoid glare and “night glow.” Site lighting will be reviewed on a project-specific basis to ensure site lighting is directed onto the pedestrian area and away from adjacent uses. Site lighting review will address: 

a. Foot-candle illumination; 

b. Optics; 

c. Shielding techniques; 

d. Consideration of adjacent uses, especially adjacent residential buildings. 

3. Adequate Illumination. Site lighting shall be reviewed on a project-specific basis to ensure pedestrian areas are adequately lit. Review considerations shall include: 

a. Spacing;

b. Height of light fixture; 

c. Shielding techniques. 

4. Complementary Style. Site lighting shall complement and coordinate with other site furnishings used throughout the site development project and shall complement street lighting in the public right-of-way. 

5. Light Special Areas. Use accent lighting at focal points such as building entrances, site entrances, public art, and landscape features. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.150 Building location/setbacks (for commercial/mixed use buildings).

A. Intent.

1. Retail Visibility. To ensure visibility of retail businesses, to establish active, lively uses along the sidewalk, and to encourage strolling in the downtown.

B. Standards – Required.

1. Buildings Close to Sidewalk. The majority of buildings shall be located directly abutting the sidewalk except where set back to highlight building entrances, plazas or to provide wider sidewalks, as follows:

a. Highlight Entrances. A minimum setback of four feet shall be allowed to highlight entrances or to provide wider sidewalks;

b. Landscaped Area. A maximum setback of up to 10 feet shall be allowed to provide seating in a landscaped public area;

c. Corner Lots. On corner lots, the building shall face the primary street; the primary entrance must be on one of the two streets, with the location determined on a case-by-case basis, evaluating access, volumes, adjacent uses, on-site and through-site circulation, and other fixed site features;

d. Plazas at Corners. A maximum setback of up to 10 feet on corner lots shall be allowed to provide plaza space;

e. Multiple buildings in one development, or properties subject to compliance with KMC 18.52.170(B)(2), surface parking lot location street frontage. At least 55 percent of the lot frontage shall be occupied by the primary building. The remaining buildings and associated parking may be set back further from the street. In cases where the development is on a corner lot, the building shall abut the primary street; the primary entrance must be on one of the two streets, with the location determined on a case-by-case basis, evaluating access, volumes, adjacent uses, on-site and through-site circulation, and other fixed site features;

f. Properties Fronting SR-522. Parcels fronting SR-522 shall be set back 10 feet from the right-of-way to allow for sidewalks, provided for all parcels fronting on the south side of SR-522 and zoned regional business, located east of 61st Avenue NE and west of 68th Avenue NE, the minimum street setback requirements shall be as follows:

(1) Ground floors shall maintain a minimum and maximum setback of 10 feet.

(2) For stories located below the ground floor, the minimum setback shall be zero feet, and the maximum setback shall be 10 feet.

(3) For facades above the ground floor (minimum elevation of 15 feet above street level), the minimum setback at any one point shall be no less than five feet, and the maximum setback at any one point shall be no greater than 10 feet. The setback may be averaged between a minimum of five feet and a maximum of 10 feet for purposes of modulation, but shall not be less than or greater than the minimum or maximum setbacks at any one point;

g. Recessed entrances are allowed;

h. On-Street Parking. Buildings may be set back to a planned right-of-way boundary for the purposes of adding on-street parking. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.160 Building setbacks (for residential/primarily residential uses).

A. Intent.

1. Pedestrian Orientation and Densities. To ensure pedestrian orientation and desired densities in downtown. 

2. Transition and Buffer. To provide minor transition and buffer areas between streets and residences which can function as outdoor space. 

B. Standards – Required.

1. Buildings Close to Sidewalk. A minimum six-foot setback, with an average setback of eight feet per street frontage, shall be required of primary structures to allow for shallow, residential front yards. The minimum setback for garages, carports, and paved parking shall be 10 feet. In the Northwest Quadrant, maximum setbacks for any structures shall be 10 feet. 

2. Modulate Street Facing Facades. Use minor modulation techniques such as: 

a. Recessed entries;

b. Landscaped gardens; 

c. Plazas; 

d. Courtyards. 

3. Palette of Front Yard Transition Elements. Use two or more of the following elements to provide front yard transitions and create usable front yard space: 

a. Steps; 

b. Low fences; 

c. Trellises; 

d. Site furnishings; 

e. Low hedges, trees, and landscaped borders;

f. Rain gardens or bioretention facilities;

g. Patios if a low fence or trellis is included for added privacy. 

4. Palette of Entrance Elements. Provide entrance elements such as: 

a. Gates;

b. Archways or arbors;

c. Walkway covers;

d. Special paving; 

e. Pedestrian lighting. [Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.170 Surface parking lot location.

A. Intent.

1. Maintain Active Street Frontage. To maintain contiguous active pedestrian street frontages by avoiding parking lot siting along sidewalks and street frontages. 

2. Impacts. To minimize visual impact of parking lots through screening where parking lots are unavoidable on street frontages. 

B. Standards – Required.

1. Location of Parking Lots. For all new development, parking lots shall be located behind or to the side of buildings, or enclosed within or underneath the building. Parking lots shall be avoided along primary street frontages; on a corner lot, the primary entrance must be on one of the two streets, with the location determined on a case-by-case basis, evaluating access, volumes, adjacent uses, on-site and through-site circulation, and other fixed site features. The parking lot screening requirements in KMC 18.52.180 apply where a surface parking lot or portions of a surface parking lot abut a public right-of-way. Parking lots shall not be located between a public right-of-way and the building unless the following exceptions apply: 

a. No other feasible alternative exists; or 

b. The property has frontage on SR-522 and takes primary access from SR-522 as of May 8, 2003; and/or

c. The development consists of multiple buildings in one development on a minimum of four acres; 

in which case, the provisions of subsection (B)(2) of this section apply.

2. Street Frontage. Where consistent with the exceptions of subsection (B)(1) of this section, parking lots on street frontages shall be located between buildings, with no less than 55 percent of the property street frontage devoted to the building facade. The street frontage devoted to surface parking shall also be appropriately screened per the parking lot screening standards in KMC 18.52.180. 

3. Pedestrian Walkways. Where a surface parking lot is located between the public right-of-way and the primary building, a pedestrian walkway shall be provided through the parking lot to connect the building to the street per the pedestrian walkway standards in KMC 18.52.100 and the development standards of KMC 18.40.100(C). [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.180 Parking lot screening.

A. Intent.

1. Reduce Visual Prominence. To reduce visual impact of parking lots through screening techniques. 

B. Standards – Required. 

1. Perimeter Screening. Where surface parking lots are adjacent to a public right-of-way, the parking lot shall provide a minimum 10-foot-wide planting strip between the parking lot and right(s)-of-way. Landscape requirements in Chapter 18.35 KMC also apply. 

2. Screening Techniques. Year-round perimeter screening shall provide a visually impervious screen utilizing one or more of the following screening techniques: 

a. Screen Walls. Low walls, opaque hedge walls, etc., shall be a minimum of three feet in height and maximum of four feet in height. Where screen walls are used, the 10-foot-wide planting strip requirement may be reduced by two feet. 

b. Screen Wall Transparency. For screen walls taller than four feet in height, all elements above four feet shall be made of semitransparent materials, i.e., lattice walls, trellises, etc. Those portions of the screen wall taller than four feet in height shall be a minimum of 85 percent transparency (i.e., see-through railing, trellis, or similar treatment).

c. Evergreen Shrubs. Shrubs shall be maintained at a maximum four feet in height from the sidewalk to maintain visibility into the site for security/safety purposes. At planting, shrubs shall be a minimum two-gallon pot size or balled and burlapped equivalent. 

d. Trees. A mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs. At planting, deciduous trees shall be a minimum three-inch caliper. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six-foot height to the uppermost branching point at planting. 

e. Wood Fences. If a wood fence is used, the fence shall have decorative detailing at the top (i.e., trellis materials) and an eight-foot-wide planting strip. The requirements of subsection (B)(2)(b) of this section are also applicable. 

f. Bioretention Landscaping. Bioretention landscaping may be used within the perimeter screen in conjunction with one or more of the options in subsections (B)(2)(a) thorough (e) of this section.

3. Supporting Ground Cover. Evergreen ground cover, other than grass, shall be used in addition to the screening techniques identified above. A maximum of 45 percent of all ground cover required shall be dedicated to grass. 

C. Not Allowed.

1. Plain Fence. Unadorned wood fences or chain link fencing is not allowed. [Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.190 Location of driveways.

A. Intent.

1. Minimize Sidewalk Interruptions. To maintain continuous, uninterrupted sidewalks by minimizing, consolidating, and eliminating driveways and promoting shared access to the extent possible.

B. Standards – Required.

1. Locate Driveways. Locate vehicular driveways on side streets and alleys unless the primary street is the only means of access to the site. 

2. Parking Lot Entrances. Parking lot entrances shall be clearly identified with markers such as a trellis, monument, low wall, or landscaping. 

3. Continuous Sidewalks. Extend sidewalk paving across driveway to maintain sidewalk continuity. 

4. Kenmore Street Standards. Driveway locations shall satisfy the requirements of the current City adopted street standards. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.200 Outdoor service and storage areas.

A. Intent.

1. Screening. To maintain design continuity by screening mechanical, service, and storage areas. 

B. Standards – Required.

1. Siting of On-Site Storage Areas. All outdoor service and storage areas such as mechanical equipment, outdoor storage, trash/recycling containers, etc., shall be fully screened and shall not be visible from adjacent public streets or from views above from adjacent buildings. The Kenmore development standards and design requirements of KMC 18.30.250 also apply. 

2. At-Grade Service Areas. At-grade storage areas such as outdoor storage and/or trash/recycling containers shall be screened from adjacent streets and public rights-of-way and from views above from adjacent buildings. Pedestrian-oriented trash receptacles along walkways and in public spaces are excepted from this requirement. 

3. Screening Techniques. Service area screening shall be 100 percent sight-obscuring, year-round, utilizing one or more of the following screening techniques: 

a. Fences and Walls. Fencing and wall materials shall be integrated and compatible with the design of the building (i.e., use the building’s materials on fence columns); 

b. Adjacent to Pedestrian Walkways. Where an outdoor storage area is adjacent to a pedestrian walkway, fences installed for screening may be used only in combination with either landscaping, vines, trellis, or similar landscaping screening technique; 

c. Evergreen Hedges and Shrubs. Landscaping shall meet the City’s landscaping requirements for Type I landscaping; 

d. Trees. A mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees. Landscaping shall meet the City’s landscaping requirements for Type I landscaping. 

e. Bioretention Landscaping. Bioretention landscaping may be used within the perimeter screen in conjunction with one or more of the options in subsections (B)(3)(a) through (d) of this section.

4. Mechanical Equipment. Locate mechanical equipment early in the design process to ensure integration with the building design. Roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be grouped together, integrated into the building design, and thoroughly screened from view from the street level and above from adjacent buildings. Roof-mounted screening techniques include but are not limited to: 

a. Roof Treatment. Roofline designed to screen visibility of mechanical equipment from an adjacent public street(s);

b. Paint. Paint mechanical equipment to match or approximate the color of the roof;

c. Setbacks. Position mechanical equipment away from building edges. [Ord. 16-0428 § 13 (Att. I); Ord. 16-0426 § 7 (Att. E); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]

Article III. Building Design – Standards for All Uses 


18.52.210 Corner features.

A. Intent.

1. To ensure architectural interest and pedestrian-scaled detail in downtown.

2. To allow for comfortable pedestrian queuing space.

B. Standards – Required.

1. Locations Where Standards Apply. Corner features are required at locations specified on the Northwest Quadrant circulation map, KMC 18.52.110; outside of the Northwest Quadrant, corner features shall be provided when conditions in subsections (B)(2) and (3) of this section are present.

2. Corner Features for Buildings at Intersections Facing Two Streets.

a. Architectural Features. Building sides that face corners of public streets shall be treated architecturally to emphasize the corner location. Appropriate expressions include: 

(1) Tower forms;

(2) Prominent building entries; 

(3) Oversized window treatment;

(4) Special rooflines; 

(5) Plazas; 

(6) Other treatments which meet the intent of this standard. 

b. Building Corner Setbacks. First floors of building corners facing intersections of two streets shall be set back 10 feet to accommodate pedestrian circulation. Columns are allowed in the setback area up to the size of a two-foot square footprint. 

3. Corner Features for Buildings at Intersections of a Street and a Pedestrian Walkway and/or Two Pedestrian Walkways. Entrances to pedestrian walkways shall be visually emphasized by the use of two of the following elements: 

a. Special Paving. Scored concrete, stained/colored concrete, concrete pavers, paving inlays, mosaics, or other special paving material which is different from the standard sidewalk material; 

b. Landscaping. Trees, shrubs, trellises, flowers, or container plants;

c. Seating Area. Benches, low seating walls; 

d. Site lighting; 

e. City signage. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.220 Roof form.

A. Intent.

1. Distinctive Profiles. To ensure that roof forms provide distinctive profiles and visual interest. 



2. Express Base and Top. To provide details which break buildings into distinct visible elements of base and top (see upper level stepbacks, mass and bulk standards in KMC 18.52.310 for details regarding building modulation and articulation). 

B. Standards – Required.

1. Commercial Buildings. Commercial buildings shall use one of the following elements to create a prominent edge: 

a. Extended parapets;

b. Projecting cornices;

c. Pitched or sloped roofs; 

d. Decorative molding if greater than or equal to 10 inches wide. 

2. Predominantly Residential Buildings. Buildings which contain predominantly residential uses shall use the following elements to break up the massiveness of an uninterrupted flat roof: 

a. Dormers;

b. Pitched roofs;

c. Stepbacks;

d. Roof gardens;

e. Cornices; 

f. Parapets; and 

g. Intersecting roof forms. 

These types of roof treatments shall be determined at the discretion of the city manager. 

C. Not Allowed.

1. Flat, Unadorned Roofs. Flat roofs without architectural embellishments are not allowed on buildings in the downtown. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.230 Structured parking.

A. Intent.

1. Visually Integrated. To visually integrate parking garages with other downtown uses through active ground floor uses, and the use of architectural treatments, such as materials, treatments of openings, and human-scaled facade elements. 

2. Garage Elevations. To ensure that parking garage facades facing public rights-of-way screen cars from view and resemble commercial, office, civic, and mixed use building elevations. 

B. Standards – Required.

1. Retail Frontage Along Streets. Parking structures shall provide retail usages for at least 50 percent of the first floor street frontages (sites fronting 182nd excepted).

2. Treatments in Nonretail Areas. Portions of ground level facade not occupied by retail uses shall integrate one or more of the following into the ground level facade: 

a. Ornamental grillwork (other than plain horizontal or vertical bars);

b. Decorative artwork (metal panels, ceramic, mosaics, etc.); 

c. Display windows for events; 

d. Brick, tile, or stone; 

e. Pre-cast panels; 

f. Wood paneling;

g. Blank wall treatments per the blank wall standards, KMC 18.52.240;

h. Other treatments which meet the intent of these standards. 

3. Opening Size. The maximum size of window and facade openings shall be 64 square feet (excluding driveway/parking garage entry). The window/facade openings shall be treated further with minimum 24-inch mullions to prevent large openings in the parking garage facade. 

4. Treatments in Primarily Residential Areas. Ground level facade treatments for residential parking garages shall integrate one or more of the following: 

a. Ornamental grillwork (other than plain horizontal or vertical bars);

b. Decorative artwork (metal panels, ceramic, mosaics, etc.); 

c. Brick, tile, or stone; 

d. Pre-cast panels; 

e. Wood paneling; 

f. Blank wall treatments per the blank wall standards, KMC 18.52.240.

5. Facade Articulation. At least two of the following elements shall be incorporated into parking garage facades to articulate the facade and provide human-scaled architectural elements: 

a. Piers or pilasters;

b. Recessed window openings; 

c. Window sills and details; 

d. Masonry trim; 

e. Accent materials; 

f. Tile, stone, or pre-cast panels; 

g. Other treatments which provide facade articulation. 

6. Architectural Elements in Vehicular Entrances. Vehicular entrances to structured parking shall incorporate two of the following elements into the design: 

a. Arches; 

b. Lintels; 

c. Piers or pilasters; 

d. Masonry trim; 

e. Planters; 

f. Ornamental lighting; 

g. Tile, stone, or pre-cast panels. 

7. Townhouse Units. Each unit shall have an individual garage, enclosed under the living spaces. Such garage shall be located on a different facade from the main entry of the unit. 

C. Not Allowed.

1. Plain Concrete Facades. Plain, unadorned, or smooth concrete facades are not allowed. 

2. Horizontal or Vertical Bars. Unadorned horizontal or vertical bars are not allowed in parking garage window openings. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.240 Blank wall and side wall screening.

A. Intent.

1. Continuity of Visual Interest. To ensure that all sides of a building in the public view have visual interest and continuity of pedestrian-oriented building scale. 

B. Standards – Required.

1. Architectural Treatments for Visible Building Sides. All sides of buildings visible from a public right-of-way shall be treated with two or more of the following elements:

a. Visible rooflines (i.e., cornices, extended parapets, pitched/sloped roofs, decorative molding, etc.); 

b. Windows; 

c. Secondary entrances; 

d. Balconies; 

e. Awnings; 

f. Oversized window treatments; 

g. Other architectural details which meet the intent of this standard. 

2. Detailed Walls Required. Ground floor walls (including retaining walls) within public view shall have architectural detail such as windows, doors, reveals, and other architectural features as described in the building design section of these standards. A wall is considered a blank wall if: 

a. A ground floor wall or portion of a ground floor wall over six feet in height that has a horizontal length greater than 15 feet and does not include architectural detailing; or 

b. Any portion of a ground floor wall having a surface area of 400 square feet or greater. 

3. Blank Wall Screening. Where a blank wall within the public view is unavoidable due to International Building Code regulations (such as where a side building wall abuts a property line), blank walls shall be treated with two or more of the following:

a. Vegetation, including trees, shrubs, evergreen ground cover (in conjunction with other landscaping) or vines adjacent to the blank wall surface;

b. Trellis vine panels; 

c. Architectural detailing such as reveals, contrasting materials, or other special detailing which meets the intent of this standard. 

Due to the many potential site-specific conditions which could occur, blank/side wall treatment shall be subject to the city manager’s discretion and approval. 

C. Not Allowed.

1. Murals. Murals shall not be permitted pending the completion of City standards addressing appropriate allowances, criteria, and locations. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.250 Pedestrian bridges.

A. Intent.

1. Active and Accessible. Locate pedestrian bridge(s) in active places which are accessible at all hours and promote safe passage over major roadways. 

2. Unique Architectural Qualities. To develop unique and inviting pedestrian bridges as key gateway features which are integrated with buildings at bridge ends. 

B. Standards – Required.

1. Locate Bridge Ends in Active Buildings and Places. Locate bridge ends in active, publicly accessible buildings or places which are accessible and secure at all hours. 

2. Building and Landscape Treatments. Pedestrian bridges shall be designed as unique structures which serve as a key gateway feature to the downtown. 

3. Integration with End Structures. The appearance, materials, and style of pedestrian bridges shall be architecturally integrated with the end structures or places. 

4. Weather Protection. Weather protection, in the form of a roof or canopy structure, shall be provided over the entire length of pedestrian bridges. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]

Article IV. Building Design – Standards for Commercial/Mixed Use Buildings 


18.52.260 Visible building entrances.

A. Intent.

1. Visible and Welcoming Entrances. To make major building entrances obvious and welcoming. 

B. Standards – Required.

1. Visual Prominence. The primary building entrance shall be made visibly prominent utilizing a minimum of five of the architectural treatments listed below. At least one element shall be selected from each of the categories listed below (i.e., at least one element from subsections (B)(1)(a), (b) and (c) of this section).

a. Facade Features.

(1) Recess;

(2) Canopies;

(3) Trellis;

(4) Porticos;

(5) Porches.

b. Doorway Features.

(1) Clerestory;

(2) Transom windows; 

(3) Glass windows flanking door;

(4) Large entry doors;

(5) Ornamental lighting;

(6) Lit displays. 

c. Detail Features.

(1) Special entry paving;

(2) Ornamental building name or address;

(3) Planters or pots of flowers; 

(4) Seating.

2. Weather Protection. Provide some form of weather protection at building entrances such as a canopy, marquee, or awning. This feature may be combined with the methods used above to achieve visual building entry prominence. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.270 Ground floor facades.

A. Intent.

1. Visual Interest in Ground Level Activities. To visually and architecturally express ground level activities which promote the pedestrian environment. 

B. Standards – Required.

1. Architectural Treatments and Details. Commercial building facades facing streets shall incorporate at least two elements from each of the following categories, with a minimum of five total treatments required: 

a. Palette of Window Treatments.

(1) Large storefront windows above kickplates; 

(2) Clerestory windows;

(3) Recessed windows;

(4) Mullions. 

b. Palette of Facade Treatments. 

(1) Lighting or baskets supported by ornamental brackets; 

(2) Medallions;

(3) Belt courses;

(4) Plinths for columns;

(5) Piers or pilasters;

(6) Projecting sills;

(7) Tilework;

(8) Stone or concrete masonry;

(9) Pedestrian-scaled signs;

(10) Planter boxes; or

(11) Other architectural treatments which meet the intent of this standard. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.280 Ground floor transparency and visibility.

A. Intent.

1. Visual Interest in Ground Level Activities. To visually and architecturally express ground level activities which contribute to the pedestrian environment. 

2. Visibility into Buildings. To provide visibility into buildings and from buildings out to the sidewalks. 

B. Standards – Required.

1. Clear Glass Windows. A minimum of 50 percent of the ground floor facade of commercial buildings fronting public streets shall be comprised of windows. The facade shall be measured from the ground to the projected interior ceiling height.

2. Film. Film may be applied to windows to provide shade and for energy efficiency, provided full transparency and visibility are maintained into the building from the sidewalk. 

3. Visible Light Transmittance. Windows shall have a minimum 50 percent visible light transmittance. 

C. Not Allowed.

1. Reflective Glass or Film. Reflective glass and/or reflective film which diminish transparency are not allowed. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.290 Weather protection.

A. Intent.

1. Weather Protection. To provide weather protection for pedestrians throughout downtown. 

B. Standards – Required.

1. Canopies, Arcades, or Awnings. Canopies, arcades, or awnings shall be provided on commercial building facades facing streets. Dimensions shall provide a:

a. Minimum canopy depth of five feet;

b. Vertical height above the sidewalk and underside of canopy between eight and 10 feet;

c. Minimum protection along 80 percent of the building facade facing a public right-of-way;

d. If an arcade is proposed, the specific dimensions and length of the arcade will be negotiated on a case-by-case basis to ensure adequate light, air, and visibility through to ground floor windows and building entries from the street. 

C. Not Allowed.

1. Internal or Backlit Canopies. Internal, backlit, or uplit canopies are prohibited. Downlighting is allowed to light sidewalk for pedestrians. 

2. Awnings as Signage. Awnings shall not be used as primary signage, including use of print and backlighting. If awnings are used for signage, the drop edge of the awning/canopy shall not exceed 12 inches in height. In addition, the City’s sign code requirements shall apply. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.300 Building materials.

A. Intent.

1. To develop a visual downtown identity and to ensure that downtown development forms a cohesive visual whole over time. This shall be accomplished through the use of a primarily masonry materials palette.

2. To provide a materials palette which allows for individual and creative architectural expression in individual development.

B. Standards – Required.

1. Primary Materials Palette. Commercial and mixed use buildings shall be built with materials which will form a visually cohesive identity over time. Facades of commercial and commercial levels of mixed use buildings shall be primarily of the following masonry materials: 

a. Brick;

b. Stone; 

c. Ceramic Tile. Alternate coursing with changes in color and/or texture is required with use of tile. Alternate coursing can be vertical, horizontal, or both;

d. Split Face Alternate Course Concrete Masonry Units. Alternate coursing with changes in color and/or texture is required with use of split face masonry units. Alternate coursing can be vertical, horizontal, or both; 

e. Stucco, if limited to a maximum 50 percent of total building surface area. 

2. On any facade adjoining a public sidewalk, at the first two stories above the public sidewalk level, and at exposed stories below the public sidewalk level, primary materials must cover 85 percent of the opaque surfaces on any elevation. On other facades in the public view (from adjacent public streets, pedestrian walkways, or public spaces), primary materials must cover more than 50 percent of the opaque surfaces.

Exceptions: 

a. Transparent glass may cover 75 percent of the first story of any one facade. Transparent glass may cover 40 percent of the second story of any one facade. 

b. Where there are two front property lines, transparent glass may cover 75 percent of a second facade if the facade is within 15 feet of the property line. 

3. Residential Floors, Mixed Use Buildings. Nonmasonry materials may be used as a primary material in the residential portions of mixed use buildings subject to any applicable restrictions in this section. 

4. Vinyl Siding. Vinyl siding is only permitted on floors three and above, and shall not exceed 15 percent of the total building surface area of those floors. 

C. Not Allowed.

1. Plain Faced and/or Uncolored Concrete Masonry Units. Plain faced and/or uncolored concrete masonry units shall not cover an area greater than five percent of any facade. 

2. Siding Materials Not Allowed. The following siding materials are not allowed on any building facade: 

a. Asphalt siding;

b. Aluminum lap siding;

c. Siding grade plywood. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.310 Upper level stepbacks, mass, and bulk.

A. Intent.

1. Develop Pedestrian Scale. To ensure that multiple-storied building facades do not overwhelm the pedestrian orientation and scale of downtown.

B. Standards – Required. A minimum of two of the following techniques shall be applied to facades visible from public rights-of-way and public spaces to minimize the apparent bulk and mass of a building: 

1. Step Back Buildings Over Two Stories. Buildings above two stories in height shall step back the upper stories as follows: 

a. Stepbacks above two stories shall be a minimum of six feet from the first two floors;

b. A second, minimum six-foot stepback shall be made above four stories;

c. Evident Decrease in Bulk. Stepbacks need not be continuous and uniform across the entire facade as long as bulk is visually decreased.

2. Horizontal Building Modulation. Use bays, recesses, and building projections to provide variations in large facades. 

a. The maximum horizontal length without building modulation shall be 100 feet. 

b. Modulation Depth. The minimum modulation depth shall be six feet. 

3. Modulated Roofline. Provide breaks in the roofline by alternating stepped roofs, gables, dormers, etc. (see roof form standards, KMC 18.52.220).

4. Articulation. Building articulation with at least one of the following architectural elements: 

a. Change in materials or color with a change in building plane;

b. Decks and Balconies. Decks, terraces, and balconies are encouraged but not required, and may be roofed or open; 

c. Bay windows; 

d. Repeat distinctive window patterns at horizontal modulation intervals.

5. Other Treatments. Other architectural treatments which meet the intent of this standard. 

C. Exceptions.

1. Stairs, Corner Features, and Other Architectural Features. Stairs, corners, and other vertical architectural features are not required to step back. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]

Article V. Building Design – Standards for Residential/Primarily Residential Uses


18.52.320 Primary residential entrances.

(Applies to all multifamily residential development except townhouses.)

A. Intent.

1. Active and Lively Street. To face residential entrances onto streets to create and maintain a lively and active downtown.

2. Safe and Welcoming Entry. To provide safe and welcoming building entries. 

B. Standards – Required.

1. Visible Entrance. The primary building entrance shall be visible from the adjacent street. 

2. Weatherproof Covering. All building entries shall have a weatherproof covering. 

3. Secure and Direct Access. Primary building entries shall provide secure and direct access to lobbies, stairs, and elevators. Gated entries are not allowed. 

4. Entrance Dimensions. The primary residential entrance shall be a minimum four feet deep and a width at least 50 percent wider than the entry doors. 

5. Visual Prominence. The primary building entrance shall be made visibly prominent utilizing a minimum of five of the architectural treatments listed below. At least one element shall be selected from each of the categories listed below (i.e., at least one element from subsections (B)(5)(a), (b) and (c) of this section).

a. Facade Features.

(1) Recess;

(2) Overhangs;

(3) Canopies;

(4) Trellis;

(5) Porticos;

(6) Porches.

b. Doorway Features.

(1) Clerestory;

(2) Transom windows;

(3) Glass windows flanking door;

(4) Large entry doors;

(5) Ornamental lighting.

c. Detail Features.

(1) Special entry paving;

(2) Ornamental building name or address;

(3) Planters or pots of flowers;

(4) Seating. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.330 Building mass and bulk.

A. Intent.

1. Reduce Building Bulk with Smaller Architectural Components. To reduce the apparent bulk of buildings by breaking them down into smaller components which are consistent with the pedestrian scale of downtown. 

2. Visual Variety. To provide visual variety along streets. 

B. Standards – Required.

1. Variations in Large Facades. Horizontal appearance facades longer than 25 feet in length shall be treated to reduce visual scale and bulk using two of the following: 

a. Bays and recesses (bays and recesses shall be a minimum of three feet in depth and eight feet long. Wall variations shall extend from first floor to roof, excluding balconies, decks, and terraces); 

b. Balconies, decks, and terraces; 

c. Distinctive roof forms;

d. Window patterns; 

e. Changes in materials; 

f. Color differentiation; 

g. Projections or overhangs; 

h. Upper story stepbacks.

C. Not Allowed.

1. Flat Blank Walls Not Allowed. Flat blank walls are not allowed. See blank wall standards, KMC 18.52.240. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.340 Materials.

A. Intent.

1. Ensure Quality and Maintenance Over Time. To ensure a standard of quality and maintenance over time. 

2. Materials and Details that Reduce Bulk. To encourage the use of materials appropriate to residential development and details that reduce the visual bulk of larger buildings. 

B. Standards – Required.

1. Durable Materials with Texture and Pattern. Exterior materials shall be durable and maintainable over time, including: 

a. Materials with textures or patterns;

b. Materials which lend themselves to quality detailing and can be well maintained over time. 

2. Allowed Primary Materials. 

a. Allowed primary materials include wood or masonry units (brick, stone, tile, or split face alternate course concrete); 

b. Enamel panels, and precast concrete panels. If panel materials are used, each panel shall not exceed a maximum of nine square feet. 

3. Vinyl Siding. Vinyl siding is only permitted on floors three and above, and shall not exceed 15 percent of the total building surface area of those floors. 

C. Not Allowed.

1. Reflective Glass. Reflective glass is not allowed. 

2. Siding Materials Not Allowed. The following siding materials are not allowed on any building facade:

a. Asphalt siding;

b. Aluminum lap siding;

c. Siding grade plywood. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.52.350 Windows.

A. Intent.

1. Active and Lively Street. To face windows onto streets to create and maintain a lively and active downtown. 

B. Standards – Required.

1. Transparent Windows. Transparent windows are required where buildings face streets. 

2. Varied Window Sizes. Residential buildings shall be designed with varied window sizes and shapes, including: 

a. Varied shape, and number of panes; 

b. Divided or mullioned windows if appropriate to style;

c. Cantilevered bay windows if appropriate to style and may project 18 inches into required stepback areas;

d. Recessed windows; 

e. Visible and substantial trim;

f. Butt glazing is allowed. 

3. Visible and Substantial Trim. Windows shall be surrounded with visible and substantial trim. 

C. Not Allowed.

1. Two-Light Horizontal Sliding Windows. Horizontal sliding windows with two lights are not allowed. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 18.55 CRITICAL AREAS

Sections:

Article I. Purpose and General Provisions

18.55.010    Purpose and goals.

18.55.020    Authority.

18.55.030    Relationship to other regulations.

18.55.040    Administrative procedures.

18.55.050    Fees.

18.55.070    Administrative rules.

18.55.080    Interpretation.

18.55.090    Jurisdiction – Critical areas.

18.55.100    Protection of critical areas.

Article II. Best Available Science

18.55.110    Best available science.

Article III. Applicability, Exemptions, and Exceptions

18.55.120    Applicability.

18.55.130    Mapping.

18.55.140    Signs and fencing of critical areas.

18.55.150    Exemptions.

18.55.160    Exception – Public agency or utility.

18.55.170    Variances – Buffer widths and building setbacks.

18.55.180    Exception – Reasonable use.

Article IV. Critical Areas Report

18.55.190    Critical areas reports – Requirements.

18.55.200    Mitigation requirements.

18.55.210    Mitigation sequencing.

18.55.220    Mitigation plan requirements.

Article V. Unauthorized Alterations and Enforcement

18.55.230    Unauthorized critical area alterations and enforcement.

Article VI. General Critical Area Protective Measures

18.55.250    Notice on title.

18.55.260    Critical area tracts.

18.55.270    Building setbacks.

18.55.280    Bonds to ensure mitigation, maintenance, and monitoring.

18.55.290    Critical area inspections.

Article VII. Wetlands – Designation and Rating

18.55.300    Designation and rating of wetlands.

Article VIII. Wetlands – Additional Report Requirements

18.55.310    Critical areas report.

Article IX. Wetlands – Allowed Uses and Alterations

18.55.320    Allowed uses.

18.55.325    Buffer width alterations.

18.55.330    Performance standards – Mitigation requirements.

Article X. Streams and Lakes – Designation and Rating

18.55.400    Designation and rating of streams and lakes.

Article XI. Streams and Lakes – Additional Report Requirements

18.55.410    Critical areas report.

Article XII. Streams and Lakes – Allowed Uses and Alterations

18.55.415    Allowed uses.

18.55.420    Alterations.

18.55.430    Performance standards – Mitigation requirements.

Article XIII. Fish and Wildlife Habitats of Importance – Designation

18.55.500    Designation of fish and wildlife habitats of importance.

Article XIV. Fish and Wildlife Habitats of Importance – Report Requirements

18.55.510    Critical areas report – Habitat management plan.

Article XV. Fish and Wildlife Habitats of Importance – Performance Standards

18.55.520    Performance standards – General requirements.

18.55.530    Performance standards – Specific habitats.

Article XVI. Geologically Hazardous Areas – Designation

18.55.600    Purpose.

18.55.610    Designation of geologically hazardous areas.

18.55.620    Designation of specific hazard areas.

Article XVII. Geologically Hazardous Areas – Report Requirements

18.55.630    Critical areas report.

Article XVIII. Geologically Hazardous Areas – Performance Standards

18.55.640    Performance standards – General requirements.

18.55.650    Performance standards – Specific hazards.

Article XIX. Flood Hazard Areas*

18.55.700    Purpose.

18.55.705    Definitions.

18.55.707    Lands to which this article applies.

18.55.710    Basis for establishing flood hazard area.

18.55.715    Permits.

18.55.720    Final certification by surveyor.

18.55.723    Designation and responsibilities of the local administrator.

18.55.725    Information to be obtained and maintained by the City.

18.55.730    Development standards applicable to all flood hazard areas.

18.55.740    Development standards for specific uses in flood hazard areas.

18.55.750    Development in the floodway.

18.55.760    Habitat assessment.

18.55.770    Warnings and disclaimer of liability.

18.55.780    Variances in flood hazard areas.

18.55.790    Penalties for noncompliance.

18.55.795    Abrogation and greater restrictions.

*Prior legislation: Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).

Article XX. Groundwater Susceptibility and Critical Aquifer Recharge Areas

18.55.800    Designation of groundwater susceptibility and critical aquifer recharge areas.

18.55.810    Critical areas report.

Article I. Purpose and General Provisions


18.55.010 Purpose and goals.

A. The purpose of this chapter is to designate and classify ecologically critical and geologic and flood hazard areas in order to protect ecologically critical areas and protect lives and property from hazards, while also allowing for reasonable use of public or private property.

B. The City finds that critical areas provide a variety of valuable and beneficial biological and physical functions that benefit the City and its residents, and/or may pose a threat to human safety or to public and private property. The beneficial functions and values provided by critical areas include, but are not limited to, water quality protection and enhancement, fish and wildlife habitat, food chain support, flood storage, groundwater recharge and discharge, erosion control, protection from hazards, historical and archaeological and aesthetic value protection, and recreation. These beneficial functions are not listed in order of priority.

C. By limiting alteration of critical areas, this chapter seeks to:

1. Strive to protect lives and public and private property from flooding;

2. Strive to protect slopes from erosion and sliding;

3. Minimize the potential for damage due to liquefaction and seismic hazards;

4. Protect wetlands from encroachment and degradation and encourage wetland restoration;

5. Protect streams from encroachment and degradation and encourage stream restoration;

6. Maintain and promote a diversity of species and habitat within the City; and

7. Address critical aquifer recharge areas and protect groundwater.

D. The regulations of this chapter are intended to protect critical areas in accordance with the GMA and through the application of best available science.

E. This chapter is to be administered with flexibility and attention to site-specific characteristics. It is not the intent of this chapter to make a parcel of property unusable by denying its owner reasonable economic use of the property.

F. The City’s enactment and enforcement of this chapter shall not be construed for the benefit of any individual person or group of persons other than the general public. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.020 Authority.

A. As provided herein, the city manager is given the authority to interpret, apply, and enforce this chapter to accomplish the stated purpose.

B. The City may withhold, condition, or deny development permits or activity approvals to ensure that the proposed action is consistent with this chapter.

C. In the event that multiple critical areas occur on a site, it is the authority of the city manager to balance the protection of the multiple critical areas and provide appropriate mitigation. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.030 Relationship to other regulations.

A. These critical areas regulations shall be in addition to zoning and other regulations adopted by the City. Compliance with other regulations does not exempt the applicant from critical areas regulations.

B. The critical area regulations shall apply to all critical areas located within the jurisdiction of the Kenmore Shoreline Master Program (KMC Title 16).

C. These critical areas regulations shall apply concurrently with review conducted under the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) (Chapter 19.35 KMC).

D. Any individual critical area adjoined by another type of critical area shall have the buffer and meet the requirements that provide the most protection to the critical areas involved. When any provision of this chapter or any existing regulation, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflicts with this chapter, that which provides more protection to the critical areas shall apply.

E. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter does not constitute compliance with other federal, State, and local regulations and permit requirements that may be required (for example, shoreline substantial development or conditional use permits, shoreline variances, the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife hydraulic project approval (HPA), U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Section 404 permits, and National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits). The applicant is responsible for complying with these requirements, apart from the process established in this chapter. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 7; Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.040 Administrative procedures.

The administrative procedures followed during the critical area review process shall conform to the standards and requirements of the City development regulations, except that, where critical areas are located within the jurisdiction of the Kenmore Shoreline Master Program, administrative procedures shall conform to the standards and requirements of Chapter 16.75 KMC. This shall include, but not be limited to, timing, permits, variances, exemptions, exceptions, appeals, and fees associated with applications covered by this chapter. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 8; Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.050 Fees.

The City by resolution shall establish fees for critical area review processing and other services provided by the City as required by this chapter. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.070 Administrative rules.

Applicable departments within the City are authorized to adopt such administrative rules and regulations as necessary and appropriate to implement this chapter and to prepare and require the use of such forms as necessary for its administration. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.080 Interpretation.

In the interpretation and application of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be considered to be the minimum requirements necessary, shall be liberally construed to serve the purpose of this chapter, and shall be deemed to neither limit nor repeal any other provisions under State statute. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.090 Jurisdiction – Critical areas.

A. The City shall regulate all uses, activities, and developments within, adjacent to, or likely to affect one or more critical areas, consistent with best available science and the provisions herein.

B. Critical areas regulated by this chapter include:

1. Wetlands as designated in KMC 18.55.300, Designation and rating of wetlands;

2. Streams and lakes as designated in KMC 18.55.400, Designation and rating of streams and lakes;

3. Fish and wildlife habitats of importance as designated in KMC 18.55.500, Designation of fish and wildlife habitats of importance;

4. Geologically hazardous areas as designated in KMC 18.55.610, Designation of geologically hazardous areas;

5. Frequently flooded areas as designated in KMC 18.55.707, Lands to which this article applies; and

6. Critical aquifer recharge areas and groundwater as designated in KMC 18.55.800, Designation of groundwater susceptibility and critical aquifer recharge areas.

C. All areas within the City meeting the definition of one or more critical areas, regardless of any formal identification, are hereby designated critical areas and are subject to the provisions of this chapter.

D. Areas Adjacent to Critical Areas Subject to Regulation. Areas adjacent to critical areas shall be considered to be within the jurisdiction of these requirements and regulations to support the intent of this chapter and ensure protection of the functions and values of critical areas. “Adjacent” shall mean any activity located:

1. On a site immediately adjoining a critical area;

2. A distance equal to or less than the required critical area buffer width and building setback;

3. A distance equal to or less than 660 feet from a bald eagle nest;

4. A distance equal to or less than 656 feet from the closest nest of a great blue heron rookery; or

5. Within the floodway, floodplain or channel migration zone. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.100 Protection of critical areas.

Any action taken pursuant to this chapter shall result in equivalent or greater functions and values of the critical areas associated with the proposed action, as determined by the best available science. All actions and developments shall be designed and constructed in accordance with mitigation sequencing (KMC 18.55.210) to avoid, minimize, restore, and compensate for adverse impacts. Applicants must first demonstrate an inability to avoid or reduce impacts before restoration and compensation of impacts will be allowed. No activity or use shall be allowed that results in a net loss of the functions and values of critical areas. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]

Article II. Best Available Science


18.55.110 Best available science.

A. Protection for Functions and Values. Critical areas reports and decisions to alter critical areas shall rely on the best available science to protect the functions and values of critical areas. The best available science is scientific information applicable to the critical area prepared by local, State or federal natural resource agencies, a qualified scientific professional or team of qualified scientific professionals that is consistent with criteria established in WAC 365-195-900 through 365-195-925. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]

Article III. Applicability, Exemptions, and Exceptions


18.55.120 Applicability.

A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands, all land uses and development activity, and all structures and facilities in the City whether or not a permit or authorization is required, and shall apply to every person, firm, partnership, corporation, group, governmental agency, or other entity that owns, leases, or administers land within the City. No person, company, agency, or applicant shall alter a critical area or buffer except as consistent with the purposes and requirements of this chapter.

B. The City shall not approve any permit or otherwise issue any authorization to alter the condition of any land, water, or vegetation, or to construct or alter any structure or improvement in, over, or on a critical area or associated buffer, without first assuring compliance with the requirements of this chapter. For development on lands regulated under the Kenmore Shoreline Master Program, compliance with this chapter includes compliance with the requirements of the Shoreline Master Program as well as with the requirements of this chapter.

C. Approval of a permit or development proposal pursuant to the provisions of this chapter does not discharge the obligation of the applicant to comply with the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 9; Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.130 Mapping.

A. The approximate location and extent of critical areas are shown on the City’s critical area maps. These maps are to be used as a guide and may be updated as new critical areas are identified. They are a reference and do not provide a final critical area designation. The exact location of a critical area and its boundary shall be determined on site through a field investigation by a qualified professional.

B. The following is a list of some map sources that identify potential critical areas located in the City:

1. Wetlands and Streams.

a. City stream and wetland inventory;

b. Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife Priority Habitats and Species online mapping system;

c. Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife SalmonScape online mapping system; and

d. Washington State Department of Natural Resources water type maps.

2. Fish and Wildlife Habitats of Importance.

a. Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife Priority Habitats and Species online mapping system;

b. Washington State Department of Natural Resources water type maps;

c. Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife SalmonScape online mapping system;

d. Anadromous and resident salmonid distribution maps contained in the Habitat Limiting Factors Reports published by the Washington State Conservation Commission; and

e. Washington State Department of Natural Resources State natural area preserves and natural resource conservation area maps.

3. Geologically Hazardous Areas.

a. City geologically hazardous areas inventory;

b. King County’s Landslide Hazards Along King County River Corridors interactive, web-based map folio;

c. Washington State Department of Natural Resources Geologic Information Portal;

d. Washington State Department of Natural Resources liquefaction susceptibility map for King County; and

e. Washington State Department of Natural Resources slope stability maps.

4. Flood Hazard Areas.

a. City stream and wetland inventory; and

b. Federal Emergency Management Administration flood insurance rate maps and studies.

5. Critical Aquifer Recharge Areas and Groundwater.

a. City map of aquifer susceptibility. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.140 Signs and fencing of critical areas.

A. Signs.

1. Temporary Markers. The outer perimeter of the critical area or buffer and the limits of those areas to be disturbed pursuant to an approved permit or authorization shall be marked in the field in such a way as to ensure that no unauthorized intrusion will occur, and verified by the city manager prior to the commencement of permitted activities. This temporary marking shall be maintained throughout construction, and shall not be removed until permanent signs, if required, are in place.

2. Permanent Signs. As a condition of any permit or authorization issued pursuant to this chapter, the city manager may require that the applicant install permanent signs along the boundary of a critical area or buffer.

Permanent signs shall be made of a metal face and attached to a metal post, or another material of equal durability. Signs must be posted at an interval of every 50 feet. If the length of the lot is 50 feet or less, one sign per lot is required. The sign must be maintained by the property owner in perpetuity. Signs must be placed in a visible location and remain visible throughout any future site development. The signs shall include the City’s logo and shall be worded as follows or with alternative language approved by the city manager based on specifications available from the City:

Environmentally Critical Area

Do Not Disturb

Contact the City of Kenmore

425-398-8900

Regarding Uses and Restriction

B. Fencing.

1. The city manager shall condition any permit or authorization issued pursuant to this chapter to require the applicant to install a permanent fence at the edge of the buffer associated with a stream, lake, wetland, or fish and wildlife habitat of importance, when fencing will prevent future impacts to ecological function. When the buffer is in a legally altered state, and is permitted to remain in that condition, the fencing may be placed at the upland edge of any properly functioning portion of the buffer. The city manager may also waive the requirement for a fence if the applicant can demonstrate that a fence would interfere with current legal public access or use.

2. A required permanent fence may be:

a. Untreated wood, split-rail; or 

b. Dense vegetation using native material appropriate for the ecoregion. Vegetation shall be maintained at a minimum height of three feet, with thorny species incorporated to deter intrusion.

3. Fencing installed shall be designed so as to not interfere with species migration, including fish runs, and shall be constructed in a manner that minimizes habitat impacts.

4. Fencing is not required for single-family residential lots where subdivision is not proposed.

C. Maintenance. To ensure long-term maintenance of signs and fencing, the owner of the property shall file a maintenance agreement as directed by the City. This agreement shall be recorded and run with the land. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.150 Exemptions.

Exempt activities shall avoid impacts to critical areas. All exempted activities shall use reasonable methods to avoid potential impacts to critical areas. To be exempt from this chapter does not give permission to degrade a critical area or ignore risk from natural hazards. Any incidental damage to, or alteration of, a critical area shall be restored, rehabilitated, or replaced at the responsible party’s expense to prior condition or better.

A. Exempt Activities. The following developments, activities, and associated uses shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter; provided, that they are otherwise consistent with the provisions of other local, State, and federal laws and requirements:

1. Activities, including routine maintenance, involving artificial drainage features intentionally created from nonwetland sites, including but not limited to grass-lined swales, irrigation and drainage ditches, detention facilities, and landscape features;

2. Normal and routine maintenance, operation and reconstruction of existing roads, streets, utilities and associated rights-of-way and structures; provided, that reconstruction of any structures may not increase the impervious surface area or remove flood storage capacity;

3. Normal maintenance and repair, and reconstruction or remodeling of residential or commercial structures, or legal preexisting and ongoing uses of the site; provided, that reconstruction of any structures may not increase the previously approved building footprint;

4. Site investigative work and studies necessary for preparing site development or modification plans, including soils tests, water quality studies, wildlife studies and similar tests and investigations, where such activities do not require construction of new roads or significant amounts of excavation; and provided, that any disturbance of the critical area shall be the minimum necessary to carry out the work or studies and disturbed areas shall be immediately restored;

5. Educational activities, scientific research, and passive outdoor recreational activities, including but not limited to interpretive field trips and birdwatching, that will not have a significant adverse effect on the critical area;

6. Emergency activities necessary to prevent an immediate threat to public health, safety, property or welfare; provided, that the critical areas shall be restored, rehabilitated, or replaced at the responsible party’s expense to prior condition or better within one year of the activity. The restoration, rehabilitation, and/or replacement of the critical area is limited to that area impacted by the prevention effort; this section does not require the responsible party to restore, rehabilitate or replace critical areas damaged by natural disaster;

7. Minor activities not mentioned above and determined by the city manager to have minimal impacts to a critical area; and

8. Existing and ongoing agricultural activities, including farm pond maintenance; provided, that they implement applicable best management practices (BMPs) and minimize their effects on water quality, riparian ecology, salmonid populations, and wildlife habitat.

B. Operation, Maintenance or Repair. Operation, maintenance or repair of existing structures, infrastructure improvements, utilities, public or private roads, dikes, levees or drainage systems, that do not require construction permits, if the activity does not further alter or increase the impact to, or encroach further within, the critical area or buffer and there is no increased risk to life or property as a result of the proposed operation, maintenance, or repair.

C. Modification to Existing Structures.

1. Structural modification of, addition to, or replacement of single detached residences in existence before November 27, 1990, which do not meet the building setback or buffer requirements for wetlands, streams or landslide hazard areas if the modification, addition, replacement or related activity does not increase the existing footprint of the residence lying within the above-described buffer or building setback area by more than 500 square feet over that existing before November 27, 1990. No portion of the modification, addition or replacement may be located closer than the closest point of the residence to the critical area or, if the existing residence is in the critical area, no portion may extend farther into the critical area.

2. Structural modification of, addition to, or replacement of structures, except single detached residences in existence before November 27, 1990, which do not meet the building setback or buffer requirements for wetlands, streams or landslide hazard areas if modification, addition, replacement or related activity does not increase the existing footprint of the structure lying within the above-described building setback area, critical area or buffer.

D. Activities within the Improved Right-of-Way. Repair, replacement, modification, installation, or construction of utility facilities, lines, pipes, mains, equipment, or appurtenances, not including substations, when such facilities are located within the improved portion of the public right-of-way or a City-authorized private roadway, except those activities that alter a wetland or watercourse, such as culverts or bridges, or result in the transport of sediment or increased stormwater. Improved rights-of-way are those that are maintained out of necessity as a cleared, graded, paved, mowed or otherwise altered surface to allow for access, maintenance, or safety.

E. Select Vegetation Removal Activities. The following vegetation removal activities; provided, that no vegetation shall be removed from a critical area or its buffer without approval from the city manager:

1. The removal of vegetation listed in King County’s noxious weed list.

2. The removal of trees that are hazardous, posing a threat to public safety, or posing an imminent risk of damage to private property from critical areas and buffers; provided, that the city manager determines that the disturbance to the critical area is minimal. Topping or limbing the tree to eliminate the hazard should be considered before removal. When removal is necessary, place the hazard tree in the critical area or buffer to provide habitat as downed wood unless doing so would pose a safety risk or increase a geologic hazard. Replacement trees at a 3:1 ratio are required.

3. Measures to control a fire or halt the spread of disease or damaging insects consistent with the State Forest Practices Act, Chapter 76.09 RCW; provided, that the removed vegetation shall be replaced in kind or with similar native species within one year in accordance with an approved restoration plan. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.160 Exception – Public agency or utility.

A. If strict application of this chapter would prohibit the following:

1. Expansion of an existing facility operated by a public agency that is site-specific and nonlinear, including, but not limited to, a school facility, a fire or police facility, a governmental office, a recreational facility, a park, or a stormwater retention/detention facility; or

2. Expansion or extension of a linear public transportation facility, such as a street, highway or sidewalk; or

3. Expansion or extension of a utility;

then the public agency or utility may apply for relief from strict application of this chapter through an exception pursuant to this section, unless the project is located on lands regulated under the Kenmore Shoreline Master Program. Projects on lands regulated under the Kenmore Shoreline Master Program are regulated under the procedures of Chapter 16.75 KMC.

B. Adjustment of critical area standards for new site-specific and nonlinear facilities to be operated by a public agency, such as schools, fire or police facilities, governmental offices, recreational facilities, parks or stormwater retention/detention facilities, shall be considered through the variance process (KMC 18.55.170) if adjustments to buffers or building setbacks are required, or as a reasonable use exception if direct impacts to the critical area are proposed (KMC 18.55.180).

C. Exception Request and Review Process. An application for a public agency or utility exception shall be made to the City and shall include a critical areas report, including mitigation plan, if necessary, and any other related project documents, such as permit applications to other agencies, special studies, and environmental documents prepared pursuant to the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA).

D. City Manager Review. The city manager shall review the application as a Type 2 land use decision under KMC 19.25.020. The city manager shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request based on the proposal’s demonstrated ability to comply with all of the public agency and utility exception criteria in subsection E of this section.

E. Public Agency or Utility Exception Review Criteria. The criteria for review and approval of a public agency or utility exception are as follows:

1. There is no other feasible location for the proposed development with less adverse impact on the critical area or buffer;

2. There is no other practical alternative to the proposed development with less impact on the critical area or buffer. Practical alternatives include but are not limited to:

a. Location outside of the critical area and its buffer;

b. Pursuit and exhaustion of other administrative code modifications or exceptions including but not limited to: front yard setback modifications in KMC 18.30.190; modifications of minimum parking standards in Chapter 18.40 KMC; and allowances for nonconforming uses in Chapter 18.100 KMC;

3. The application of this chapter would unreasonably restrict the ability to provide public agency or utility services to the public;

4. The proposal does not pose an unreasonable threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;

5. The development proposal protects and mitigates impacts to the critical area functions and values consistent with best available science;

6. The development proposal achieves no net loss of critical area functions and values;

7. Mitigation sequencing through KMC 18.55.210 has been demonstrated in the critical areas report, along with a demonstration of how the public agency or utility will provide mitigation using a watershed approach;

8. Development activities involve the least intrusion into and disruption of the critical area necessary while fulfilling a public purpose and need;

9. The proposal is consistent with a public agency or utility system plan, capital facilities plan, master plan, program, or policy that has been the subject of a public review process; and

10. The proposal is consistent with the general purpose and intent of the City’s comprehensive plan and adopted development regulations.

F. Approval Conditions. Conditions for approval of a public agency or utility exception shall include, at a minimum:

1. Conformance with the development standards and mitigation plans identified in the approved critical areas report; and

2. Appropriate best management practices, as described in this chapter and in other science-based documents, including but not limited to the Washington State Department of Commerce Critical Areas Guidebook, as amended, sources of science by State agencies with expertise, and standard conditions of approval published by federal agencies. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 10; Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.170 Variances – Buffer widths and building setbacks.

A. Variances from the buffer width and building setback standards of this chapter may be authorized by the City in accordance with the procedures set forth in the City’s zoning code, unless the project is located on lands regulated under the Kenmore Shoreline Master Program. Projects on lands regulated under the Kenmore Shoreline Master Program are regulated under the procedures of Chapter 16.75 KMC.

B. No variance is allowed in order to create additional lots.

C. The City may grant a variance; provided, that the applicant demonstrates that all of the following criteria are met:

1. Special Circumstances.

a. Private Development Proposals: There are special circumstances applicable to the subject property or to the intended use such as shape, topography, location or surroundings that do not apply generally to other properties and which support the granting of a variance from the buffer width or building setback requirements;

b. New Public Agency Development Proposals: There is no other practical alternative that allows the public agency to meet its public service obligations pursuant to applicable laws, rules, or adopted plans. Practical alternatives include but are not limited to:

(1) Location out of the critical area buffer;

(2) Pursuit and exhaustion of other code modifications or exceptions;

2. Necessary for Rights or Use.

a. Private Development Proposals: Such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right or use possessed by other similarly situated property but which because of special circumstances is denied to the property in question;

b. New Public Agency Development Proposals: Such variance is necessary for a public agency proposal to fulfill a duty to serve per federal, State, or local laws; or to provide an essential public facility; or to address a public need or demand for service consistent with an adopted capital facilities plan, system plan, or other master plan that has been subject to a public review process which commonly includes an evaluation of alternative sites;

3. The granting of such buffer width or building setback variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvement;

4. The granting of the buffer width or building setback variance will not significantly impact the subject critical area;

5. The decision to grant the variance includes the best available science and gives special consideration to conservation or protection measures necessary to preserve or enhance anadromous fish habitat; and

6. The granting of the variance is consistent with the general purpose and intent of the City’s comprehensive plan and adopted development regulations.

D. Conditions May Be Required. In granting any variance, the City may prescribe such conditions and safeguards as are necessary to secure adequate protection of critical areas from adverse impacts and to ensure conformity with this chapter.

E. City Manager Review. The city manager shall review the application. The city manager shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request based on the proposal’s ability to comply with all of the variance criteria in this section.

F. Time Limit. 

1. Establishment of any development activity authorized pursuant to a variance shall occur within four years of the effective date of the decision for such variance. This period may be extended for one additional year by the city manager if the applicant has submitted the applications necessary to authorize the development activity and has provided written justification for the extension.

2. For the purpose of this subsection, “establishment” shall occur upon the issuance of all local permit(s) needed to begin the development activity; provided, that the improvements authorized by such permits are completed within the time frames of said permits.

G. Burden of Proof. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to bring forth evidence in support of the application and upon which any decision has to be made on the application. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 11; Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.180 Exception – Reasonable use.

A. If the application of this chapter pertaining to critical areas will prevent the applicant from making any reasonable use of the subject property, the applicant may apply for an exception pursuant to this section unless the project is located on lands regulated under the Kenmore Shoreline Master Program. Projects on lands regulated under the Kenmore Shoreline Master Program are regulated under the procedures of Chapter 16.75 KMC. An application for a reasonable use exception must accompany a development permit application through the City’s review and decision process.

1. Criteria for Granting. The city manager shall grant a reasonable use allowance only when all of the following criteria are met:

a. Reasonable Use.

(1) Private Proposals: The applicant demonstrates that the application of this chapter will deny all reasonable use of the subject property otherwise allowed by applicable law;

(2) New Public Agency Development Proposals: The applicant demonstrates that the application of this chapter would interfere with a public agency proposal to fulfill a duty to serve per federal, State, or local laws; or to provide an essential public facility; or to address a public need or demand for service consistent with an adopted capital facilities plan, system plan, or other master plan that has been subject to an alternative site evaluation and public review process;

b. The development activities involve the least intrusion into and disruption of the critical area necessary to allow a reasonable use of the subject property by a private applicant or to achieve a public agency responsibility consistent with adopted laws, rules, and plans per subsection (A)(1)(a) of this section;

c. The development activities will not cause or result in damage to properties other than the subject property and will not endanger the public health, safety or welfare;

d. The applicant’s inability to make reasonable use of the subject property has not resulted from any of the following:

(1) Prior subdivision or segregation of the subject property, or changes to the boundaries of the subject property through a boundary line adjustment or otherwise; or

(2) Prior actions taken in violation of this chapter or any local, State, or federal law or regulation;

e. No other reasonable use of the property has less impact on the critical area;

f. The inability of the applicant to derive reasonable use of the property is not the result of actions by the applicant after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or its predecessor; and

g. Mitigation proposed by the applicant is sufficient to protect the functions and values of the critical area and public health, safety, and welfare concerns consistent with the goals, purposes, objectives, and requirements of this chapter.

2. Appeals. The applicant may appeal a decision of the city manager on a reasonable use allowance application to the hearing examiner pursuant to the provisions of the Kenmore Municipal Code.

B. Exception Request and Review Process. An application for a reasonable use exception shall be made to the City and shall include a critical areas report, including mitigation plan, if necessary; and any other related project documents, such as permit applications to other agencies, special studies, and environmental documents prepared pursuant to the State Environmental Policy Act (Chapter 19.35 KMC).

C. City Manager Review. The city manager shall review the application. The city manager shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request based on the proposal’s ability to comply with all of the criteria in subsection A of this section.

D. Burden of Proof. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to bring forth evidence in support of the application and to provide sufficient information on which any decision has to be made on the application. 

E. Time Limit.

1. Establishment of any development activity authorized pursuant to a reasonable use exception shall occur within four years of the effective date of the decision for such reasonable use exception. This period may be extended for one additional year by the city manager if the applicant has submitted the applications necessary to authorize the development activity and has provided written justification for the extension.

2. For the purpose of this subsection, “establishment” shall occur upon the issuance of all local permit(s) needed to begin the development activity; provided, that the improvements authorized by such permits are completed within the time frames of said permits. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 12; Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]

Article IV. Critical Areas Report


18.55.190 Critical areas reports – Requirements.

A. Prepared by Qualified Professional. The applicant shall submit a critical areas report prepared by a qualified professional as defined herein.

B. Incorporating Best Available Science. The critical areas report shall use scientifically valid methods and studies in the analysis of critical area data and field reconnaissance and reference the source of science used. The critical areas report shall evaluate the proposal and all probable impacts to critical areas in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

C. Critical Areas Report Contents. Requirements for critical areas reports are available from the city manager. In addition, the applicant shall provide any additional known information pertain-ing to the critical area(s) on the subject property and adjacent properties. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.200 Mitigation requirements.

A. The applicant shall avoid all impacts that degrade the functions and values of critical areas unless there is no practicable alternative. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, if alteration to the critical area is unavoidable, all adverse impacts to or from critical areas and buffers resulting from a development proposal or alteration shall be mitigated in accordance with an approved critical areas report and SEPA documents.

B. Mitigation shall be in kind and on site, when possible, and sufficient to maintain the functions and values of the critical area, or to prevent risk from a hazard posed by a critical area. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.210 Mitigation sequencing.

Applicants shall demonstrate that all reasonable efforts have been made to identify and evaluate practicable alternatives with the intent to avoid and minimize impacts to critical areas while still achieving the overall project purposes. When an alteration to a critical area is proposed, such alteration shall be avoided, minimized, or compensated for as outlined by WAC 197-11-768, in the following order of preference:

A. Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of actions;

B. Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation by using appropriate technology or by taking affirmative steps to avoid or reduce impacts;

C. Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment;

D. Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the action;

E. Compensating for the impact by replacing or providing substitute resources or environments; and/or

F. Monitoring the impact and the compensation projects and taking appropriate corrective measures.

Mitigation for individual actions may include a combination of the above measures. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 13; Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.220 Mitigation plan requirements.

When mitigation is required, the applicant shall submit for approval by the City a mitigation plan as part of the critical areas report. Mitigation plan requirements are available from the city manager. 

Within 30 days of installation of the approved mitigation, the applicant shall submit an affidavit or as-built drawing signed by the qualified professional described in KMC 18.55.190 certifying that the mitigation has been installed consistent with the approved plan, unless the installed mitigation has been inspected and accepted by the department. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]

Article V. Unauthorized Alterations and Enforcement


18.55.230 Unauthorized critical area alterations and enforcement.

A. When a critical area or its buffer has been altered in violation of this chapter, all ongoing development work shall stop and the critical area shall be restored. The City shall have the authority to issue a stop work order to cease all ongoing development work, and order restoration, rehabilitation or replacement measures at the owner’s or other responsible party’s expense to compensate for violation of provisions of this chapter.

B. Restoration Plan Required. All development work shall remain stopped and the site stabilized until a restoration plan is prepared and approved by the City. Such a plan shall be prepared by a qualified professional and shall describe how the actions proposed meet the minimum requirements described in subsection C of this section. The city manager shall, at the violator’s expense, seek expert advice in determining the adequacy of the plan. Inadequate plans shall be returned to the applicant or violator for revision and resubmittal.

C. Minimum Performance Standards for Restoration. For alterations to wetlands, streams and lakes, geologically hazardous areas, fish and wildlife habitats of importance, and flood hazard areas, the following minimum performance standards shall be met for the restoration of a critical area; provided, that if the violator can demonstrate that greater functional and habitat values can be obtained, these standards may be modified:

1. The historic structural and functional values shall be restored, including water quality and habitat functions;

2. The historic soil types and configuration shall be replicated;

3. The critical area and buffers shall be replanted with native vegetation that replicates the vegetation historically found on the site in species types, sizes, and densities; and

4. The historic functions and values should be replicated at the location of the alteration.

D. Site Investigations. The city manager is authorized to make site inspections and take such actions as are necessary to enforce this chapter. The inspector shall present proper credentials and make a reasonable effort to contact any property owner before entering onto private property.

E. Monitoring. Monitoring shall be required for five years unless otherwise determined by the city manager. A performance and/or maintenance bond of 125 percent of the estimated cost of restoring the functions and values of the critical area shall be posted to assure that all work or actions are satisfactorily completed and maintained in accordance with the approved plans, specifications, permit or approval requirements, and applicable regulations, and to ensure that all work or actions will be completed. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]

Article VI. General Critical Area Protective Measures


18.55.250 Notice on title.

A. In order to inform subsequent purchasers of real property of the existence of critical areas, the owner of any property containing a critical area or buffer on which a development proposal is submitted shall file a notice with the county records and elections division according to the direction of the City. The notice shall state the presence of the critical area or buffer on the property, of the application of this chapter to the property, and the fact that limitations on actions in or affecting the critical area or buffer may exist. The notice shall run with the land.

B. This notice on title shall not be required for a development proposal by a public agency or utility:

1. Within a recorded easement or right-of-way;

2. Where the agency or utility has been adjudicated the right to an easement or right-of-way; or

3. On the site of a permanent public facility.

C. The applicant shall submit proof that the notice has been filed for public record before the City approves any development proposal for the property or, in the case of subdivisions, short subdivisions, and binding site plans, at or before recording. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.260 Critical area tracts.

A. Critical area tracts shall be used in development proposals for subdivisions, short subdivisions, site plan reviews, commercial and multifamily building permits, and binding site plans to delineate and protect those contiguous critical areas and buffers listed below:

1. All wetlands and their buffers;

2. All streams, lakes and their buffers;

3. All fish and wildlife habitats of importance;

4. Geologically hazardous areas and buffers, if applicable; and

5. All other lands to be protected from alterations as conditioned by project approval.

B. Critical area tracts shall be recorded on all documents of title of record for all affected lots.

C. Critical area tracts shall be designated on the face of the plat, short plat or recorded drawing in a format approved by the City. The designation shall include the following restriction:

1. An assurance that native vegetation will be preserved for the purpose of preventing harm to property and the environment, including, but not limited to, controlling surface water runoff and erosion, maintaining slope stability, buffering, and protecting plants, fish, and animal habitat; and

2. The right of the City to enforce the terms of the restriction.

D. The City shall determine at the City’s discretion that any required critical area tract be dedicated to the City, held in an undivided interest by each owner of a building lot within the development with the ownership interest passing with the ownership of the lot, or held by an incorporated homeowners’ association or other legal entity (such as a land trust), which assures the ownership, maintenance, and protection of the tract. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.270 Building setbacks.

Unless otherwise provided in this chapter or in Division I of KMC Title 16 (Shoreline Management), buildings and other structures shall be set back a distance of 15 feet from the edges of all critical area buffers or from the edges of all critical areas, if no buffers are required. Structures that may extend into or be located in the required setback are listed in KMC 18.30.230. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.280 Bonds to ensure mitigation, maintenance, and monitoring.

A. When mitigation required pursuant to a development proposal is not completed prior to the City final permit approval, such as final plat approval or final building inspection, the City shall require the applicant to post a performance bond or other security in a form and amount deemed acceptable by the City. If the development proposal is subject to mitigation, the applicant shall post a mitigation bond or other security in a form and amount deemed acceptable by the City to ensure mitigation is fully functional.

B. The performance bond shall be in the amount of 125 percent of the estimated cost of the installed mitigation project (including monitoring) or the estimated cost of restoring the functions and values of the critical area that are at risk, whichever is greater.

C. The bond shall be in the form of a surety bond, performance bond, assignment of savings account, or an irrevocable letter of credit guaranteed by an acceptable financial institution with terms and conditions acceptable to the city attorney.

D. Bonds or other security authorized by this section shall remain in effect until the City determines, in writing, that the standards bonded for have been met. Bonds or other security shall be held by the City for a minimum of five years to ensure that the required mitigation has been fully implemented and demonstrated to function, and may be held for longer periods when necessary.

E. Depletion, failure, or collection of bond funds shall not discharge the obligation of an applicant or violator to complete required mitigation, maintenance, monitoring, or restoration.

F. Public development proposals shall be relieved from having to comply with the bonding requirements of this section if public funds have previously been committed for mitigation, maintenance, monitoring, or restoration.

G. Any failure to satisfy critical area requirements established by law or condition, including but not limited to the failure to provide a monitoring report within 30 days after it is due or comply with other provisions of an approved mitigation plan shall constitute a default, and the City may demand payment of any financial guarantees or require other action authorized by the City code or any other law.

H. Any funds recovered pursuant to this section shall be used to complete the required mitigation. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.290 Critical area inspections.

Reasonable access to the site shall be provided to the City, State, and federal agency review staff for the purpose of inspections of the critical area during any proposal review, restoration, emergency action, or monitoring period. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]

Article VII. Wetlands – Designation and Rating


18.55.300 Designation and rating of wetlands.

A. Designating Wetlands. All areas within the City meeting the wetland designation criteria, regardless of any formal identification, are hereby designated critical areas and are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Identification of wetlands and delineation of their boundaries shall be done in accordance with the Corps of Engineers wetlands delineation manual (Corps, 1987) and applicable regional supplement (Corps, 2010), as revised or as may be revised in WAC 173-22-035 and 173-22-080.

B. Wetland Ratings. Wetlands, as defined by this chapter, shall be classified and scored using the 2014 Department of Ecology Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington, Publication No. 14-06-029 (Hruby, 2014 or latest edition), which contains the definitions and methods for determining whether the criteria below are met.

1. Category I. Category I wetlands are:

a. Wetlands of high conservation value that are identified by scientists of the Washington Natural Heritage Program/DNR;

b. Bogs;

c. Mature and old-growth forested wetlands larger than one acre; or

d. Wetlands that perform many functions well (scoring 23 points or more).

These wetlands: (1) represent unique or rare wetland types; (2) are more sensitive to disturbance than most wetlands; (3) are relatively undisturbed and contain ecological attributes that are impossible to replace within a human lifetime; or (4) provide a high level of functions.

2. Category II. Category II wetlands are wetlands larger than one acre or those found in a mosaic of wetlands, or wetlands with a moderately high level of functions (scoring between 20 and 22 points).

3. Category III. Category III wetlands have a moderate level of functions (scoring between 16 and 19 points) and can often be adequately replaced with a well-planned mitigation project. Wetlands scoring between 16 and 19 points generally have been disturbed in some way and are often less diverse or more isolated from other natural resources in the landscape than Category II wetlands.

4. Category IV. Category IV wetlands have the lowest levels of functions (scoring fewer than 16 points) and are often heavily disturbed. These are wetlands that can often be adequately replaced with a well-planned mitigation project, or in some cases improved. However, experience has shown that replacement cannot be guaranteed in any specific case. These wetlands may provide some important functions, and should be protected to some degree.

C. Buffer Areas.

1. The establishment of buffer areas shall be required for all development proposals and activities in or adjacent to wetland areas. The purpose of the buffer shall be to protect the integrity, function, and value of the critical area, and/or to protect life, property and resources from risks associated with development on unstable or critical lands.

2. Buffers shall be protected during construction by placement of a temporary barricade, on-site notice for construction crews of the presence of the critical area, and implementation of appropriate erosion and sedimentation controls.

3. Native vegetation removal or disturbance is not allowed in established buffers, unless the removal or disturbance is part of a restoration activity or is allowed by other provisions of this chapter. In all cases, the removal or disturbance should be appropriately mitigated consistent with KMC 18.55.200 and 18.55.210.

4. Wetland buffers shall be established as follows:

	Wetland Type 	Buffer Width (Feet) Based on Habitat Score (Points)

	3-5	6-7	8-9

	Category I 	75 	110 	225

	Category II 	75 	110 	225

	Category III 	60 	110 	225

	Category IV 	40 	40 	40

5. To minimize the impacts of adjacent land uses, development proposals and activities proposed in or adjacent to wetland areas must implement the following measures if applicable:

	Disturbance 	Required Measures to Minimize Impacts 

	Lights 

	•    	Direct lights away from wetland

	Noise 

	•    	Locate activity that generates noise away from wetland



	•    	If warranted, enhance existing buffer with native vegetation plantings adjacent to noise source



	•    	For activities that generate relatively continuous, potentially disruptive noise, such as certain heavy industry or mining, establish an additional 10-foot heavily vegetated buffer strip immediately adjacent to the outer wetland buffer

	Toxic runoff 

	•    	Route all new, untreated runoff away from wetland while ensuring wetland is not dewatered



	•    	Establish covenants limiting use of pesticides within 150 feet of wetland



	•    	Apply integrated pest management

	Stormwater runoff 

	•    	Retrofit stormwater detention and treatment for roads and existing adjacent development



	•    	Prevent channelized flow from lawns that directly enters the buffer



	•    	Use low impact development techniques

	Change in water regime 

	•    	Infiltrate or treat, detain, and disperse into buffer new runoff from impervious surfaces and new lawns

	Pets and human disturbance 

	•    	Use privacy fencing or plant dense vegetation to delineate buffer edge and to discourage disturbance using vegetation appropriate for the ecoregion



	•    	Place wetland and its buffer in a separate tract or protect with a conservation easement

	Dust 

	•    	Use best management practices to control dust

6. For wetlands that score six points or more for habitat function, a relatively undisturbed, vegetated corridor at least 100 feet wide shall be protected when feasible between the wetland and any other priority habitats as defined by the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife. Presence or absence of a nearby priority habitat must be confirmed by a qualified professional and documented in a critical areas report. The corridor must be protected for the entire distance between the wetland and the priority habitat by some type of legal protection such as a conservation easement or critical area tract.

7. Measurement of Wetland Buffers. Wetland buffers shall be measured from the wetland edge as delineated and marked in the field using the methodology specified in subsection A of this section.

8. Increased Wetland Buffer Widths. The city manager shall require increased buffer widths in accordance with the recommendations of a qualified professional biologist and the best available science on a case-by-case basis when a larger buffer is necessary to protect wetland functions and values based on site-specific characteristics. This determination shall be based on one or more of the following criteria:

a. A larger buffer is needed to protect other critical areas or their functions;

b. The buffer has a slope greater than 30 percent or is susceptible to erosion and standard erosion-control measures will not prevent adverse impacts to the wetland. In such cases, the buffer shall be increased to include the slope or the standard buffer shall be drawn from the top of the slope, whichever provides greater protection; or

c. A degraded wetland buffer is present. In this case, the standard buffer on the entire site shall be increased by 33 percent unless new net impervious surface between the upland edge of the standard buffer and the upland edge of the potentially increased buffer equals or is less than 500 square feet or a buffer revegetation plan is provided meeting all of the following criteria:

(1) The buffer revegetation plan shall be prepared by a qualified professional and the applicant shall fund a review of the plan by the City’s wetland consultant. Enhancements shall include revegetation with native species appropriate for the site, and may also include installation of special habitat features, such as snags, downed wood, bat boxes, or other wildlife habitats. The buffer revegetation plan shall meet the requirements for a mitigation plan as described in KMC 18.55.220, including five years of maintenance and monitoring consistent with KMC 18.55.280.

(2) The degraded wetland buffer shall be enhanced at a 1:1 ratio relative to the total net new impervious surface located between the upland edge of the standard buffer and the upland edge of the potentially increased buffer, up to the total on-site square footage of degraded wetland buffer outside of any legal nonconformances. When the available degraded wetland buffer area is exceeded by the new net impervious surface area, the remaining required area of revegetation shall be implemented in degraded wetland, if present on the site.

(3) If the total new net impervious surface area between the upland edge of the standard buffer and the upland edge of the potentially increased buffer exceeds the area of degraded wetland buffer outside of any legal nonconformances and degraded wetland, the applicant should consider opportunities to convert areas of legal nonconformances to enhanced buffer.

D. Limited Exemptions.

1. All isolated Category IV wetlands meeting certain criteria that are less than 4,000 square feet may be exempt from the requirement to avoid wetland and buffer impacts (KMC 18.55.210(A)), and they may be altered or filled if the impacts are fully mitigated based on the remaining actions in KMC 18.55.210(B) through (F). If available, impacts should be mitigated through the purchase of credits from an in-lieu fee program or mitigation bank, consistent with the terms and conditions of the program or bank. A critical areas report for wetlands meeting the requirements in KMC 18.55.310 must be submitted that demonstrates that the wetland is eligible for this exemption by confirming that the following criteria are met:

a. The wetland is not associated with riparian areas or their buffers;

b. The wetland is not associated with shorelines of the state or their associated buffers;

c. The wetland is not part of a wetland mosaic;

d. The wetland does not score six or more points for habitat function based on the 2014 update to the Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington: 2014 Update (Ecology Publication No. 14-06-029, or as revised and approved by Ecology); and

e. The wetland does not contain a fish and wildlife habitat of importance as identified in KMC 18.55.500.

2. All isolated Category IV wetlands meeting certain criteria that are less than 1,000 square feet may be exempt from the buffer provisions contained in this chapter. A critical areas report for wetlands meeting the requirements in KMC 18.55.310 must be submitted that demonstrates that the wetland is eligible for this exemption by confirming that the following criteria are met:

a. Criteria in subsections (D)(1)(a) through (e) of this section; and

b. The wetland does not contain federally listed species or their critical habitat. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]

Article VIII. Wetlands – Additional Report Requirements


18.55.310 Critical areas report.

Requirements for critical areas reports for wetlands are available from the city manager. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]

Article IX. Wetlands – Allowed Uses and Alterations 


18.55.320 Allowed uses.

A. Activities and uses shall be prohibited from wetlands and wetland buffers, except as provided for in this chapter.

B. Unless otherwise allowed by this chapter, activities may only be permitted in a wetland or wetland buffer after demonstration of mitigation sequencing, and if the applicant can show that the proposed activity will not degrade the functions and values of the wetland and other critical areas and no other feasible site design exists that results in less encroachment or impact to the wetland or wetland buffer.

C. Category I and II Wetlands. Activities and uses shall be prohibited from Category I and II wetlands, except as provided for in the exemptions, public agency and utility exception, or reasonable use exception sections of this chapter, or in subsection E of this section.

D. Category III and IV Wetlands. Activities may be permitted if the city manager determines, based upon review of special studies completed by qualified professionals, that the activity meets     avoidance and minimization requirements outlined in KMC 18.55.210 and will not:

1. Adversely affect water quality;

2. Adversely affect fish, wildlife, or their habitat;

3. Have an adverse effect on drainage and/or stormwater detention capabilities;

4. Lead to unstable earth conditions or create an erosion hazard or contribute to scouring actions;

5. Be materially detrimental to any other property or the City as a whole; or

6. Have adverse effects on any other critical areas.

E. Wetland and Buffer Uses. The following uses may be permitted within a wetland and wetland buffer in accordance with the review procedures of this chapter, provided they are not prohibited by any other applicable law and they are conducted in a manner so as to minimize impacts to the buffer and adjacent wetland:

1. Conservation and Restoration Activities. Conservation or restoration activities aimed at protecting or restoring the soil, water, vegetation, or wildlife;

2. Passive Recreation. Passive recreation facilities designed in accordance with an approved critical areas report, including:

a. Private walkways and trails; provided, that those pathways that are generally parallel to the perimeter of the wetland shall be located in the outer 25 percent of the buffer area. Walkway and trail surfaces in buffers shall be made of pervious materials and shall be a maximum of five feet wide. Where private walkways and trails must cross a wetland to reach a permitted water access structure, such as a dock, or a pedestrian bridge over an associated waterbody, the walkway or trail must be a raised boardwalk supported by piles that allow free movement of water beneath the structure;

b. Public walkways and trails; provided, that those pathways are located and designed based on existing site-specific conditions to minimize native vegetation removal, and are part of an approved public park or trail plan. The trail proposal shall be accompanied by a plan demonstrating that the existing ecological functions of the wetland or required buffer area on a project site would be improved. Trails may extend in or across a wetland if necessary to access viewing platforms or other viewpoints, access pedestrian bridges over an associated waterbody, or provide some other public purpose. Walkway and trail surfaces in buffers shall be made of pervious materials except that public multipurpose trails may be of impervious materials if they meet all other requirements, including water quality. Trail segments in wetlands must be a raised boardwalk supported by piles that allow free movement of water beneath the structure, but should be limited to protect ecological functions of the buffer and wetland;

c. Walkways and trails proposed in wetlands and buffers by private parties as part of subdivisions, multifamily development, or commercial or institutional uses may be allowed, subject to subsection (E)(2)(b) of this section, if they will be accessible to the general public, identified with visible signage, and are recorded on title. Providing connectivity to existing City or regional trail systems or completing or contributing to a trail linkage identified in the City’s Parks, Recreation and Open Space Plan or Walkways and Waterways Plan is encouraged;

d. Wildlife viewing structures;

e. Fishing access areas; and

f. Interpretive and other signs, benches, railings, and similar accessories to passive recreation that do not require significant ground disturbance, vegetation clearing, or concrete foundations;

3. Stormwater Management Facilities. Stormwater dispersion outfalls and bioswales may be located in the outer 25 percent of the buffer area of Category III and IV wetlands only. All other surface water management facilities are not allowed within the buffer area. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 14; Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.325 Buffer width alterations.

A. Buffer Conditions Shall Be Maintained. Except as otherwise specified or allowed in accordance with this chapter, wetland buffers shall be retained in an undisturbed condition.

B. Averaged Buffer Widths. The city manager may allow averaging of the wetland buffer width in accordance with an approved critical areas report and the best available science on a case-by-case basis. Averaging of buffer widths may only be allowed where a qualified professional biologist demonstrates that:

1. Additional protection to the wetland will be provided through implementation of a buffer enhancement plan;

2. It will not reduce wetland functions or values;

3. The wetland contains variations in sensitivity due to existing physical characteristics or the character of the buffer varies in slope, soils, or vegetation, and the wetland would benefit from a wider buffer in places and would not be adversely impacted by a narrower buffer in other places;

4. The total area contained in the buffer after averaging is no less than that which would be contained within the standard buffer; and

5. The buffer width shall not be reduced by more than 25 percent in any one place.

C. The City may approve a modification of the minimum required buffer in cases where an improved right-of-way, associated with a legally established roadway, transects the buffer. The buffer may be reduced to match the edge of the right-of-way closest to the wetland if the portion of the buffer on the other side of the roadway meets the following criteria:

1. Does not provide additional protection to the proposed development from flooding or other hazard, or to the wetland; and

2. Provides insignificant biological, geological or hydrological buffer functions relating to the other portion of the buffer adjacent to the wetland.

Improved rights-of-way are those that are maintained out of necessity as a cleared, graded, paved, mowed or otherwise altered surface to allow for access, maintenance, or safety.

D. The City may approve a modification of the minimum required buffer width where the proposed development or use is isolated from the critical area and its contiguous buffer by an existing legally established building, detached garage, accessory dwelling unit, commercial parking area, or retaining wall over six feet in height. The modification may not be requested for such improvements as fences, sheds, patios, decks, driveways, or other similar structures and impervious surfaces.

For the buffer modification to be approved, the applicant must demonstrate conclusively in a critical area report that all of the following criteria are met:

1. The existing legal improvement between the proposed development or use and the wetland creates a substantial barrier to buffer function;

2. The isolated section of buffer does not provide additional protection of the critical area from the proposed development; and

3. The isolated section of buffer does not provide significant hydrological, water quality, and wildlife buffer functions relating to the portion of the buffer adjacent to the critical area. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.330 Performance standards – Mitigation requirements.

A. Mitigation Shall Achieve Equivalent or Greater Ecological Functions. Mitigation for alterations to wetlands and buffers shall achieve equivalent or greater ecologic functions than exist in the impacted wetland and buffer. Mitigation plans shall be generally consistent with the Department of Ecology Guidelines found in Wetland Mitigation in Washington State – Part 2, Version 1, March 2006, Publication No. 06-060-011b.

B. Mitigation for Lost Functions and Values. Mitigation actions shall address functions affected by the alteration to achieve functional equivalency or improvement, and shall provide similar wetland functions as those lost except when:

1. The lost wetland provides minimal functions as determined by a site-specific function assessment and the proposed mitigation action(s) will provide equal or greater functions or will provide functions shown to be limiting within a watershed through a formal watershed assessment plan or protocol; or

2. Out-of-kind replacement will best meet formally identified regional goals, such as replacement of historically diminished wetland types.

C. Buffers for Mitigation Shall Be Consistent. When mitigation for a wetland impact includes creation of a new wetland area, the new area shall be provided with a functioning buffer consistent with the buffer requirements of this chapter, unless determined by the city manager through a variance or a reasonable use exemption that a different buffer would provide adequate protection to the critical area.

D. Preference of Mitigation Actions. Mitigation sequencing outlined in KMC 18.55.210 shall be demonstrated in each development proposal. Mitigation actions that require compensation by replacing, enhancing, or substitution shall occur in the following order of preference:

1. Restoring wetlands on upland sites that were formerly wetlands.

2. Creating wetlands in upland areas, considering degraded areas first.

3. Enhancing significantly degraded wetlands.

4. Preserving high quality wetlands that are under imminent threat.

E. Type and Location of Mitigation. Mitigation actions shall be conducted within the same sub-drainage basin or on the same site as the alteration except when all of the following apply:

1. There are no reasonable on-site or in-subdrainage-basin opportunities, or on-site and in-subdrainage-basin opportunities do not have a high likelihood of success due to development pressures or adjacent land uses, or on-site buffers or connectivity is inadequate;

2. Off-site mitigation has a greater likelihood of providing equal or improved wetland functions than the impacted wetland; and

3. Off-site locations shall be in the same subdrainage basin unless established regional or watershed goals for water quality, flood or conveyance, habitat or other wetland functions have been established and strongly justify location of mitigation at another site.

F. Mitigation Timing. Where feasible, mitigation or restoration projects shall be completed prior to activities that will disturb wetlands. In all other cases, mitigation shall be completed immediately following disturbance and prior to use or occupancy of the activity or development. Construction of mitigation projects shall be timed to reduce impacts to existing wildlife and flora.

G. Mitigation Ratios.

1. Acreage Replacement Ratios. The following ratios shall apply to creation or restoration that is in kind, on site, the same category, timed prior to or concurrent with alteration, and has a high probability of success. These ratios do not apply to remedial actions resulting from unauthorized alterations; greater ratios shall apply on a case-by-case basis. These ratios do not apply to the use of credits from a State-certified wetland mitigation bank. The first number specifies the acreage of replacement wetlands and the second specifies the acreage of wetlands altered.

Standard Wetland Mitigation Ratios  

	Category and Type of Wetland	Creation or Reestablishment	Rehabilitation1	Enhancement2

	Category I (Mature Forested) 	6:1	12:1	24:1

	Category I	4:1	8:1	16:1

	Category II	3:1	6:1	12:1

	Category III	2:1	4:1	8:1

	Category IV	1.5:1	3:1	6:1

	Buffer	1:1	1:1	1:1

1 “Rehabilitation” means the manipulation of the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics of a site with the goal of repairing natural or historic functions and processes of a degraded wetland. Rehabilitation results in a gain in wetland function but does not result in a gain in wetland acres. An example would be breaching a dike to reconnect wetlands to a floodplain.

2 “Enhancement” means the manipulation of the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics of a wetland to heighten, intensify, or improve specific function(s) or to change the growth stage or composition of the vegetation present. Enhancement is undertaken for specified purposes such as water quality improvement, floodwater retention, or wildlife habitat. Enhancement results in a change in wetland function(s) and can lead to a decline in other wetland functions, but does not result in a gain in wetland acres. Examples are planting vegetation, controlling nonnative or invasive species, and modifying site elevations to alter hydroperiods.

2. Increased Replacement Ratio. The city manager may increase the ratios under the following circumstances:

a. Uncertainty exists as to the probable success of the proposed restoration or creation; or

b. A significant period of time will elapse between impact and replication of wetland functions; or

c. Mitigation will occur off site versus on site; or

d. Proposed mitigation will result in a lower category wetland or reduced functions relative to the wetland being impacted; or

e. The impact was an unauthorized impact.

3. Decreased Replacement Ratio.

a. The city manager may decrease the creation/reestablishment ratios required for Category II and III wetlands to 2:1 and 1.5:1, respectively, under the following circumstances:

(1) The applicant’s qualified biologist provides documentation that increases the certainty of success of the proposed wetland restoration or creation. At a minimum, this documentation shall include groundwater monitoring in the area of proposed restoration or creation in the early growing season over a sufficient period of time to determine that there is a high probability of creating or restoring wetlands in that location; or

(2) Proposed mitigation will result in a higher functioning wetland (higher class) relative to the functions of the wetland being impacted; or

(3) The mitigation is successfully installed for a period of one year prior to the wetland being impacted. Successful installation shall be determined by a qualified biologist.

b. When a decreased replacement ratio is allowed, the mitigation shall be monitored for a period of no less than 10 years.

4. Credit/Debit Method. As an alternative to the standard mitigation ratios, the City may allow mitigation based on the “credit/debit” method developed by the Department of Ecology and documented in Calculating Credits and Debits for Compensatory Mitigation in Wetlands of Western Washington, Final Report, March 2012 (Hruby, 2012, or as revised).

H. Wetlands Enhancement as Mitigation. Impacts to wetlands may be mitigated by enhancement of existing significantly degraded wetlands. Applicants proposing to enhance wetlands must produce a critical areas report that identifies how enhancement will increase the functions of the degraded wetland and how this increase will adequately mitigate for the loss of wetland area and function at the impact site. An enhancement proposal must also show whether existing wetland functions will be reduced by the enhancement actions.

I. Mitigation Banking.

1. Credits from a wetland mitigation bank may be approved for use as compensation for unavoidable impacts to wetlands when:

a. The bank is certified under State rules;

b. The city manager determines that the wetland mitigation bank provides appropriate compensation for the authorized impacts; and

c. The proposed use of credits is consistent with the terms and conditions of the certified bank instrument.

2. Replacement ratios for projects using bank credits shall be consistent with replacement ratios specified in the certified bank instrument.

3. Credits from a certified wetland mitigation bank may be used to compensate for impacts located within the service area specified in the certified bank instrument. In some cases, the service area of the bank may include portions of more than one adjacent drainage basin for specific wetland functions.

J. In-Lieu Fee Programs. To aid in the implementation of off-site mitigation, the City may develop an in-lieu fee (ILF) program or allow participation in an ILF program, such as King County’s mitigation reserves program. ILF programs shall be developed and approved through a public process and be consistent with federal rules, State policy on in-lieu fee mitigation, and State water quality regulations. An approved ILF program sells compensatory mitigation credits to permittees whose obligation to provide compensatory mitigation is then transferred to the in-lieu program sponsor, a governmental or nonprofit natural resource management entity. Credits from an approved in-lieu fee program may be used when subsections (J)(1) through (6) of this section apply:

1. The city manager determines that it would provide environmentally appropriate compensation for the proposed impacts.

2. The mitigation will occur on a site identified using the site selection and prioritization process in the approved ILF program instrument.

3. The proposed use of credits is consistent with the terms and conditions of the approved ILF program instrument.

4. Land acquisition and initial physical and biological improvements of the mitigation site must be completed within three years of the credit sale. A one-year extension to this requirement may be granted by the city manager if the need for additional mitigation because of possible temporal loss is evaluated and addressed.

5. Projects using ILF credits shall have debits associated with the proposed impacts calculated by the applicant’s qualified wetland scientist using the method consistent with the credit assessment method specified in the approved instrument for the ILF program.

6. Credits from an approved ILF program may be used to compensate for impacts located within the service area specified in the approved ILF instrument.

K. Advance Mitigation. Mitigation for projects with pre-identified impacts to wetlands may be constructed in advance of the impacts if the mitigation is implemented according to federal rules, State policy on advance mitigation, and State water quality regulations.

L. Alternative Mitigation Plans. The city manager may approve alternative critical areas mitigation plans that are based on best available science, such as priority restoration plans that achieve restoration goals identified in the Shoreline Master Program (SMP). Alternative mitigation proposals must provide an equivalent or better level of protection of critical area functions and values than would be provided by the strict application of this chapter and must contain all of the standard components of a mitigation plan. The city manager shall consider the following for approval of an alternative mitigation proposal:

1. The proposal uses a watershed approach consistent with Selecting Wetland Mitigation Sites Using a Watershed Approach (Western Washington) (Ecology Publication No. 09-06-32, Olympia, WA, December 2009, or as revised).

2. Creation or enhancement of a larger system of natural areas and open space is preferable to the preservation of many individual habitat areas.

3. There is clear potential for success of the proposed mitigation at the proposed mitigation site.

4. A wetland of a different type is justified based on regional needs or functions and values; the replacement ratios may not be reduced or eliminated unless the reduction results in a preferred environmental alternative. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 §§ 15, 16; Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]

Article X. Streams and Lakes – Designation and Rating


18.55.400 Designation and rating of streams and lakes.

A. Stream and Lake Classifications. Streams and lakes shall be designated Type S, Type F, Type Np, and Type Ns according to the following criteria identified in WAC 222-16-030:

1. “Type S waters” means those segments of natural waters identified as “shorelines of the State” under Chapter 90.58 RCW, including the Sammamish River and the main stem of Swamp Creek, as well as Lake Washington.

2. “Type F waters” means segments of natural waters other than Type S waters, which are within the bankfull widths of defined channels and periodically inundated areas of their associated wetlands, or within lakes, ponds, or impoundments having a surface area of one-half acre or greater at seasonal low water and which in any case contain fish habitat.

3. “Type Np waters” means all segments of natural waters within the bankfull width of defined channels that are perennial nonfish habitat streams. Perennial streams are flowing waters that do not go dry any time of a year of normal rainfall and include the intermittent dry portions of the perennial channel below the uppermost point of perennial flow.

4. “Type Ns waters” means all segments of natural waters within the bankfull width of the defined channels that are not Type S, F, or Np waters. These are seasonal, nonfish habitat streams in which surface flow is not present for at least some portion of a year of normal rainfall and which are not located downstream from any stream reach that is a Type Np water. Ns waters must be physically connected by an aboveground channel system to Type S, F, or Np waters.

B. Presumption of Fish Use. Waters having any of the following characteristics are presumed to contain suitable fish habitat, and therefore are a Type F water:

1. Stream segments having a defined channel width of two feet or greater within the bankfull width and having a channel gradient of 16 percent or less;

2. Stream segments having a defined channel width of two feet or greater within the bankfull width and having a channel gradient greater than 16 percent and less than or equal to 20 percent, and having greater than 50 acres in contributing basin size based on hydrographic boundaries;

3. Ponds or impoundments having a surface area of less than one acre at seasonal low water and having an outlet to a fish stream; or

4. Ponds or impoundments having a surface area greater than one-half acre at seasonal low water.

C. Ditches. Ditches are artificial drainage features created in uplands through purposeful human action, such as irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, and canals. Purposeful creation must be demonstrated through documentation, photographs, statements and/or other evidence. Ditches are excluded from regulation as streams, unless they are used by native species of fish. Drainage setbacks are required as per the City’s surface water runoff policy (Chapter 13.35 KMC).

D. Lakes and ponds, which terms can be used interchangeably and are loosely differentiated in common use by the larger size of lakes, are surface water bodies distinguished from wetlands by the presence of deep water, typically two meters (6.6 feet) or greater.

E. Lakes, ponds and impoundments deliberately designed and created from dry sites, such as canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, temporary construction ponds (of less than three years duration), and landscape amenities, are not regulated by this chapter unless they are used by native fish. Purposeful creation must be demonstrated through documentation, photographs, statements and/or other evidence. However, lakes, ponds and impoundments intentionally created from dry areas as mitigation for a critical areas impact are regulated by this chapter.

F. Stream and Lake Buffers.

1. The establishment of buffer areas shall be required for all development proposals and activities in or adjacent to streams and lakes. The purpose of the buffer shall be to protect the integrity, function, and value of the stream or lake and provide habitat for great blue heron and other wildlife. Buffers shall be protected during construction by placement of a temporary barricade, on-site notice for construction crews of the presence of the stream or lake, and implementation of appropriate erosion and sedimentation controls. 

The following buffers are established for streams and lakes to protect functions and values:

	Stream Type	Buffer Width (Feet)

	Type S – Swamp Creek, Lake Washington and

Sammamish River	See KMC 16.65.020

	Type F – Little Swamp Creek	150

	Type F (other water bodies used by or containing habitat suitable for salmonid fish)	100

	Type F (water bodies used by or containing habitat suitable for fish other than salmonids)	50

	Type Np or Ns	25

	Any type stream restored from a pipe	25

2. Measurement of Buffers. Buffers shall be measured perpendicularly from the ordinary high water mark.

3. Increased Buffer Widths. The city manager shall require increased buffer widths in accordance with the recommendations of a qualified professional and the best available science on a case-by-case basis when a larger buffer is necessary to protect stream or lake functions and values based on site-specific characteristics. This determination shall be based on one or more of the following criteria:

a. A larger buffer is needed to protect other critical areas or their functions;

b. The buffer has a slope greater than 30 percent or is susceptible to erosion and standard erosion-control measures will not prevent adverse impacts to the stream or lake. The buffer should be measured from the toe of the slope. In such cases, the buffer shall be increased to include the slope or the standard buffer shall be drawn from the top of the slope, whichever provides greater protection. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]

Article XI. Streams and Lakes – Additional Report Requirements


18.55.410 Critical areas report.

Requirements for critical areas reports for streams and lakes are available from the city manager. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]

Article XII. Streams and Lakes – Allowed Uses and Alterations


18.55.415 Allowed uses.

A. Buffer Conditions Shall Be Maintained. Except as otherwise specified or allowed in accordance with this chapter and Division I of KMC Title 16 (Shoreline Management), stream and lake buffers shall be retained in an undisturbed condition.

B. Native vegetation removal or disturbance is not allowed in established buffers.

C. Buffer Uses. The following uses may be permitted within a stream or lake buffer in accordance with the review procedures of this chapter and Division I of KMC Title 16 (Shoreline Management), provided they are not prohibited by any other applicable law and they are conducted in a manner so as to minimize impacts to the buffer and adjacent stream or lake:

1. Conservation and Restoration Activities. Conservation or restoration activities aimed at protecting the soil, water, vegetation, or wildlife;

2. Passive Recreation. Passive recreation facilities designed in accordance with an approved critical areas report, including:

a. Private walkways and trails; provided, that those pathways that are generally parallel to the perimeter of the stream or lake shall be located in the outer 25 percent of the buffer area. Walkway and trail surfaces in buffers shall be made of pervious materials and shall be a maximum of five feet wide;

b. Public walkways and trails; provided, that those pathways are located and designed based on existing site-specific conditions to minimize native vegetation removal, and are part of an approved public park or trail plan. The trail proposal shall be accompanied by a plan demonstrating that the ecological functions of the overall required buffer area on a project site would be improved. Walkway and trail surfaces in buffers shall be made of pervious materials, except that public multipurpose trails may be of impervious materials if they meet all other requirements, including water quality. In order to allow for a waterfront promenade area along the inner harbor area of the Downtown Waterfront Shoreline Environment on Lake Washington, public access improvements may extend to the water’s edge;

c. Walkways and trails proposed in stream and lake buffers by private parties as part of subdivisions, multifamily development, or commercial or institutional uses may be allowed, subject to subsection (C)(2)(b) of this section, if they will be accessible to the general public, identified with visible signage, and are recorded on title. Providing connectivity to existing City or regional trail systems or completing or contributing to a trail linkage identified in the City’s Parks, Recreation and Open Space Plan or Walkways and Waterways Plan is encouraged;

d. Wildlife viewing structures;

e. Fishing access areas; and

f. Interpretive and other signs, benches, railings, and similar accessories to passive recreation that do not require significant ground disturbance, native vegetation removal, or concrete foundations.

3. Stormwater Management Facilities. Stormwater dispersion outfalls and bioswales may be located in the outer 25 percent of the buffer area. All other surface water management facilities are not allowed within the buffer area. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.420 Alterations.

A. Modification of Standard Buffer.

1. The City may approve a modification of the minimum required buffer in cases where an improved right-of-way, associated with a legally established roadway, transects the stream or lake buffer. The buffer may be reduced to match the edge of the right-of-way closest to the stream or lake if the portion of the buffer on the other side of the roadway meets the following criteria:

a. Does not provide additional protection to the proposed development from flooding or other hazard, or to the lake or stream; and

b. Provides insignificant biological, geological or hydrological buffer functions relating to the other portion of the buffer adjacent to the lake or stream.

Improved rights-of-way are those that are maintained out of necessity as a cleared, graded, paved, mowed or otherwise altered surface to allow for access, maintenance, or safety.

2. The City may approve a modification of the minimum required buffer width where the proposed development or use is isolated from the critical area and its contiguous buffer by an existing legally established building, detached garage, accessory dwelling unit, commercial parking area, retaining wall over six feet in height, or similar structure. The modification may not be requested for such improvements as fences, sheds, patios, decks, driveways, or other similar structures and impervious surfaces. For the buffer modification to be approved, the applicant must demonstrate conclusively in a critical area report that all of the following criteria are met:

a. The existing legal improvement between the proposed development or use and the stream or lake creates a substantial barrier to buffer function;

b. The isolated section of buffer does not provide additional protection of the critical area from the proposed development; and

c. The isolated section of buffer does not provide significant hydrological, water quality, and wildlife buffer functions relating to the portion of the buffer adjacent to the critical area.

B. Buffer Reduction with Enhancement. Standard buffer widths for degraded buffers of Type F, Ns, or Np waters may be reduced a maximum of 25 percent of the standard width through a combination of buffer enhancement and low impact development strategies. The applicant shall demonstrate that through enhancing the buffer and use of low impact development strategies the reduced buffer will function at a higher level than the standard buffer. Type S buffers and setbacks may only be reduced as outlined in KMC 16.60.030 or under the shoreline variance requirements of KMC 16.75.030.

The following table describes the maximum buffer reduction and minimum buffer width when a degraded buffer is enhanced:

	Stream Type	Maximum Buffer Reduction	Minimum Buffer Width (Feet)

	Type S – Swamp Creek, Lake Washington and Sammamish River	See KMC 16.60.030 or 16.75.030

	Type F – Little Swamp Creek	25 percent	112.5 feet

	Type F (other water bodies used by or containing habitat suitable for salmonid fish) 	25 percent	75 feet

	Type F (water bodies used by or containing habitat suitable for fish other than salmonids)	25 percent	37.5 feet

	Type Np or Ns	25 percent	18.75 feet

	Any type stream restored from a pipe	25 percent	18.75 feet

1. Prior to approval of a reduced buffer, a critical areas application shall meet all of the decisional criteria listed below. A reduced buffer will be approved in a degraded stream or lake buffer only if:

a. It will provide an overall improvement in water quality;

b. It will provide an overall enhancement to fish, wildlife, or their habitat;

c. It will provide a net improvement in drainage and/or stormwater detention capabilities;

d. It will not lead to unstable earth conditions or create an erosion hazard;

e. It will not be materially detrimental to any other property or the City as a whole; and

f. All exposed areas are stabilized with native vegetation, as appropriate.

2. As part of the buffer reduction request, the applicant shall submit a buffer enhancement plan prepared by a qualified professional and fund a review of the plan by the City’s critical areas consultant. The plan shall assess the habitat, water quality, stormwater detention, groundwater recharge, shoreline protection, and erosion protection functions of the buffer; assess the effects of the proposed modification on those functions; and address the six criteria listed in subsection (B)(1) of this section.

C. Stream Crossings. Stream crossings may be allowed and may encroach on the otherwise required stream buffer if:

1. All crossings are designed using the most recent version of Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife’s Water Crossing Design Guidelines (Barnard and others, 2013, or as revised), prioritizing bridges or other construction techniques which do not disturb the stream bed or bank, except that bottomless culverts or other appropriate methods demonstrated to provide fisheries protection may be used for Type F streams if the applicant demonstrates that such methods and their implementation will pose no harm to the stream or inhibit migration of fish;

2. All crossings are constructed during the summer low flow and are timed to avoid stream disturbance during periods when use is critical to salmonids;

3. Crossings do not occur over salmonid spawning areas unless the City determines that no other possible crossing site exists;

4. Bridge piers or abutments are not placed within the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) floodway or below the ordinary high water mark;

5. Crossings do not diminish the flood-carrying capacity of the stream;

6. Underground utility crossings are laterally drilled and located at a depth of four feet below the maximum depth of scour for the base flood predicted by a civil engineer licensed by the State of Washington. Temporary bore pits to perform such crossings may be permitted within the stream buffer established in this chapter; and

7. Crossings are minimized and serve multiple purposes and properties whenever possible.

D. Stream Relocations.

1. Stream relocations may be allowed only for:

a. Types F, Np, and Ns streams as part of a public project for which a public agency and utility exception is granted pursuant to this chapter; or

b. Type F streams with fish use other than salmonids, Np or Ns streams for the purpose of enhancing resources in the stream;

c. The location occurs on site except that relocation off site may be allowed if the applicant demonstrates that any on-site relocation is impracticable, the applicant provides all necessary easements and waivers from affected property owners and the off-site location is in the same drainage subbasin as the original stream.

2. For any relocation allowed by this section, the applicant shall base the design on the most recent version of the multiagency Stream Habitat Restoration Guidelines (Cramer, 2012, or as revised), and demonstrate, based on information provided by a civil engineer and a qualified biologist, that:

a. The equivalent base flood storage volume and function will be maintained;

b. There will be no adverse impact to local groundwater;

c. There will be no increase in velocity;

d. There will be no interbasin transfer of water;

e. There will be no increase in the sediment load;

f. There is an overall increase in habitat function and value for salmonids and other fish;

g. Requirements set out in the mitigation plan are met;

h. The relocation conforms to other applicable laws; and

i. All work will be carried out under the direct supervision of a qualified biologist.

E. Stream or Lake Enhancement/Restoration. Stream or lake enhancement and restoration not associated with any other development proposal may be allowed if:

1. Accomplished according to a plan consistent with the most recent version of the multiagency Stream Habitat Restoration Guidelines (Cramer, 2012, or as revised) for its design, implementation, maintenance and monitoring prepared by a civil engineer and a qualified biologist and carried out under the direction of a qualified biologist;

2. The project results in a net increase in stream or lake functions and values;

3. The enhancement or restoration is not associated with mitigation of a specific development proposal; and

4. The enhancement or restoration is limited to removal of nonnative vegetation and enhancement of riparian vegetation, placement of rock weirs, log controls, spawning gravel and other specific habitat improvements. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.430 Performance standards – Mitigation requirements.

A. Stream or Lake Mitigation. Mitigation of adverse impacts to aquatic or riparian habitat areas shall result in equivalent functions and values on a per function basis, be located as near to the alteration as feasible, and be located in the same subdrainage basin as the impacted habitat unless mitigation will be implemented via a City-approved in-lieu fee program or mitigation bank. See also KMC 18.55.200, 18.55.210 and 18.55.220.

B. Advance Mitigation. Mitigation for projects with pre-identified impacts to streams, lakes or their buffers may be constructed in advance of the impacts if the mitigation is implemented according to federal rules, State policy on advance mitigation, and State water quality regulations.

C. Alternative Mitigation Plans. The city manager may approve alternative critical areas mitigation plans that are based on best available science, such as priority restoration plans that achieve restoration goals identified in the Shoreline Master Program (SMP). Alternative mitigation proposals shall provide an equivalent or better level of protection of critical area functions and values than would be provided by the strict application of this chapter and shall contain all of the standard components of a mitigation plan. The city manager shall consider the following for approval of an alternative mitigation proposal:

1. The proposal uses a watershed approach consistent with the joint U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Compensatory Mitigation for Losses of Aquatic Resources (33 CFR Part 33, April 2008).

2. Creation or enhancement of a larger system of natural areas and open space is preferable to the preservation of many individual habitat areas.

3. There is clear potential for success of the proposed mitigation at the proposed mitigation site.

4. Mitigation in a different subbasin is justified, based on regional needs or functions and values; the replacement ratios may not be reduced or eliminated unless the reduction results in a preferred environmental alternative.

D. Mitigation Banking.

1. Credits from a mitigation bank may be approved for use as compensation for unavoidable impacts to aquatic habitats when:

a. The bank is certified under State rules;

b. The city manager determines that the mitigation bank provides appropriate compensation for the authorized impacts; and

c. The proposed use of credits is consistent with the terms and conditions of the certified bank instrument.

2. Accounting methods for quantifying project impacts and the necessary compensation shall be consistent with methods specified in the certified bank instrument.

3. Credits from a certified mitigation bank may be used to compensate for impacts located within the service area specified in the certified bank instrument. In some cases, the service area of the bank may include portions of more than one adjacent drainage basin.

E. In-Lieu Fee Programs. To aid in the implementation of off-site mitigation, the City may develop an in-lieu fee (ILF) program or allow participation in an ILF program, such as King County’s mitigation reserves program. ILF programs shall be developed and approved through a public process and be consistent with federal rules, State policy on in-lieu fee mitigation, and State water quality regulations. An approved ILF program sells compensatory mitigation credits to permittees whose obligation to provide compensatory mitigation is then transferred to the in-lieu program sponsor, a governmental or nonprofit natural resource management entity. Credits from an approved in-lieu fee program may be used when subsections (E)(1) through (6) of this section apply:

1. The city manager determines that it would provide environmentally appropriate compensation for the proposed impacts.

2. The mitigation will occur on a site identified using the site selection and prioritization process in the approved ILF program instrument.

3. The proposed use of credits is consistent with the terms and conditions of the approved ILF program instrument.

4. Land acquisition and initial physical and biological improvements of the mitigation site shall be completed within three years of the credit sale. A one-year extension to this requirement may be granted by the city manager if the need for additional mitigation because of possible temporal loss is evaluated and addressed.

5. Projects using ILF credits shall have debits associated with the proposed impacts calculated by the applicant’s qualified stream or lake scientist using the method consistent with the credit assessment method specified in the approved instrument for the ILF program.

6. Credits from an approved ILF program may be used to compensate for impacts located within the service area specified in the approved ILF instrument. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]

Article XIII. Fish and Wildlife Habitats of Importance – Designation


18.55.500 Designation of fish and wildlife habitats of importance.

A. Fish and wildlife habitats of importance are those habitat areas that serve a critical role in sustaining needed habitats and species for the functional integrity of the ecosystem, and which, if altered, may reduce the likelihood that the species will persist over the long term. In the City, habitats of importance meet any of the following criteria:

1. Documented presence of species listed by the federal government or the State of Washington as endangered, threatened or sensitive; or

2. Great blue heron rookeries or active nesting trees; or

3. Pileated woodpecker breeding habitat as mapped by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife in its Priority Habitats and Species Program; or

4. Biodiversity areas and corridors as mapped by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife in its Priority Habitats and Species Program; or

5. Bald eagle habitat, protected pursuant to the Federal Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act; or

6. Anadromous fish habitat; or

7. Habitat for species nominated and approved by the City per subsection C of this section.

B. All areas within the City meeting one or more of these criteria, regardless of any formal identification, are hereby designated critical areas and are subject to the provisions of this chapter.

C. The City may accept and consider nominations by Kenmore residents or property owners for habitat areas and species to be designated as fish and wildlife habitats of importance. Nominations will be accepted by the city manager on an annual basis and will be considered for approval by the city council following a public hearing on the nomination. Information to be included with a nomination request includes:

1. Specific geographic boundaries and list of species proposed, including a list of functions;

2. Rationale for nomination based on best available science, including the viability of the population in Kenmore and the contribution to biodiversity;

3. Causes for vulnerability, including a description of activities that compromise these areas, as well as a list of proposed management and protection measures;

4. Regulatory gaps regarding protection of the habitat or species; and

5. Nonenvironmental impacts affecting the habitat area and species (e.g., legal, cultural, recreational, and economic significance). [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]

Article XIV. Fish and Wildlife Habitats of Importance – Report Requirements


18.55.510 Critical areas report – Habitat management plan.

A. Habitat Management Plan. A habitat management plan is required when available maps, or other information, indicate the presence of fish and wildlife habitats of importance.

1. All habitat management plans shall be prepared by a qualified professional and are encouraged to be prepared in consultation with the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife.

2. Habitat Management Plan Content Requirements. Requirements for habitat management plans are available from the city manager. Plans also shall include:

a. An analysis of how the proposed development activities will affect the fish and wildlife habitats of importance and species of importance.

b. An analysis of mitigation sequencing per KMC 18.55.210, including a mitigation plan.

c. Consideration of the following issues:

(1) Establishment of a buffer around the fish and wildlife habitat of importance;

(2) Retention of certain vegetation or areas of vegetation critically important to the species of importance;

(3) Limitation of access to the fish and wildlife habitats of importance and buffer;

(4) Seasonal restrictions on construction activities on the subject property; and

(5) Clustering of development on the subject property.

d. Discussion of how the project complies with published Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife management recommendations for the species’ habitat, if available.

3. When bald eagle habitat is the only potential fish and wildlife habitat of importance on a site, applicants may self-certify that they are in compliance with the federal Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act by submitting a document generated online through the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service’s Bald and Golden Eagle Permit Recommendation Tool. Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife no longer maps bald eagle nest sites, so applicants would complete the certification based on their knowledge of their site and local conditions. The City may review the applicant’s certificate and require modification if more accurate information or updated standards for protection are available.

4. The applicant may combine a habitat management plan with any studies required by other laws and regulations (e.g., a biological assessment or biological evaluation). [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]

Article XV. Fish and Wildlife Habitats of Importance – Performance Standards


18.55.520 Performance standards – General requirements.

A. Buffers.

1. Establishment of Buffers. The city manager shall require the establishment of buffer areas for activities in, or adjacent to, fish and wildlife habitats of importance when needed to protect fish and wildlife habitats of importance. Buffers shall consist of an undisturbed area of native vegetation, or areas identified for restoration, established to protect the integrity, functions and values of the affected habitat. Buffer enhancement may be required. Required buffer widths shall reflect the sensitivity of the habitat and the type and intensity of human activity proposed to be conducted nearby, and shall be consistent with the management recommendations issued by the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife.

2. Seasonal Restrictions. When a species is more susceptible to adverse impacts during specific periods of the year, seasonal restrictions, as determined by the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife in a permit or in its management recommendations, or by another State or federal agency with expertise in the species or its habitat, may apply. Larger buffers may be required and activities may be further restricted during the specified season.

B. Alterations Shall Not Degrade the Functions and Values of Habitat. Wildlife habitat areas of importance may be altered only if the proposed alteration of the habitat or the mitigation proposed does not degrade the quantitative and qualitative functions and values of the habitat. Fish habitat areas of importance may be altered only when necessary to install water-dependent developments that are mitigated consistent with this chapter and Division I of KMC Title 16 (Shoreline Management), when applicable. 

C. Nonindigenous Species Shall Not Be Introduced. No plant, wildlife, or fish species not indigenous to the region shall be introduced into a fish and wildlife habitat of importance unless authorized by a State or federal permit or approval.

D. Mitigation Shall Result in Contiguous Habitat. When feasible, mitigation sites shall be located to achieve contiguous wildlife habitat corridors in accordance with a mitigation plan that is part of an approved critical areas report to minimize the isolating effects of development on habitat areas, so long as mitigation of aquatic habitat is located within the same aquatic ecosystem as the area disturbed.

E. Mitigation Shall Achieve Equivalent or Greater Biological Functions. Mitigation of alterations to habitat areas of importance shall achieve equivalent or greater biologic functions and shall include mitigation for adverse impacts upstream or downstream of the development proposal site. Mitigation shall address each function affected by the alteration to achieve functional equivalency or improvement on a per function basis.

F. Approvals Shall Be Supported by the Best Available Science. Any approval of alterations or impacts to a fish and wildlife habitat of importance shall be supported by the best available science. Special consideration shall be given to conservation or protection measures necessary to preserve or enhance anadromous fish and their habitat, such as salmon and bull trout, as required by WAC 365-195-900 through 365-195-925. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.530 Performance standards – Specific habitats.

A. Great Blue Heron Rookery.

1. A buffer equal to the distance of a 656-foot radius measured from the outermost nest tree in the rookery will be established around an active rookery. This area will be maintained in native vegetation. For the Kenmore heron rookery located adjacent to the Kenmore park-and-ride lot, the buffer excludes the area south of the north edge of the State Route 522 right-of-way and west of the east edge of the 73rd Avenue NE right-of-way.

2. Between January 1st and July 31st, no clearing, grading or land-disturbing activity shall be allowed within 656 feet of the rookery unless approved by the City. For the Kenmore heron rookery located adjacent to the Kenmore park-and-ride lot, the area south of the north edge of the State Route 522 right-of-way and west of the east edge of 73rd Avenue NE right-of-way is excluded.

3. Approval of permits for activities within the heron rookery buffer shall not occur prior to the approval of a habitat management plan by the City.

B. Anadromous Fish.

1. All activities, uses, and alterations proposed to be located in water bodies used by anadromous fish or in areas that affect such water bodies shall give special consideration to the preservation and enhancement of anadromous fish habitat, including, but not limited to, adhering to the following standards:

a. Activities shall be timed to occur only during the allowable work window as designated by the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife for the applicable species;

b. Applicant must demonstrate that an alternative alignment or location for the activity is not feasible;

c. The activity is designed so that it will not degrade the functions or values of the fish habitat or other critical areas; and

d. Any impacts to the functions or values of the anadromous fish habitat are mitigated in accordance with an approved habitat management plan.

2. Structures that prevent the migration of salmonids shall not be allowed in the portion of water bodies currently or historically used by anadromous fish. Fish bypass facilities shall be provided that allow the upstream migration of adult fish and shall prevent fry and juveniles migrating downstream from being trapped or harmed. See also KMC 18.55.420(C). [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0334 § 17; Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]

Article XVI. Geologically Hazardous Areas – Designation


18.55.600 Purpose.

The primary purpose of geologically hazardous area regulations is to avoid and minimize potential impacts to life and property from geologic hazards. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.610 Designation of geologically hazardous areas.

Geologically hazardous areas include areas susceptible to erosion, landsliding, earthquake, or other geological events. They pose a threat to the health and safety of citizens when incompatible development is sited in hazard areas. Such incompatible development may not only place itself at risk, but also may increase the hazard to surrounding development and use. Areas susceptible to one or more of the following types of hazards shall be designated as a geologically hazardous area:

A. Erosion hazard;

B. Landslide hazard;

C. Seismic hazard; and

D. Other geological events including debris flows and differential settlement. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.620 Designation of specific hazard areas.

A. Erosion Hazard Areas. Erosion hazard areas are those areas identified by the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Natural Resources Conservation Service or identified by a special study as having a “moderate to severe,” “severe,” or “very severe” erosion potential.

B. High Landslide Hazard Areas. High landslide hazard areas are areas at high risk of landslides based on a combination of geologic, topographic, and hydrologic factors. They include areas susceptible because of any combination of bedrock, soil, slope (gradient), slope aspect, structure, hydrology, or other factors. Examples of these may include, but are not limited to, the following:

1. Areas of historic failures, such as:

a. Those areas delineated by the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Natural Resources Conservation Service as having a “severe” limitation for building site development; or

b. Areas designated as Quaternary slumps, earthflows, mudflows, or landslides on maps published by the U.S. Geological Survey or State Department of Natural Resources; or

c. Areas identified on King County’s 2017 map of unstable slopes and as amended;

2. Areas with all three of the following characteristics:

a. Slopes steeper than 15 percent; and

b. Hillsides intersecting geologic contacts with a relatively permeable sediment overlying relatively impermeable sediment; and

c. Springs or groundwater seepage;

3. Areas that have shown movement during the post-glacial period (from 16,000 years ago to the present) or that are underlain or covered by mass wastage debris of that time period, as shown on U.S. Geological Survey, Washington Department of Natural Resources, or King County maps;

4. Areas potentially unstable because of rapid stream incision, stream bank erosion, and undercutting by wave action; and

5. Areas located in a canyon or on an active alluvial fan, presently or potentially subject to inundation by debris flows or catastrophic flooding.

C. Moderate Landslide Hazard Areas. Moderate landslide hazard areas are areas at moderate risk of landslides based on a combination of geologic, topographic, and hydrologic factors. They include areas susceptible because of any combination of bedrock, soil, slope (gradient), slope aspect, structure, hydrology, or other factors. Examples of these may include, but are not limited to, the following:

1. Areas with a slope of 40 percent or steeper and with a vertical relief of 10 or more feet. A slope is delineated by establishing its toe and measured by averaging the inclination over at least 10 feet of vertical relief.

D. Seismic Hazard Areas. Seismic hazard areas are locations subject to severe risk of damage as a result of earthquake-induced ground shaking, slope failure, settlement, soil liquefaction, lateral spreading, tsunami, or surface faulting. One indicator of potential for future earthquake damage is a record of earthquake damage in the past. Ground shaking is the primary cause of earthquake damage in Washington. The strength of ground shaking is primarily affected by:

1. The magnitude of an earthquake;

2. The distance from the source of an earthquake;

3. The type or thickness of geologic materials at the surface; and

4. The type of subsurface geologic structure.

Settlement, soil liquefaction, and lateral spreading occur in areas underlain by cohesionless, loose, or soft saturated soils of low density, typically in association with shallow groundwater. Tsunami or seiche waves triggered by an earthquake or seismically induced landslides can inundate shoreline-adjacent land, such as along Lake Washington or the lower reaches of the Sammamish River.

In Kenmore, seismic hazard areas include liquefaction-prone areas and a potential strand of the Southern Whidbey Island Fault Zone known as the Kenmore Lineament as designated by the Washington Department of Natural Resources.

E. Other Hazard Areas. Geologically hazardous areas shall also include areas determined by the city manager to be susceptible to other geological events, including debris flows and differential settlement. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]

Article XVII. Geologically Hazardous Areas – Report Requirements


18.55.630 Critical areas report.

A. A critical areas report shall be required for all proposed alterations of properties that are located within 200 feet of any geologically hazardous area. Requirements for critical areas reports for geologically hazardous areas are available from the city manager.

B. In the event that the applicant’s geotechnical consultant and the City’s geotechnical reviewer cannot resolve the geotechnical issues and do not agree on required development conditions, the city manager may require a third-party review of the critical areas report. The applicant’s consultant and the City’s reviewer shall select a mutually agreed-upon qualified professional to provide the final opinion. The applicant shall fund this review and shall make substantive changes to the proposed alteration or provide additional analysis as directed by the third-party reviewer. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]

Article XVIII. Geologically Hazardous Areas – Performance Standards


18.55.640 Performance standards – General requirements.

A. Structures and site improvements shall be clustered to avoid geologically hazardous areas and other critical areas;

B. Alterations of geologically hazardous areas or associated buffers may only occur for activities that:

1. Will not increase the threat of the geological hazard to adjacent properties beyond predevelopment conditions;

2. Will not adversely impact other critical areas;

3. Are designed so that the hazard to the project is eliminated or mitigated to a level equal to or less than predevelopment conditions; and

4. Are determined to be safe as sited and designed and under anticipated conditions by a qualified engineer, or engineering geologist, as appropriate, licensed in the State of Washington;

C. Critical Facilities Prohibited. Critical facilities shall not be sited within geologically hazardous areas unless there is no other practical alternative. If so sited, the design shall be adequate to mitigate the effects of the hazard. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.650 Performance standards – Specific hazards.

A. Erosion Hazard Areas. Erosion shall meet the following requirements:

1. Buffer Not Required for Erosion Hazard Areas. No buffer is required from an area categorized as only an erosion hazard area.

2. Best Management Practices. Best management practices for sediment and erosion control shall be implemented in an erosion hazard area.

3. Vegetation Shall Be Retained. Unless otherwise provided or as part of an approved alteration, removal of vegetation from an erosion hazard area shall be prohibited.

4. Seasonal Restriction. Site development work shall be allowed only from May 1st to October 1st of each year; provided, that the city manager may extend or shorten the dry season on a case-by-case basis depending on actual weather conditions, except that timber harvest, not including brush clearing or stump removal, may be allowed pursuant to an approved forest practice permit issued by the City or the Department of Natural Resources.

5. Utility Lines and Pipes. Utility lines and pipes shall be permitted in erosion hazard areas only when the applicant demonstrates that no other practical alternative is available. Such utilities shall be designed by qualified professionals to resist ground movement and erosion.

6. Point Discharges. Point discharges from surface water facilities and roof drains onto or upstream from an erosion hazard area shall be prohibited except as follows:

a. Conveyed via continuous storm pipe downslope to a point where there are no erosion hazard areas downstream or downslope from the discharge; or

b. Discharged at flow durations matching predeveloped conditions, with adequate energy dissipation, into existing channels that previously conveyed stormwater runoff in the predeveloped state.

7. Alterations. In addition to meeting the requirements in KMC 18.55.640, alterations of an erosion hazard area may only occur for activities for which a special study is submitted demonstrating that the alteration will not increase surface water discharge or sedimentation to adjacent properties beyond predevelopment conditions.

B. Landslide Hazard Areas. In addition to meeting the requirements in KMC 18.55.640, activities on sites containing landslide hazards shall meet the following requirements:

1. General Standards. The following standards shall apply in all landslide hazard areas:

a. Buffer Required for Landslide Hazard Areas. A buffer shall be established from all edges of landslide hazard areas. The size of the buffer shall be determined by the city manager to eliminate or minimize the risk of property damage, death or injury resulting from landslides caused in whole or part by the development, based upon review of and concurrence with a critical area report prepared by a qualified professional.

(1) Minimum Buffer. The minimum buffer shall be equal to the height of the slope, as measured from the toe to the top, or 50 feet, whichever is greater.

(2) Buffer Reduction. The buffer may be reduced to a minimum of 25 feet when a qualified professional demonstrates to the city manager’s satisfaction based upon review of a special study that the reduction will adequately protect the proposed development, adjacent developments and uses and the subject critical area through slope stability improvements or structural means.

(3) Increased Buffer. The buffer may be increased where the city manager determines a larger buffer is necessary to prevent risk of damage to proposed and existing development.

b. Vegetation Shall Be Retained. Unless otherwise provided or as part of an approved alteration, removal of vegetation from a landslide hazard area or related buffer shall be prohibited.

c. Point Discharges. Point discharges from surface water facilities and roof drains onto or upstream from a landslide hazard area shall be prohibited except as follows:

(1) Conveyed via continuous storm pipe downslope to a point where there are no landslide hazard areas downstream or downslope from the discharge;

(2) Discharged at flow durations matching predeveloped conditions, with adequate energy dissipation, into existing channels that previously conveyed stormwater runoff in the predeveloped state; or

(3) Dispersed discharge upslope of the steep slope onto a low-gradient undisturbed buffer demonstrated to be adequate to infiltrate all surface and stormwater runoff, and where it can be demonstrated that such discharge will not increase the saturation of the slope.

d. Utility Lines and Pipes.

(1) Utility lines and pipes shall be permitted in landslide hazard areas only when the applicant demonstrates that no other practical alternative is available. The line or pipe shall be located aboveground and properly anchored and/or designed so that it will continue to function in the event of an underlying landslide. It must be demonstrated by the applicant that a utility line within the landslide hazard area has been designed in a manner that does not negatively impact the stability of the slope, minimizes or eliminates the potential for rupture or failure, and ensures that in the event of failure there will not be a life/safety risk. Stormwater conveyance shall be allowed only through a high-density polyethylene pipe with fuse-welded joints, or similar product that is technically equal or superior. Automatic shutoff valves shall be provided on petroleum or natural gas lines to isolate the landslide area.

(2) Access roads to serve utilities may be permitted within a landslide hazard area and associated buffer if the City determines that no other feasible alternative exists, and the road is designed so as not to lower the stability of the slope. Such a road shall not be used for general ingress/egress to the property unless otherwise approved as part of a development proposal.

e. Seasonal Restriction. Permitted site development work shall be allowed only from May 1st to October 1st of each year; provided, that the city manager may extend or shorten the dry season on a case-by-case basis depending on actual weather conditions, except that timber harvest, not including brush clearing or stump removal, may be allowed pursuant to an approved forest practice permit issued by the City or the Washington Department of Natural Resources. An exception may be granted by the city manager for emergency repair of structures or landslides when waiting for the clearing window will (1) create a life-threatening risk; (2) do additional damage to the structure; or (3) damage adjacent property or structures.

f. Trails. Trails shall be permitted when all of the following conditions have been met:

(1) The proposed trail shall not decrease the existing factor of safety within the landslide hazard area or any required buffer;

(2) The proposed trail is for pedestrian use only, and is a maximum of four feet wide;

(3) The trail shall not be sited within a landslide hazard area or associated buffer when there is such a high risk of landslide activity that the use of the trail would be hazardous; and

(4) The trail shall be designed and constructed using an engineered drainage system or other methods to prevent the trail surface from becoming a drainage course.

g. Subdivisions. The division of land in landslide hazard areas and associated buffers is subject to the following:

(1) Land that is located wholly within a landslide hazard area or its minimum buffer as required by subsection (B)(1)(a) of this section shall not be subdivided.

(2) Land that is located partially within a landslide hazard area or its minimum buffer may be divided; provided, that each resulting lot has sufficient buildable area outside of, and will not affect, or be affected by, the landslide hazard area or its buffer. For single-family residential subdivisions and short subdivisions on sites in the R-4 zone located partially within a landslide hazard area and its minimum buffer, minimum lot size in the area outside of the landslide hazard area and its buffer may be reduced to 5,400 square feet with no limitation on the percentage of smaller lots, regardless of KMC 18.21.030, Footnote 16. These smaller lots shall be located so as to have the least impact on surrounding properties in terms of consistency of street frontages and privacy of abutting properties and the lot area shall exclude access easements and access panhandles.

(3) Access roads shall be allowed within a landslide hazard area and associated buffer only if the City determines that no other feasible alternative exists, and the road is designed so as not to lower the stability of the slope.

h. Prohibited Development. On-site sewage disposal systems, including drain fields, shall be prohibited within landslide hazard areas and related buffers.

2. High Landslide Hazard Areas – Additional Standards.

a. No new alteration shall be permitted in a high landslide hazard area unless approved as a reasonable use exception, KMC 18.55.180.

b. Modifications to a previously approved alteration, including remodeling of an existing residence, in a high landslide hazard area may be permitted only if a critical areas report is submitted demonstrating that the proposal is determined to be safe as sited and designed and under anticipated conditions by a qualified engineer, or engineering geologist, as appropriate, licensed in the State of Washington.

3. Moderate Landslide Hazard Areas – Additional Standards.

a. Design Standards. Alterations of a moderate landslide hazard area and/or its buffer may only occur for activities for which a critical areas report is submitted. Alterations shall be designed to meet the following basic requirements unless it can be demonstrated that an alternative design that deviates from one or more of these standards provides greater long-term slope stability while meeting all other provisions of this article. The requirement for long-term slope stability shall exclude designs that require regular and periodic maintenance to maintain their level of function. The basic development design standards are:

(1) The proposed development shall not decrease the factor of safety for landslide occurrences below the limits of 1.5 for static conditions and 1.2 for dynamic conditions. Analysis of dynamic conditions shall be based on a minimum horizontal acceleration as established by the current version of the International Building Code;

(2) Structures and improvements shall minimize alterations to the natural contour of the slope and foundations shall be tiered where possible to conform to existing topography;

(3) Structures and improvements shall be located to preserve the most critical portion of the site and its natural landforms and vegetation;

(4) The proposed development shall not decrease slope stability on adjacent properties or result in greater risk or a need for increased buffers on neighboring properties;

(5) The use of retaining walls that allow the maintenance of existing natural slope area is preferred over graded artificial slopes; and

(6) Development shall be designed to minimize impervious lot coverage.

C. Slopes Created by Previous Grading. Artificial slopes meeting the criteria of a landslide hazard area based on slope steepness and height that were created through previous permitted grading or are legally nonconforming may be further altered or graded, provided the applicant provides information from a qualified professional demonstrating that the naturally occurring slope, as it existed prior to the permitted grading, did not meet any of the criteria for a landslide hazard area and that a new hazard will not be created. Previously graded slopes meeting the criteria of a landslide hazard area that were not permitted or were illegally created are considered to be landslide hazard areas.

D. Seismic Hazard Areas. Activities proposed to be located in seismic hazard areas shall meet the standards of KMC 18.55.640, Performance standards – General requirements, and the International Building Code. Development or renovation of property in designated tsunami or seiche zones, when identified by the USGS or Washington State Department of Natural Resources, may be allowed if taking into account Designing for Tsunamis, Seven Principles for Planning and Designing for Tsunami Hazards (National Tsunami Hazard Mitigation Program, 2001) and following the regulations for floodways.

E. Other Hazard Areas. Activities on sites adjacent to geologically hazardous areas shall meet the standards of KMC 18.55.640, Performance standards – General requirements. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]

Article XIX. Flood Hazard Areas


18.55.700 Purpose.

The Washington State Legislature has delegated the responsibility to each community to adopt floodplain management regulations consistent with the National Flood Insurance Program designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. The State Legislature also has established that floodplains and other areas subject to flooding perform important hydrologic functions, and as such they must also be regulated as critical areas under the Growth Management Act (GMA). This article addresses both mandates as an integrated set of regulations.

The flood hazard areas of the City of Kenmore, which encompass the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) designated areas of special flood hazard, are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. These flood losses may be caused by the cumulative effect of development in areas of flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities.

Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated, anchored, or otherwise protected from flood damage contribute to flood losses and may cause damage in other areas. The purpose of this article is to establish minimum standards for developments located within or adjacent to flood hazard areas, including areas of special flood hazard. The following statements describe the purpose of this article:

A. Protect human life and health;

B. Minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control projects;

C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding;

D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

E. Minimize damage to public infrastructure, facilities and utilities;

F. Minimize damage to critical fish and wildlife habitat areas;

G. Protect frequently flooded areas that provide natural and beneficial ecological functions, including providing vital habitat to support salmon and other fish and wildlife species;

H. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood hazard area;

I. Ensure that those who occupy flood hazard areas assume responsibility for their actions; and

J. Qualify for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program, thereby providing owners located within the mapped area of special flood hazard the opportunity to purchase flood insurance. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.705 Definitions.

Most of the terms used in this article are defined in Chapter 18.20 KMC. However, there are some terms used in this article that are required to have unique meanings separate from those in Chapter 18.20 KMC. Those terms listed below are defined in 44 CFR Part 59.1 and supersede those provided in Chapter 18.20 KMC for purposes of administering this article. Any undefined terms used in these definitions will also be based on 44 CFR Part 59.1.

A. “Appeal” means a request for a review of the interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance.

B. “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

C. “Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the City.

D. “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

E. “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a recreational vehicle.

F. “New construction” means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial flood insurance rate map or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, “new construction” means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by the City and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

G. “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

1. Built on a single chassis;

2. Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

3. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and

4. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

H. “Structure” means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.

I. “Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

2. Any alteration of an historic structure; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an historic structure.

J. “Variance” means a grant of relief by the City from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.707 Lands to which this article applies.

This article shall apply to all flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the City of Kenmore, including areas of special flood hazards as mapped by FEMA and shown on the FIRM. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.710 Basis for establishing flood hazard area.

A. The City shall determine the flood hazard area after obtaining, reviewing and utilizing base flood elevations and available floodway data for a flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, often referred to as the “100-year flood.” The base flood is determined for existing conditions, unless a basin plan including projected flows under future developed conditions has been completed and adopted by the City, in which case these future flow projections shall be used.

B. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administrator (FIA) in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study of King County, Washington and Incorporated Areas,” dated August 19, 2020, and any revisions thereto, with an accompanying effective flood insurance rate map (FIRM), dated August 19, 2020, and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. The flood insurance study is on file at Kenmore City Hall. In areas where the flood insurance study for the City includes detailed base flood elevation calculations, those calculations will be used until projections of future flows are completed and approved by the City and FEMA.

C. The City may use other sources of flood hazard data to determine floodplain boundaries, floodway boundaries, base flood elevations or cross-sections when identifying a flood hazard area if the data from sources listed below is more restrictive than the effective data:

1. Preliminary flood insurance rate maps;

2. Preliminary flood insurance studies;

3. Draft flood boundary work maps and associated technical reports;

4. Critical area reports prepared in accordance with FEMA standards contained in 44 CFR Part 65 and consistent with the King County Surface Water Design Manual provisions for floodplain analysis;

5. Approved letter of map amendments;

6. Approved letter of map revisions;

7. Channel migration zone maps and studies;

8. Historical flood hazard information;

9. Wind and wave data provided by the United States Army Corps of Engineers; and

10. Any other available data that accurately classifies and delineates the flood hazard area or base flood elevation.

D. Where elevation data is not available either through the flood insurance study or from the FIRM, or another authoritative source for the City to administer the floodplain development requirements, applications for building permits shall be reviewed to ensure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a federal, State or local source; historical data; documented high water marks; photographs of past flooding; or additional modeling studies, etc., where available. Structures shall be elevated two feet above the highest adjacent grade in these zones.

E. Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less). [Ord 20-0508 § 1; Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.715 Permits.

A. Development Permit Required. A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any flood hazard area. The permit shall be for all structures, including manufactured homes as defined in KMC 18.55.705, and for all development as defined in KMC 18.55.705.

B. Application for Development Permit. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the City of Kenmore and may include but not be limited to plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:

1. Elevation in relation to mean sea level and the effective flood study base flood elevation survey data of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;

2. Elevation in relation to mean sea level and the effective flood study base flood elevation survey datum to which any structure has been floodproofed;

3. Map depicting existing conditions, wetlands, streams, water bodies, designated fish and wildlife habitats of importance, the boundary of the flood hazard area and floodway, and the location of grading and structures in the proposed development;

4. Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and

5. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing standards in this article.

C. All elevated construction shall be designed and certified by a professional structural engineer licensed by the State of Washington and shall be approved by the City prior to construction.

D. Prior to approving any permit, the City shall determine that all permits required by State or federal law have been obtained.

E. A notice on title shall be recorded consistent with KMC 18.55.250. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.720 Final certification by surveyor.

A. For all new structures or substantial improvements in a flood hazard area, the applicant shall provide certification by a professional land surveyor licensed by the State of Washington of:

1. The actual as-built elevation of the lowest floor, including basement; and

2. The actual as-built elevation to which the structure is floodproofed, if applicable.

B. The surveyor shall indicate if the structure has a basement. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.723 Designation and responsibilities of the local administrator.

The city manager is hereby appointed to administer and implement this article by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. Duties of the city manager shall include, but not be limited to:

A. Review of the flood hazard area maps, and other source documents, for any development proposal to determine whether the proposed project area for a regulated activity falls within a potential flood hazard area;

B. Review of proposed development located within a flood hazard area to ensure compliance with the flood hazard area standards set forth in this article; and

C. Interpretation of flood hazard area boundaries. The city manager shall make interpretations, where needed, as to exact location of the boundaries of the flood hazard area, including the FEMA-mapped area of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation to the hearing examiner as provided in Chapter 19.30 KMC. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.725 Information to be obtained and maintained by the City.

A. The City shall obtain, verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level and the base flood elevation data) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement.

B. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures, the City shall maintain the floodproofing certifications required in this article.

C. Alteration of Watercourses.

1. The City shall notify adjacent communities and the Department of Ecology, or federal resource agencies where required, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administrator through appropriate notification means.

2. The City shall require that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocation portion of said watercourse is maintained. 

3. Base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. If a project will alter the base flood elevation or boundaries of the area of special flood hazard, then the project proponent shall provide the City with engineering documentation and analysis regarding the proposed change. If the change to the base flood elevation or boundaries of the area of special flood hazard would normally require a Letter of Map Change, then the applicant shall initiate, and receive approval of, a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) prior to approval of the development permit. The project shall be constructed in a manner consistent with the approved CLOMR. As soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information becomes available, the city manager shall notify the Federal Insurance Administrator of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data in accordance with 44 CFR Part 65.3. The City reserves the right to require the applicant to develop and provide the required technical or scientific data. Such a submission is necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements will be based upon current data.

4. The City shall notify the Federal Insurance Administrator in writing of acquisition by means of annexation, incorporation or otherwise of additional areas of jurisdiction.

D. The City shall maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.730 Development standards applicable to all flood hazard areas.

Development proposals on sites within flood hazard areas, including the area of special flood hazard, shall meet the following requirements:

A. Buffers. No critical area buffer is required for a flood hazard area.

B. Anchoring.

1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; and

2. All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (reference FEMA’s “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas” guidebook for additional techniques).

C. Construction Materials and Methods.

1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

3. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other utility and service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

4. Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.

D. Utilities.

1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.

2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters.

3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. They shall be, to the extent possible, located outside of the flood hazard area. The installation of a new on-site sewage disposal system in the flood hazard area may be allowed if no feasible alternative site is available.

4. Aboveground utility transmission lines, other than electric transmission lines, shall only be allowed for the transport of nonhazardous substances.

5. Buried utility transmission lines transporting hazardous substances shall be buried at a minimum depth of four feet below the maximum depth of scour for the base flood, as predicted by a professional civil engineer licensed by the State of Washington, and shall achieve sufficient negative buoyancy so that any potential for flotation or upward migration is eliminated.

6. Water wells shall be located on high ground that is not in the floodway.

E. Encroachments. The cumulative effect of any proposed development, where combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the City. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.740 Development standards for specific uses in flood hazard areas.

A. Residential Construction.

1. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot above the base flood elevation. In any flood hazard area where the base flood elevation has not been determined on the FIRM, the base flood elevation is determined by the city manager consistent with KMC 18.55.710.

2. Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited unless used solely for parking, access or storage. These areas shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

a. A minimum of two openings on opposite walls having a total open area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided;

b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and

c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.

B. Manufactured Homes.

1. Except as noted in subsection (B)(2) of this section, all manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within any flood hazard area shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated one foot above the base flood elevation and shall be securely anchored to an adequately designed foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. In any flood hazard area where the base flood elevation has not been determined on the FIRM, the base flood elevation is determined by the city manager consistent with KMC 18.55.710. The City reserves the right to require the applicant to perform the engineering studies necessary to determine the base flood elevation.

2. Manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within a flood hazard area that have not incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood shall be elevated so that either:

a. The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated one foot above the base flood elevation; or

b. The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and is securely anchored to an adequately designed foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.

C. Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot above the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:

1. Be floodproofed so that below one foot above the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

2. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;

3. Be certified by a professional civil or structural engineer licensed by the State of Washington that the floodproofing methods are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impacts, uplift forces and other factors associated with the base flood. After construction, the engineer shall certify that the permitted work conforms with the approved plans and specifications;

4. Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in subsection (A)(2) of this section;

5. Approved building permits for floodproofed nonresidential structures shall contain a statement notifying applicants that flood insurance premiums shall be based upon rates for structures which are one foot below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building floodproofed to the base flood level will be rated as one foot below);

6. Sewage and agricultural waste storage facilities shall be floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.

D. Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within flood hazard areas shall either:

1. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;

2. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on their wheels or jacking systems, attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or

3. Meet the requirements of subsection B of this section, including the elevation and anchoring requirements.

E. Critical Facility. Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of flood hazard areas, including the area of special flood hazard. Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the flood hazard area if no feasible alternative site is available and if the proposal is evaluated through the conditional use permit process. Critical facilities constructed within the flood hazard area shall have the lowest floor elevated three feet or more above the level of the base flood elevation (100-year) at the site. Floodproofing and sealing measures shall be taken to ensure that hazardous substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities from the nearest maintained public street or roadway.

F. Subdivisions, short subdivisions and binding site plans shall meet the following requirements:

1. New building lots shall contain 5,000 square feet or more of buildable land outside the flood hazard area, and building setback areas shall be shown on the face of the plat to restrict permanent structures to this buildable area;

2. All utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems shall be located and constructed consistent with KMC 18.55.730;

3. Base flood data and flood hazard notes shall be shown on the face of the recorded subdivision, short subdivision or binding site plan, including, but not limited to, the base flood elevation, required flood protection elevations and the boundaries of the flood hazard area and the floodway, if determined;

4. The following notice shall also be shown on the face of the recorded subdivision, short subdivision or binding site plan for all affected lots:

NOTICE

Lots and structures located within flood hazard areas may be inaccessible by emergency vehicles during flood events. Residents and property owners should take appropriate advance precautions.

5. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; and

6. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.750 Development in the floodway.

A. Encroachments. Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development, within the adopted regulatory floodway are prohibited unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels within the City during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

B. If the requirements in subsection A of this section are satisfied, the requirements which apply to all flood hazard areas (KMC 18.55.730 and 18.55.740), including the area of special flood hazard, shall also apply to all new construction and substantial improvements in the floodway. The more restrictive requirements shall apply where there is a conflict.

C. Any development proposal, including, but not limited to, new or reconstructed structures, that results in any increase in the base flood elevation shall meet the following requirements:

1. Amendments to the flood insurance rate map are approved and adopted by FEMA, in accordance with all requirements of 44 CFR Part 65.7, to incorporate the increase in the base flood elevation; and

2. Appropriate legal documents are prepared in which all property owners affected by the increased flood elevations consent to the impacts on their property. These documents shall be filed with the title of record for the affected properties.

D. If allowed, post or piling construction techniques which permit water flow beneath a structure shall be used. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.760 Habitat assessment.

To comply with Federal Endangered Species Act requirements, the applicant shall provide an assessment of impacts to federal, State or locally listed species, habitat, water quality and aquatic riparian habitat impacts for any proposal lying within a mapped area of special flood hazard. See Article XIV of this chapter. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.770 Warnings and disclaimer of liability.

The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Floods larger than the regulatory base flood can and will occur. Flooding and flood hazards may occur in unmapped areas. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the City of Kenmore, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.780 Variances in flood hazard areas.

A. Conditions for Variances.

1. Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, provided subsections (B)(1) through (11) of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

2. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures or the City’s local landmarks, upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

3. Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

4. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

5. Variances shall only be issued upon:

a. A showing of good and sufficient cause;

b. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and

c. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

6. Variances as interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program are based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, or economic or financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such, variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare.

7. Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited circumstances to allow a lesser degree of floodproofing than watertight or dry floodproofing, where it can be determined that such action will have low damage potential, complies with all other variance conditions except subsection (A)(1) of this section and otherwise complies with KMC 18.55.730(A) and (B).

8. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.

B. If a variance to the standards in this article is proposed, the decisionmaker shall consider, in addition to the conditions itemized in subsection A of this section, and the standard variance criteria itemized in KMC 18.115.030:

1. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

2. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

3. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

4. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

5. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

6. The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

8. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

9. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

10. The expected depths, heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and

11. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.

C. The city manager shall report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.790 Penalties for noncompliance.

No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this article by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Kenmore from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.795 Abrogation and greater restrictions.

This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1).]

Article XX. Groundwater Susceptibility and Critical Aquifer Recharge Areas


18.55.800 Designation of groundwater susceptibility and critical aquifer recharge areas.

Groundwater recharge areas play an important role in groundwater quality and the general environmental health of the area in which they are located. Although no critical aquifer recharge areas are designated within the City limits at this time, the City understands the importance of protecting its groundwater resources. For example, groundwater can be an important source of water in City streams and wetlands, particularly during dry summer months, which supports associated vegetation communities and aquatic habitat. Some communities rely on groundwater for irrigation or drinking water. In the City, areas susceptible to groundwater contamination have been designated using the City of Kenmore Groundwater Susceptibility Map, which was developed based on the Guidance Document for the Establishment of Critical Aquifer Recharge Area Ordinances (Ecology, 1998). The map is the result of combining the ratings of a variety of factors for areas throughout the City, including: geologic unit (i.e., depositional environment), near surface permeability (based on the county soil map), and depth to groundwater. The map identifies areas with “moderate” or “high” susceptibility to groundwater contamination. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


18.55.810 Critical areas report.

A. The purpose of a hydrogeologic assessment report is to evaluate actual hydrogeologic conditions and determine a site’s proximity to vulnerable groundwater resources. This information then is used to evaluate the likely impacts of proposed activities and to determine appropriate construction practices, monitoring programs, and other mitigation measures required to ensure achievement of the purpose and intent of these regulations.

B. The information required by the hydrogeologic assessment report should be coordinated with the study and reporting requirements for any other critical areas located on the site.

C. The hydrogeologic assessment report shall be prepared by a qualified professional who is a hydrogeologist, geologist, or engineer licensed in the State of Washington and has experience in preparing hydrogeologic assessments.

D. The City of Kenmore Groundwater Susceptibility Map, referenced under KMC 18.55.800, identifies the level of evaluation required at a particular site within the City.

1. Level One Hydrogeological Assessment – Areas of Moderate Susceptibility.

a. A level one hydrogeologic assessment shall be required for any of the following nonresidential proposed activities at sites located within groundwater susceptibility zones that are rated as “moderate susceptibility”:

(1) The storage, handling, treatment, use, production, recycling, or disposal of hazardous substances, other than hazardous household substances used according to the directions specified on the packaging for domestic applications. See RCW 70.105.010.

(2) The use of injection wells, including on-site septic systems, except those domestic septic systems releasing less than 14,500 gallons of effluent per day and that are limited to a maximum density of one system per acre.

(3) Any other activity determined by the city manager likely to have an adverse impact on groundwater quality or quantity, or on groundwater recharge.

b. A level one hydrogeologic assessment shall include the following site and development-related information at a minimum:

(1) Information regarding geologic and hydrogeologic characteristics of the site, including the permeability of the unsaturated zone (soils located above the groundwater table) based on existing data.

(2) Groundwater depth, flow direction, and gradient based on available information.

(3) Location of wells and springs within 1,300 feet of the project area.

(4) Location of other critical areas, including surface waters, within 1,300 feet of the project site.

(5) Available historic water quality data for the area to be affected by the proposed activity.

(6) Best management practices (BMPs) proposed to be utilized.

2. Level Two Hydrogeologic Assessment – Areas of High Susceptibility.

a. A level two hydrogeologic assessment shall be required for any of the following nonresidential proposed activities at sites located within groundwater susceptibility zones that are rated as “high susceptibility”:

(1) The storage, handling, treatment, use, production, recycling, or disposal of hazardous substances, other than hazardous household substances used according to the directions specified on the packaging for domestic applications. See RCW 70.105.010.

(2) The use of injection wells, including on-site septic systems, except those domestic septic systems releasing less than 14,500 gallons of effluent per day and that are limited to a maximum density of one system per acre.

(3) Any other activity determined by the city manager likely to have an adverse impact on groundwater quality or quantity, or on groundwater recharge.

b. A level two hydrogeologic assessment shall include the following site and proposal-related information at a minimum, in addition to the requirements for a level one hydrogeologic assessment:

(1) Historic water quality and elevation data for the area to be affected by the proposed activity compiled for at least the previous five-year period, unless otherwise approved by the city manager.

(2) Groundwater monitoring plan provisions.

(3) Discussion of the effects of the proposed project on groundwater quality and quantity, including:

(a) Predictive evaluation of groundwater withdrawal effects on nearby wells and surface water features.

(b) Predictive evaluation of contaminant transport based on potential releases to groundwater.

(4) Identification of the type and quantities of any hazardous materials that will be stored, handled, treated, used, produced, recycled, or disposed of on the site, including but not limited to materials such as elevator lift/hydraulic fluid, hazardous materials used during construction, materials used by the building occupants, proposed storage and manufacturing uses, etc.

(5) Proposed methods of storing any of the above substances, including containment methods to be used during construction and/or use of the proposed facility.

(6) Proposed plan for implementing protection standards during construction.

(7) A spill prevention, control and countermeasure (SPCC) plan that identifies equipment and/or structures that could fail, resulting in an impact. Spill plans shall include provisions for regular inspection, repair, and replacement of structures and equipment that could fail.

(8) A discussion of past environmental investigations, sampling, spills, or incidents that may have resulted in or contributed to contaminated soil or groundwater at the site. Attach copies of all historical and current reports, and sampling results. [Ord. 19-0488 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 18.57 TREE MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION

Sections:

18.57.010    Title.

18.57.015    Findings and purpose.

18.57.030    Applicability.

18.57.035    Exemptions.

18.57.050    Tree protection plan required.

18.57.060    Tree density requirement.

18.57.070    Tree protection plan review procedure.

18.57.080    Tree protection plan review standards.

18.57.085    Tree windthrow evaluation and prevention.

18.57.090    Tree protection during construction.

18.57.100    Post-construction replacement, financial guarantee and maintenance requirements.

18.57.110    Penalties, enforcement.


18.57.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Kenmore tree management and protection code. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.57.015 Findings and purpose.

A. Reducing soil erosion and water pollution in the City’s streams and creeks by providing wind breaks, slowing the surface movement of water, reducing the amount of stormwater runoff, and stabilizing soil with their roots and fallen leaves;

B. Improving air quality by removing pollutant gases and airborne particles;

C. Positively affecting energy and water conservation by providing shade, lowering temperatures, and reducing net evaporation rates;

D. Reducing noise pollution by absorbing and deadening excessive and/or unwanted noise and by screening the source of the noise from view; and

E. Providing a wide variety of habitats and ecosystems for birds, mammals, and other wildlife;

F. Accordingly, the purpose of this chapter is to establish a process and standards to:

1. Increase the livability of an area by helping to screen people and buildings from wind and inclement weather;

2. Create a special sense of identity, a sense of community and civic pride, and a memorable place to live and work;

3. Preserve and enhance the City’s physical and aesthetic character by preventing untimely and indiscriminate removal or destruction of trees;

4. Promote site planning, construction practices, and horticultural practices that are consistent with the reasonable use of property;

5. Implement the goals and objectives of the City’s comprehensive plan; and

6. Implement the goals and objectives of the City’s parks and recreation master plan. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.57.030 Applicability.

A. No individual, partnership, corporation, association, organization, cooperative, public or municipal corporation, or agency of any governmental unit, however designated, shall directly or indirectly remove or destroy any tree as defined in this title within the City, without first obtaining a clearing permit as provided in KMC Title 15.

B. Unless otherwise exempted in KMC 18.57.035, any site subject to development, including the division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels, within the City shall comply with the requirements of this chapter.

C. Approval of a tree protection plan pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not discharge the obligation of the applicant to otherwise comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter.

D. When any provision of any other chapter of the Kenmore Municipal Code conflicts with this chapter or when the provisions of this chapter are in conflict, that provision which provides more protection for individual trees and groves of trees shall apply unless specifically provided otherwise in this chapter or unless such provision conflicts with federal or State laws or regulations. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.57.035 Exemptions.

A. The following land uses are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. However, compliance with other applicable provisions of the Kenmore Municipal Code including but not limited to then-current critical area regulations per Chapter 18.55 KMC and then-current clearing regulations per Chapter 15.25 KMC is still required:

1. Agriculture, meaning the use of the land for the primary purpose of deriving income from growing plants or trees on land including, but not limited to, land used principally for fruit or timber production, but not including land used principally for another use and only incidentally for growing trees or plants for income.

2. Commercial nursery or tree farm, but only those trees which are planted and growing on the premises of a licensed retailer or wholesaler for sale to the general public. Other trees on such premises shall remain subject to this chapter.

3. Residential Development.

a. All existing lots on which are to be situated new single detached dwelling units in residential zones based on tree removal limits established by clearing requirements. 

b. All existing lots on which are situated existing detached dwelling units in residential zones based on tree removal limits established by clearing requirements.

4. Downtown Commercial and Downtown Residential Zones. All development occurring within core areas designated as downtown commercial and downtown residential zones. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.57.050 Tree protection plan required.

A. Requirement Established. Except for the exemptions enumerated in this chapter, no individual, partnership, corporation, association, organization, cooperative, public or municipal corporation, or agency of any governmental unit, however designated, shall remove, transplant, or destroy, or cause to be removed, transplanted, or destroyed, on any land in the City, any tree as defined in this chapter, without first obtaining the city manager’s approval of a tree protection plan and receiving a clearing permit from the City. For sites proposed for land development, including the division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels, having trees below the minimum tree density, even though no trees are proposed to be removed, a tree protection plan is required to bring the site up to the minimum tree density standard herein established.

B. Submittal of Tree Protection Plan. Where the site proposed for development requires site or plat or short plat review, the tree protection plan shall be submitted concurrent with a site plan or plat or short plat application.

C. Tree Protection Plan Requirements. Attached to the applicant information and site plan information required for the clearing permit applications, the applicant shall include the following tree protection plan information:

1. Tree Survey. For all development proposals, a tree survey, drawn to scale by a land surveyor licensed in Washington State, identifying the exact location and conditions of existing trees as defined in this title and containing the following information:

a. Common and botanical name of each tree.

b. Trees proposed to remain and to be removed.

c. Groves with indication of predominant species, number of trees and size of d.b.h.

d. Any off-site tree with a root protection zone which could be adversely affected by the proposed activity.

e. The location and dimensions of established and proposed perimeter landscaping, natural vegetation easements, and open space areas for public, private, or community use.

f. Net buildable areas.

g. Critical areas and their buffers.

h. Stormwater tracts.

i. Limits of construction line.

j. North arrow, scale, and date of survey.

2. An assessment of tree windthrow potential as described in KMC 18.57.085, along with any proposed mitigation measures to minimize windthrow. These measures shall be incorporated into the proposed tree protection plan described in subsection (C)(5) of this section.

3. A statement describing how trees intended to remain will be identified, marked, and protected before the start of and during development as further described in KMC 18.57.090.

4. A statement that describes replacement tree quality as conforming to the American Standards for Nursery Stock (ANSI).

5. Proposed Tree Protection Plan. The permit applicant shall have a qualified tree protection professional prepare recommendations for the tree protection plan. The tree protection plan shall be drawn to scale using the tree survey as a base and containing the following information:

a. The exact location and conditions of protected trees.

b. The exact location, common name, botanical name, and caliper of each tree species to be planted.

c. The site minimum tree density calculation indicating the total number, size, and species of existing trees to be preserved and the replacement trees to be planted as described in KMC 18.57.060.

d. The site replacement tree calculation as described in KMC 18.57.060 with an explanation including the number, caliper, and species.

e. The location, materials, dimensions, and layout of the protective barriers.

6. Submit a landscape bond quantity form.

7. Additional Information. Any additional or more detailed information required by the city manager to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter (i.e., aerial photograph). The city manager may waive the requirements for the scaled drawing and other submission data if he finds that the information presented is sufficient to determine the project’s compliance with the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 15-0409 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.57.060 Tree density requirement.

A. Minimum Tree Density Requirement Established. A minimum tree density is required on each site. The tree density may consist of existing trees, replacement trees, or a combination of existing and replacement trees. The site density of trees to be protected on each site shall be determined prior to approval of a tree protection plan or clearing permit, by the city manager.

B. Tree Density Calculation. The minimum tree density required for each site is 30 tree units per acre of net buildable area. 

1. To calculate the density of trees to be protected:

a. Obtain the d.b.h. measurement in inches for each protected tree within the net buildable area.

b. Go to Table 18.57.060A and select the tree unit value that corresponds to the d.b.h. for each protected tree.

c. Add up the tree unit values for all protected trees and divide by the total acreage of the net buildable area. This value must equal or exceed 30 tree units per acre of net buildable area. If the total is less than 30 tree units per acre, more trees must be protected or replacement trees will be required.

d. If replacement trees are planted as groves within designated tracts, then applicant may reduce total tree units required by 10 percent.

 

Table 18.57.060A  Existing Trees to Remain. 

(Conversion from diameter (d.b.h.) in inches to tree units for  trees protected on-site.)

	d.b.h.	Tree Units	d.b.h.	Tree Units

	1 – 5	1.0	30	8.2

	6 – 10	1.2	31	8.6

	11	1.4	32	9.0

	12	1.8	33	9.5

	13	2.0	34	10.0

	14	2.3	35	10.5

	15	2.6	36	11.0

	16	2.9	37	11.5

	17	3.2	38	12.0

	18	3.5	39	12.5

	19	3.8	40	13.0

	20	4.2	41	13.5

	21	4.6	42	14.0

	22	5.0	43	14.5

	23	5.4	44	15.0

	24	5.8	45	15.5

	25	6.2	46	16.0

	26	6.6	47	17.0

	27	7.0	48	18.0

	28	7.4	49	19.0

	29	7.8	50	20.0

	For every one inch greater than 50 d.b.h., add an additional 2 tree units (i.e., 62 d.b.h. = 44 tree units).

C. Replacement Tree Requirement. If the number of existing trees is not enough to meet the minimum of 30 tree units per acre, a sufficient number of replacement trees shall be planted to meet the minimum requirement. To determine the total number of replacement trees required:

1. Obtain the caliper measurement for each replacement tree. Replacement trees are measured differently than protected trees. Instead of measuring d.b.h. as in protected trees, replacement trees are measured by caliper in inches according to industry standards (ANSI). Caliper on replacement trees is measured six inches above the ground line for four-inch and smaller trees, and 12 inches above ground for larger replacement trees.

2. Go to Table 18.57.060B and select the tree unit value that corresponds to the caliper for each replacement tree.

3. Add the replacement tree unit values together to determine how many of that size tree will be required to achieve the minimum site density. See Table 18.57.060C for an example.

Table 18.57.060B Replacement Trees.  

(Conversion from  caliper inches to tree units for replacement trees.)

	Deciduous Tree Caliper in Inches	Tree Units for Deciduous Trees	Coniferous Tree Height in Feet	Tree Units for Conifers	Tree Units for Native Conifers

	1.5"	0.4	4' – 6'	0.5	0.8

	2"	0.5	6' – 8'	0.7	1.0

	3"	0.6	8' – 10'	1.0	1.5

	4"	0.7	11' – 12'	1.5	2.0

	5"	0.8	 	 	 

	6"	1.0	 	 	 

	7"	1.2	 	 	 

	8" +	1.5	 	 	 

Table 18.57.060C Sample Tree Density Calculation. 

The required density factor is calculated below as follows for five acres: five acres x 30 units = 150 tree units required.

Existing density (ED):

	Size	Quantity	Total Units	Size	Quantity	Total Units

	24"	3	17.4	12"	5	9.0

	18"	3	10.5	8"	6	7.2

	10"	4	4.8	15"	8	20.8

	30"	7	57.4	4"	10	10.0

	 	 	 	 	Total ED	137.1

Replacement density (RD):

	Size	Units	Quantity	Total Units

	2" Deciduous	0.5	12	6.0

	4" Deciduous	0.7	6	4.2

	4' – 6' Native Conifer	0.8	5	4.0

	 	 	Total RD	14.2

	ED + RD =	Site Total Tree Density	>	or	=	Minimum Density Required

	137.1 + 14.2 =	151.3	>	 	 	150	Density Satisfied

The sum of the ED and RD must be greater than or equal to the minimum density required. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.57.070 Tree protection plan review procedure.

A. Departmental Review. The city manager shall review the tree protection plan and clearing permit application to determine whether the applicant has provided all required information. Completed applications shall be referred to appropriate City departments for review. Upon request of either the applicant or the City, the City may conduct field inspections or review meetings. City departments involved in the review and/or inspections shall submit their report(s) and recommendation(s) to the city manager.

B. Evaluation for Compliance. The city manager may require an evaluation by a qualified tree protection professional, a qualified engineer, landscape architect, soils engineer, testing lab, or other specialist at any time during the tree protection plan review process or tree removal inspection as necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and/or the terms of the clearing permit. Individual applicants will be responsible for payment to the City of the actual cost to the City of this evaluation. The actual costs of any such evaluation shall be paid to the City within 30 days of receipt of the City’s invoice.

C. Financial Guarantees. For all projects required to have a tree protection plan, financial guarantees shall be required consistent with the provisions of KMC 21.20.070; provided, however, that to the extent that the financial guarantee requirements of KMC 18.57.100 are more protective of tree preservation, performance and maintenance, then the more protective requirements shall prevail. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.57.080 Tree protection plan review standards.

The following standards shall govern the approval of a tree protection plan and the granting or denial of an application for clearing permit:

A. Design. Development shall be designed, located, and conducted so as to minimize the loss of healthy groves and protected trees as identified by a qualified tree protection professional, degradation of wildlife habitat as identified through environmental review, and the potential for erosion and slope failure.

B. Tree Protection Priority. In designing a development project and in meeting the required minimum tree density, the applicant shall protect trees within the net buildable area as described in KMC 18.57.060(B)(1), in the following order of priority. Trees to be preserved and protected must be healthy and vigorous, wind-firm, and not in conflict with utilities.

1. Groves.

2. Individual trees which provide wildlife habitat as identified through environmental review.

3. Individual trees and groves which occur within required setbacks.

4. Trees that protect against windthrow, including trees sheltering interior trees or trees on adjacent property from strong winds that could otherwise cause them to blow down.

5. Trees which provide a buffer and separate incompatible uses or reduce sound and wind levels.

C. Replacement Tree Planting Conditions. Replacement trees should be planted in areas with soil, climate, exposure, and moisture conditions appropriate to the replacement tree species’ growing requirements as determined by a qualified tree protection professional, licensed landscape architect, or certified nurseryman.

D. Replacement Tree Planting Location Priority. On sites where the number of existing trees falls below the minimum density requirements, then replacement tree planting shall be required. The applicant’s proposed location of transplanted or replacement trees shall be subject to review by a qualified tree protection professional, licensed landscape architect, or certified nurseryman, and City approval as part of the tree protection plan. Replacement trees should be planted according to the following priority:

1. On-Site.

a. Designated Tracts. Trees located in separate deeded tree tracts specifically set aside for the preservation and planting of trees and/or the required recreation open space area if trees do not interfere with recreation activities.

b. Perimeter Landscaping. In which case, replacement trees shall not count toward and shall be in addition to perimeter landscape requirements.

c. Landscaping. This may include entrance landscaping, traffic islands, and other common open space areas. Trees located in a public right-of-way may be credited as replacement trees only if street trees are not a requirement.

2. Off-Site. In cases where an applicant believes that lot size prevents installation of the required number of trees, the applicant may propose to the City payment of a fee in lieu for installation of trees in a public park or other public space. The city manager shall review and make the final decision on the applicant’s proposal, based on a recommendation from a qualified tree protection professional.

E. Replacement Conifer Tree Types. Replacement trees shall be of a similar type of genus to the conifer trees that are removed; i.e., a Western Red Cedar (Thuja plicata) may be replaced with a tree in the genus Thuja, such as an American Arborvitae (Thuja occidentalis). [Ord. 15-0409 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.57.085 Tree windthrow evaluation and prevention.

A. Increased tree windthrow potential as a result of impacts to trees on a site shall be evaluated based on the following risk factors:

1. Root system disruption that will extend within an area one to two and one-half times the radius of the canopy;

2. Topography of the site;

3. Whether the tree is deciduous or evergreen;

4. Height of the tree relative to the neighboring trees;

5. Whether the tree is part of a grove.

B. The windthrow evaluation shall be conducted as part of the preparation of the tree protection plan (see KMC 18.57.050) based on the aforementioned risk factors. The assessment shall be conducted by a qualified tree protection professional. This assessment also shall evaluate increased windthrow potential for trees on neighboring lots that are within 50 feet of the closest trees being removed on the site, including trees that share a root system with tree(s) on the site.

C. Tree Protection Plan.

1. When significant windthrow potential is identified for trees that could impact neighboring properties or are on neighboring properties, the applicant shall identify measures to minimize windthrow as part of the tree protection plan. Measures could include but are not limited to demonstrating that the critical root zone (CRZ) fencing is adequate to prevent root disruption or that the CRZ is expanded to provide root protection; saving groves when applicable; taking steps to preserve existing grades around trees; and/or tunneling rather than trenching for utilities. The City may deny a request to remove a tree(s) if mitigation measures are inadequate to minimize windthrow. 

2. If potential windthrow damage is for the site itself, the applicant shall identify measures to reduce impacts to future structures on the site. [Ord. 15-0409 § 2 (Att. B).]


18.57.090 Tree protection during construction.

Prior to initiating tree removal and any clearing and grading on the site, trees to be protected and preserved shall be protected from potentially damaging activities as follows unless otherwise approved by the City.

A. Critical Root Zone (CRZ). The CRZ of individual trees, groves, or otherwise designated protected tree areas shall include no less than the area of a circle with a radius that extends one foot out from the tree for every inch of trunk d.b.h., or the area of a circle with radius extending from a tree’s trunk to a point no less than the end of a tree’s longest branch, whichever is greater (see Figure 18.57.090A).

B. Tree Protection Fence (TPF). Before development, the applicant:

1. Shall place three inches of composted woodchips over the CRZ of all retained trees to retain moisture, increase organic matter, and visually establish the CRZ.

2. Shall erect and maintain readily visible protective tree fencing a minimum of three feet beyond the outer edge of the CRZ for all individual trees, groves, or other designated protected tree areas.

a. Fencing shall completely surround the required tree protection area. The city manager may allow adjustments to placement of the TPF based on an evaluation of the tree, soils, and proposed disturbance.

b. Fencing shall be a minimum of four feet high and may be higher if needed to ensure clear visual delineation. Chain-link fence or orange plastic fence fastened to steel stakes/posts driven securely into the ground shall be required in order to discourage easy movement.

c. Any deviation from the tree fencing methods listed above must be authorized in writing by the city manager in advance.

3. Shall keep the protective fencing in place until the City authorizes the removal or issues a final certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first.

4. Shall ensure that any landscaping done within the root protection zone subsequent to the removal of the fence shall not disturb existing trees including roots within the CRZ.

C. Placing Materials Near Tree. During development, no individual, partnership, corporation, association, organization, cooperative, public or municipal corporation, or agency of any governmental unit, however designated, may conduct any activity within the TPF of any tree designated to remain, except as specified in this section.

D. Attachments to Trees. During development, no individual, partnership, corporation, association, organization, cooperative, public or municipal corporation, or agency of any governmental unit, however designated, shall attach any object to any tree designated for protection.

E. Grade.

1. The grade shall not be filled or cut within the CRZ of any tree designated to remain without prior review by a qualified tree protection professional and advance, written approval from the city manager.

2. The applicant shall not install an impervious surface within the protective barrier of any tree designated to remain without the advance, written authorization of the city manager.

3. To the greatest extent practical, utility trenches shall be located outside of the root protection zone of trees to be retained. Boring or tunneling under the CRZ may be considered an alternative, but shall require the advance, written approval of the city manager.

4. Trees and other vegetation to be retained shall be protected from erosion and sedimentation.

F. Additional Requirements. The city manager may require additional tree protection measures which are consistent with accepted urban forestry practices.

Figure 18.57.090A Critical Root Zone.


[IMAGE]


This section shows a cross-section of the typical root zone for a deciduous tree. Eighty-five percent of the tree’s roots are within the top 18 inches of the soil. Roots typically spread up to two times the height of the tree and sometimes more. However, the critical mass of roots is usually found within the critical root zone. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.57.100 Post-construction replacement, financial guarantee and maintenance requirements.

A. Replace Damaged, Dead, or Dying Trees. Replacement trees or groves that are damaged or die within a period of three years after planting or transplanting must be replaced in kind at a ratio of one-to-one within six months of the tree’s death or the date of discovery of the damage. Existing trees that are damaged or die within a period of three years after completion of construction activities and as a cause of construction activities as determined by a qualified tree protection professional shall be replaced in kind at a ratio of two-to-one within six months of the tree’s death or date of discovery of the damage. 

B. Replacement Tree Quality. Replacement trees shall conform to the American Standards for Nursery Stock, ANSI. 

C. Tree Maintenance. All trees shall be maintained in accordance with International Society of Arboriculture guidelines and standards. 

D. Financial Guarantee Required. A financial guarantee as defined and regulated under KMC Title 21 shall be required as a mechanism to cover any potential cost associated with replacing dead or dying replacement or existing trees required to satisfy tree unit requirements per this section.

1. A financial guarantee shall be required for all plans requiring 15 or more tree units.

2. Calculation of the amount of the financial guarantee shall be computed based upon equivalent tree replacement value for all replacement and existing trees on the property as determined by a qualified tree protection professional using the most recent edition of the Guide for Plant Appraisal published by the International Society of Arboriculture, in collaboration with the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers. Fair market value shall be posted. Fair market value includes the value of the tree(s), installation, and maintenance until establishment that would be required to compensate for the trees that could be lost. 

3. The financial guarantee period for maintenance shall be three years, plus an additional 60 days. 

4. Release of Financial Guarantee.

a. Upon successful tree replacement and establishment as determined by the written approval of the City and consistent with Chapter 21.15 KMC, the financial guarantee required by this section shall be released. 

b. The City, in its discretion, may release a financial guarantee under this section when fee simple title is transferred. The City may condition the release of the existing financial guarantee upon establishment of a new financial guarantee by the new owner in fee simple. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.57.110 Penalties, enforcement.

A. Civil Penalty. Any violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a civil violation under Chapter 1.15 KMC, and is subject to the enforcement procedures of Chapter 1.20 KMC; provided, however, that an individual, partnership, corporation, association, organization, cooperative, public or municipal corporation, or agency of any governmental unit, however designated, who removes any tree in violation of this chapter shall be assessed the following civil penalty: 

An individual, partnership, corporation, association, organization, cooperative, public or municipal corporation, or agency of any governmental unit, however designated, removing a tree in violation of this chapter shall be assessed a monetary penalty in the amount of $2,000 per inch in diameter at breast height of tree removed. For example, if a 20-inch tree is removed, then the penalty would be $40,000. 

B. Criminal Penalty. In addition to or as an alternative to incurring civil liability under this section, an individual, partnership, corporation, association, organization, cooperative, public or municipal corporation, or agency of any governmental unit, however designated, who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the criminal penalties set forth in Chapter 1.15 KMC, and shall be subject to the procedures of the City’s criminal code, KMC Title 9. 

C. Separate Offense. Every individual, partnership, corporation, association, organization, cooperative, public or municipal corporation, or agency of any governmental unit, however designated, violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which the violation is committed, continued or permitted by any such individual, partnership, corporation, association, organization, cooperative, public or municipal corporation, or agency of any governmental unit, however designated. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 18.60 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES

Sections:

18.60.010    Purpose.

18.60.020    Applicability.

18.60.030    Exemptions.

18.60.040    Locational priorities.

18.60.050    Wireless communication facility review processes and maximum allowable heights.

18.60.060    Distributed antenna systems (DAS) and small cells.

18.60.070    Preapplication community meetings.

18.60.080    Criteria for determining infeasibility of alternative sites.

18.60.090    Collocation requirements.

18.60.100    Setback requirements.

18.60.110    Landscaping requirements.

18.60.120    Concealment elements.

18.60.130    Minor modifications to eligible communication facilities (ECFM).

18.60.140    Other modifications to conforming communication facilities.

18.60.150    Radio frequency radiation compliance.

18.60.160    Fencing and NIER warning signs.

18.60.170    Interference.

18.60.180    Noise standards.

18.60.190    Minor adjustment to requirements.

18.60.200    Major adjustment to requirements.

18.60.210    Cessation of use.

18.60.220    Third party review.

18.60.230    Nonconformance.


18.60.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish guidelines for the siting of wireless communication facilities, including towers, satellite dishes, antennas, and amateur (ham) radio facilities. The goals of this chapter are to:

A. Provide for the appropriate location and development of wireless communication facilities in locations that promote public safety and the general welfare;

B. Encourage the location of towers, satellite dishes, and antennas in nonresidential areas and non-view zones, and minimize the total number of towers and alternative transmission support structures throughout the community;

C. Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing wireless communication facility sites;

D. Encourage wireless communication providers to configure towers, satellite dishes, antennas and amateur (ham) radio facilities in ways that minimize the adverse visual impact;

E. Enhance the ability of the providers of wireless communication services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and efficiently to support personal and business use;

F. Process requests for wireless communication facility development in a timely manner; and 

G. Ensure compliance with Federal Communications Commission rules and applicable law, including standards related to nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER). [Ord. 16-0426 § 3 (Att. A).]


18.60.020 Applicability.

The standards and process requirements of this chapter supersede all other review process, setback or landscaping requirements of this title. In case of conflict with other KMC titles, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. All wireless communication facilities which are not exempt pursuant to KMC 18.60.030 shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. Wireless communication facilities in City rights-of-way also shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 12.58 KMC. [Ord. 16-0426 § 3 (Att. A).]


18.60.030 Exemptions.

The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

A. Industrial processing equipment and scientific or medical equipment using frequencies regulated by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC);

B. The storage, shipment or display for sale of transmission equipment;

C. Radar systems for military and civilian communication and navigation;

D. Hand-held, mobile, marine and portable radio transmitters and/or receivers;

E. Two-way radio utilized for temporary or emergency services communications;

F. Any antenna which is treated as exempt under 47 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Section 1.4000(a)(1), as it may be amended from time to time, including satellite dishes with a diameter of less than one meter or 39.37 inches and VHF and UHF receive-only television antennas. Such antennas shall not be required to obtain building permit approval unless installed on a mast higher than 12 feet above the roofline, but installation must comply with any applicable provisions of the City Building Code;

G. Maintenance or repair of an existing wireless communication facility. For any emergency maintenance or repair, filing of the permit application shall be required within 30 days after the completion of such emergency activities;

H. Reconstruction or replacement of an existing conforming wireless communication facility only if the dimensions of the facility are not changed. If the proposed reconstruction or replacement changes the dimensions of the facility, an ECFM through KMC 18.60.130 or a modification through KMC 18.60.140 shall be required. For emergency reconstruction or replacement, filing of the permit application shall be required within 30 days after the completion of such emergency activities. [Ord. 16-0426 § 3 (Att. A).]


18.60.040 Locational priorities.

Wireless communication facilities shall be sited according to the following siting hierarchy, with (1) being the highest (most preferable) ranking site and (9) being the lowest (least preferable) ranking site. A new wireless communication facility, with the exception of amateur (ham) radio facilities, must be located on the highest ranking site unless the applicant can demonstrate, through relevant information, including but not limited to the report of a qualified radio frequency engineer, that the highest ranking site is not feasible (see KMC 18.60.080). In order of ranking, from highest to lowest, the sites are:

1. Collocation on an existing conforming tower.

2. Rooftop antenna in a nonresidential zone.

3. Facade antenna in a nonresidential zone.

4. Antenna on a utility/light pole in a nonresidential zone.

5. New tower in a nonresidential zone, except in the UC west, WC and CB west zones (view zones).

6. Attachment of an antenna to a nonresidential building in a residential zone.

7. Attachment of an antenna to a utility/light pole in a residential zone.

8. New tower in a residential zone.

9. New tower in the UC west, WC or CB west zones (view zones).

The applicant shall provide a map showing all existing towers or other suitable alternative transmission support structures located within one-quarter mile of the proposed site with consideration given to engineering and structural requirements. No new wireless communication facility shall be permitted if an existing structure in a higher priority location, suitable for attachment of an antenna or collocation, is located within one-quarter mile, unless the applicant demonstrates that these alternative locations are not feasible. [Ord. 18-0454 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 16-0426 § 3 (Att. A).]


18.60.050 Wireless communication facility review processes and maximum allowable heights.

P – Permitted Use

C – Conditional Use – reviewed through Type 2 process outlined in KMC 19.25.020.

X – Prohibited Use5

	Type of wireless communication facility	Residential zones R-1 through R-6 and MHC	Residential zones R-12 through R-24, and DR	Nonresidential zones RB, UC east, DC, CB Juanita, and NB	Nonresidential zones UC west, WC, and CB west (view zones)	Other nonresidential zones PSP, P, and GC

	Antenna collocation on an existing conforming tower	P

 

Maximum height: same as existing tower	P

 

Maximum height: same as existing tower	P

 

Maximum height: same as existing tower	P

 

Maximum height: same as existing tower	P

 

Maximum height: same as existing tower

	Rooftop antenna	X, C1,2, P1,7

 

Maximum height: 15' above the roof height at the antenna location	P

 

Maximum height: 15' above the roof height at the antenna location	P

 

Maximum height: 15' above the roof height at the antenna location	X	P

 

Maximum height: 15' above the roof height at the antenna location

	Facade antenna	X, C1,2, P1,7

 

Maximum height: 2' above the roofline or parapet wall	P

 

Maximum height: 2' above the roofline or parapet wall	P

 

Maximum height: 2' above the roofline or parapet wall	P

 

Maximum height: May not extend above the roofline or parapet wall	P

 

Maximum height: 2' above the roofline or parapet wall

	Amateur (ham) radio facilities	P

 

Maximum height3: Ground-mounted facility – 65'.

Rooftop facility – 30' above the roof height at the antenna location	P

 

Maximum height3: Ground-mounted facility – 65'.

Rooftop facility – 30' above the roof height at the antenna location	P

 

Maximum height3: Ground-mounted facility – 65'.

Rooftop facility – 30' above the roof height at the antenna location	P

 

Maximum height: 35'	P

 

Maximum height3: Ground-mounted facility – 65'.

Rooftop facility – 30' above the roof height at the antenna location

	Antennas on utility or light poles. (Nearest abutting zone is used to determine process if in the right-of-way.)	C2, P7

 

Maximum height: 55'	P

 

Maximum height: 55'	P

 

Maximum height: 55'	C2, P8

 

Maximum height: up to the building height limit as specified in the underlying zoning district	P

 

Maximum height: 55'

	Satellite dish	C2 if no more than 2 meters (6.6') in diameter; otherwise X

 

Maximum height: Ground-mounted dishes – 15'.

Rooftop dishes – 15' above the roof height at the dish location	P if no more than 2 meters (6.6') in diameter and limited to a maximum of 1 dish per site; otherwise C2

 

Maximum height: Ground-mounted dishes – 15'.

Rooftop dishes – 15' above the roof height at the dish location	P if no more than 2 meters (6.6') in diameter and limited to a maximum of 3 dishes per site; otherwise C2

 

Maximum height: Ground-mounted dishes – 15'.

Rooftop dishes – 15' above the roof height at the dish location	P if ground- mounted; otherwise X

 

Maximum height: Ground-mounted dishes – 15'	C2

 

Maximum height: Ground-mounted dishes – 15'.

Rooftop dishes – 15' above the roof height at the dish location

	Tower6	X	X	X in the DC zone; otherwise C2,4

 

Maximum height: up to the building height limit as specified in the underlying zoning district	X	C2,4

 

Maximum height: up to the building height limit as specified in the underlying zoning district

1If on a nonresidential building such as a religious institution, school, or utility facility, or on a multifamily or mixed use building.

2In addition to satisfying the criteria listed in KMC 18.115.040, the conditional use permit shall be granted by the City only if the applicant also demonstrates that:

a. Alternative sites, or facilities with less impact to the community have been considered and have been determined to be not feasible per KMC 18.60.080; and

b. Visual impacts of the facility are minimized and the proposal does not significantly impact views to Lake Washington. 

3Amateur (ham) radio facilities exceeding 65 feet in height may be permitted only through a conditional use permit. In addition to satisfying the criteria listed in KMC 18.115.040, the conditional use permit shall be granted by the City only if the applicant also demonstrates that:

a. The proposal in the proposed location is necessary to support emergency radio operations in Kenmore; and

b. Smaller facilities, with less impact to the community, have been considered and have been determined to be infeasible per KMC 18.60.080; and

c. Visual impacts of the facility are minimized and the proposal does not significantly impact views to Lake Washington. 

4Prohibited on properties within the jurisdiction of the Shoreline Management Act as set forth in KMC Title 16, Division I.

5Unless a major adjustment has been granted pursuant to KMC 18.60.200.

6Lattice towers shall not be permitted.

7Small cells only, limited to a maximum of three antennas per utility/light pole, facade or rooftop. A conditional use permit will be required to locate more than three small cell antennas on a utility/light pole, facade or rooftop, including any additional requirements in applicable footnotes.

8Small cells only, limited to a maximum of three antennas per utility/light pole. A conditional use permit will be required to locate more than three small cell antennas on a utility/light pole, including the additional requirements in the applicable footnote.

[Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 18-0454 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 17-0446 § 3 (Att. B); Ord. 16-0426 § 3 (Att. A).]


18.60.060 Distributed antenna systems (DAS) and small cells.

A. A single permit may be used for multiple distributed antennas that are part of a larger overall DAS network. 

B. A single permit may be used for multiple small cells spaced to provide wireless coverage in a contiguous area. [Ord. 16-0426 § 3 (Att. A).]


18.60.070 Preapplication community meetings.

When either a new wireless communication facility requiring a conditional use permit or a major adjustment under KMC 18.60.200 is proposed within the City, a community meeting shall be convened in Kenmore by the applicant prior to submittal of an application.

A. At least two weeks in advance, notice of the meeting shall be provided by the applicant as follows:

1. Published in the local paper and mailed to the department; and

2. Mailed notice shall be provided to all property owners within 1,000 feet (or at least 20 of the nearest property owners, whichever is greater) of any potential sites, identified by the applicant for possible development, to be discussed at the community meeting. The mailed notice shall at a minimum contain a brief description and purpose of the project, the estimated height, approximate location noted on an assessor map with address and parcel number, a photo or sketch of the proposed facility, a contact name and telephone number to obtain additional information, and such other information as the City shall reasonably deem necessary and require of the applicant in writing. For facilities other than amateur (ham) radio facilities, the mailed notice shall include a statement that alternative sites proposed by citizens can be presented at the meeting which will be considered by the applicant. Because the purpose of the community meeting is to promote early discussion, applicants are encouraged to note any changes to the conceptual information presented in the mailed notice when they submit applications.

B. At the community meeting, at which at least one employee of the department, assigned by the city manager, shall be in attendance, the applicant shall provide information relative to the proposal. For facilities other than amateur (ham) radio facilities, the applicant shall identify existing facilities and other higher priority locations within one-quarter mile of the potential site, and shall discuss reasons why those existing locations are infeasible. Furthermore, any alternative sites within one-quarter mile, identified by community members and provided to the applicant in writing at least five days in advance of the meeting, shall be evaluated by the applicant to the extent possible given the timeframe, and discussed at the meeting. A listing of the sites, identified in writing and provided to the applicant at or before the community meeting, shall be submitted to the department with the proposed application. All applicants shall provide a list of meeting attendees and those receiving mailed notice and a record of the published meeting notice at the time of application submittal. [Ord. 16-0426 § 3 (Att. A).]


18.60.080 Criteria for determining infeasibility of alternative sites.

When an applicant is required to demonstrate that a proposed wireless communication facility location is not feasible, the evidence submitted to corroborate that finding must demonstrate at least one of the following:

A. Insufficient structural strength of an existing structure to support the applicant’s proposed antenna and related equipment.

B. The facility would not be of sufficient height to meet the applicant’s proposed area of coverage in Kenmore or to allow connection to other sites operated by the applicant.

C. The alternative fails to meet engineering requirements for such things as location and size.

D. The applicant’s proposed antenna would cause interference between the proposed and existing antennas. 

E. The site is not made available to the applicant for sale or lease at a market rate cost. The applicant shall demonstrate that he/she contacted the landowners or owners of structures and was denied permission by those owners to locate the facility on their land or their structures.

F. The location would result in conflicts with FAA height limitations.

G. The alternative is more intrusive on visual, aesthetic, neighborhood character or other community values, despite having a higher priority in KMC 18.60.040. [Ord. 16-0426 § 3 (Att. A).]


18.60.090 Collocation requirements.

A. Prior to the receipt of a building permit for a new tower, the applicant shall file a letter with the department agreeing to allow collocation. The agreement shall commit the applicant to provide, either at a market rate cost or at another cost basis agreeable to the affected parties, the opportunity to collocate the antennas of other service providers on the applicant’s proposed tower to the extent that such collocation is technically feasible for the affected parties.

B. All new or modified towers shall be constructed in a manner that would provide sufficient structural strength to allow the collocation of additional antennas from other service providers at the standard separation. [Ord. 16-0426 § 3 (Att. A).]


18.60.100 Setback requirements.

A. Wireless communication facilities shall meet the following setback standards:

	Facility	Setbacks

	Rooftop antenna	Building setback as specified in the zoning district

	Facade antenna	Building setback as specified in the zoning district. See also KMC 18.30.230, Projections and structures allowed. 

	Amateur (ham) radio facilities	Building setback as specified in the zoning district. In addition, the facility shall be located as far as practicable from lot lines and residential structures on neighboring lots.

	Satellite dish	Building setback as specified in the zoning district

	Tower	50' from any residentially zoned property. Otherwise, the building setback as specified in the zoning district.

B. The setback provisions of subsection A of this section may be waived by the city manager in order to achieve greater levels of screening than that which would be available by using the stated setback. In waiving the requirement, the department shall consider the protection of adjacent residentially zoned lands. [Ord. 16-0426 § 3 (Att. A).]


18.60.110 Landscaping requirements.

A wireless communication facility site, with the exception of an amateur (ham) radio facility, shall provide landscaping as follows:

A. When the facility is located in:

1. The NB, CB, PSP, RB, WC, UC, DC, or DR zone, the base of any tower and any ground equipment, whether or not in a structure or cabinet, shall be landscaped with eight feet of Type II landscaping as defined by KMC 18.35.040(B). This landscaped area shall be increased to 10 feet of Type I landscaping as defined by KMC 18.35.040(A) in areas adjacent to residential development as described in KMC 18.35.030(A). For satellite dishes, the visual screen may be reduced to the height of the center of the dish on the transmitting side. 

2. The R, MHC, GC, and P zones, the base of any tower and any ground equipment, whether or not in a structure or cabinet, shall be landscaped with 10 feet of Type I landscaping as defined by KMC 18.35.040(A). For satellite dishes, the visual screen may be reduced to the height of the center of the dish on the transmitting side. 

B. When a security fence is used to prevent access to a tower or ground equipment, any landscaping required pursuant to subsection A of this section shall be placed outward of such security fence.

In the R and MHC zones, climbing evergreen shrubs or vines capable of growing on the fence shall supplement any landscaping required pursuant to subsection A of this section.

C. Landscaping shall be planted according to KMC 18.35.110. The applicant shall be required to maintain the installed landscaping for the life of the project per KMC 18.35.120. A two-year landscape maintenance bond shall be required to be posted at the time of permit issuance and will go into effect when the landscaping has been installed to ensure survivability of the plants. The amount of the bond shall be determined by the Kenmore landscaping bond quantity worksheet. Landscape maintenance will be reviewed any time a modification to an existing facility is proposed. If inadequately maintained, landscaping maintenance, or complete landscaping replacement if necessary, shall be required prior to approval of any modification. 

D. Existing vegetation may be used and/or supplemented with additional vegetation to comply with the requirements of subsection A of this section.

E. The city manager may waive or modify the provisions for landscaping at the base of the tower and/or the ground equipment when existing structures on the site or the screening effects of existing vegetation on the site or along the site perimeter would preclude the ability to view these structures. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 16-0426 § 3 (Att. A).]


18.60.120 Concealment elements.

The goal of this section is to minimize the appearance of wireless communication facilities. Wireless facilities shall be designed to be minimally visible through the use of architecture, landscape architecture, siting solutions, and where feasible, through use of the smallest-scale wireless communication technology. Wireless communication facilities shall include concealment elements as follows:

A. All Facilities.

1. Wherever possible, stealth installations such as antennas either hidden within existing structures (e.g., church steeples or cupolas) or mounted in new structures designed to look like non-purpose-built towers (e.g., flagpoles, fire towers, light standards, trees, art) are required.

2. If stealth installation is not possible, wireless communication facilities shall be designed to blend with existing surroundings to the extent feasible. This should be achieved through the use of compatible colors and materials, and alternative site placement to allow the use of topography, existing vegetation or other structures to screen the proposed facility from adjacent lands containing, in descending order of priority: existing residences, public parks and open spaces, and public roadways.

3. Except for amateur (ham) radio facilities, transmission and power cables and any other conduit shall be contained within the support structure or located underground.

4. Equipment facilities shall be placed underground if practicable.

5. Except as specifically required by the FAA or the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), wireless communication facilities shall not be illuminated, except ground equipment may use lighting for security reasons which is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.

6. Wireless communication facilities shall be located and oriented in such a way as to minimize view blockage to Lake Washington.

7. No signs, symbols, flags, or banners shall be attached to, painted, or inscribed upon any wireless communication facilities except as follows: one sign measuring 18 inches by 12 inches upon or near the wireless communication facility which: (a) states that trespassers will be prosecuted (if applicable); (b) lists the names and telephone numbers of persons to be contacted in the event of an emergency; (c) identifies the permittee or person responsible for operating the wireless communication facility; and/or (d) contains information necessary and convenient for the permittee or person operating the wireless communication facility to identify the wireless communication facility. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the placement of safety or warning signs upon any portion of the wireless communication facility which are required by law or which are designed to apprise emergency response personnel and the employees and agents of wireless communication facility providers of particular hazards associated with equipment located upon the wireless communication facility.

B. Rooftop Antennas. The antenna shall be placed as close to the center of the structure as possible.

C. Facade Antennas.

1. Antennas shall be flush-mounted within 12 inches of the face of the building or mechanical equipment screening.

2. Antennas shall be placed on the portion of the structure less likely to be seen from adjacent lands containing, in descending order of priority: existing residences, public parks and open spaces, and public roadways.

3. Colors and materials shall be chosen to provide architectural compatibility with the building.

D. Towers.

1. Antennas shall be flush-mounted within six inches of the tower.

2. A tower in a more open setting such as a field or parking area shall have a backdrop (for example, but not limited to, trees, a hillside, or a structure) on at least two sides, be a color compatible with the backdrop, be made of materials visually compatible with the backdrop, and provide architectural or landscape screening for the remaining sides.

E. Satellite Dishes.

1. In nonresidential zones, ground-mounted dishes shall be located outside of any required landscaped area and preferably located in service areas or other less visible locations.

2. In residential zones, screening shall be provided with one or a combination of the following methods to block the view of the facility as much as possible from any street and from neighboring residences: fencing, walls, landscaping, structures, or topography. Screening may be located anywhere between the facility being screened and the above-mentioned viewpoints. Landscaping for the purpose of screening shall be maintained in a healthy condition.

3. For all zones, aluminum mesh dishes are preferable to solid fiberglass dishes.

F. Amateur (Ham) Radio Facilities.

1. Screening shall be provided with one or a combination of the following methods to block the view of the facility as much as practicable from any street and from neighboring residences: fencing, walls, landscaping, structures, or topography. Screening may be located anywhere between the facility being screened and the above-mentioned viewpoints. Landscaping for the purpose of screening shall be maintained in a healthy condition.

2. To the extent technically feasible and in compliance with safety regulations, specific paint colors may be required for camouflage purposes.

G. Antennas on Utility or Light Poles.

1. Antennas shall be flush-mounted within six inches of the pole, fully concealed within the utility or light pole, or otherwise camouflaged to appear to be an integrated part of the utility or light pole.

2. Cable and/or conduit should be routed through the inside of the pole. Where this is not feasible or where routing would result in a structure of a substantially different design or substantially greater diameter than that of other similar structures in the vicinity or would otherwise appear out of context with its surroundings, the City may allow or require that the cable or conduit be placed on the outside of the structure. The outside cable or conduit shall be the color of the utility pole, or other support structure, and the City may require that the cable be placed in conduit.

3. Equipment associated with an antenna on a utility or light pole shall be attached to the pole, placed underground if in the right-of-way, and/or placed on adjacent private property, using stealth technology if feasible and subject to the landscaping requirements in KMC 18.60.110. [Ord. 16-0426 § 3 (Att. A).]


18.60.130 Minor modifications to eligible communication facilities (ECFM).

Modifications to existing wireless communication facilities other than amateur (ham) radio facilities, whether conforming or legally nonconforming, that do not substantially change the physical dimensions of the communication facility as determined by FCC regulation will be reviewed by the City as eligible communication facility modifications (ECFM). To be eligible as an ECFM the request for modification must involve: (A) collocation of new transmission equipment on an existing facility; (B) removal of transmission equipment on an existing facility; or (C) replacement of existing transmission equipment on an existing facility. For purposes of this section only, “collocation” means the mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communication purposes. The process provides an expedited timeframe for review and guaranteed approval of the modification. Conditions for approval of the modification may be imposed by the City to the extent necessary for consistency with the substantial change test (subsections A through F of this section) or to ensure compliance with generally applicable building, structural, electrical, and safety codes, or with other laws codifying objective standards reasonably related to health and safety.

A modification shall be determined to be a “substantial change” and not eligible as an ECFM if any one of the following apply:

A. For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it increases the height of the tower by more than 10 percent or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it increases the height of the structure by more than 10 percent or more than 10 feet, whichever is greater. 

Changes in height shall be measured from the original support structure in cases where deployments are or will be separated horizontally, such as on buildings’ rooftops; in other circumstances, changes in height should be measured from the dimensions of the tower or base station, inclusive of originally approved appurtenances and any modifications that were approved prior to February 22, 2012.

B. For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six feet. 

C. For any eligible support structure, it involves installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four cabinets; or, for towers in the public rights-of-way and base stations, it involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no preexisting ground cabinets associated with the structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than 10 percent larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure. 

D. It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site. 

E. It would defeat the concealment elements of the eligible support structure. 

F. It does not comply with the conditions associated with the siting approval of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure or base station equipment; provided, however, that this limitation does not apply to any modification that is non-compliant only in a manner that would not exceed the thresholds identified in subsections A through D of this section.

Definitions of terms used in this section, as well as interpretations of this section, shall be guided by Section 6409 of the Spectrum Act; the FCC Eligible Facilities Request Rules, the FCC’s Report and Order in In re Acceleration of Broadband Deployment by Improving Wireless Facilities Siting Policies, WT Docket Nos. 13-238, 13-32; and WC Docket No. 11-59; FCC 14-153.

For eligible ECFM applications meeting the concealment element standards outlined in KMC 18.60.110, the maximum permit review period shall be reduced by up to 15 calendar days.

G. The provisions of this section shall prevail over any inconsistent provisions set forth in KMC 18.60.190 or Chapter 18.100 KMC. [Ord. 16-0426 § 3 (Att. A).]


18.60.140 Other modifications to conforming communication facilities.

For modifications to conforming wireless communication facilities that substantially change the physical dimensions of the communication facility as determined by FCC regulation and do not, therefore, meet the ECFM criteria set forth in KMC 18.60.130, the following standards shall apply:

A. Antenna modifications and replacements which meet the concealment element standards of KMC 18.60.120 and do not increase the overall height of the wireless communication facility do not require approval from the City or a land use permit; however, testing per KMC 18.60.150 is required.

B. Modifications that propose to increase the height of the conforming facility shall be processed as a new application, consistent with processes outlined in KMC 18.60.050, unless a minor adjustment is granted through KMC 18.60.190(A)(3). [Ord. 16-0426 § 3 (Att. A).]


18.60.150 Radio frequency radiation compliance.

A. All wireless communication facilities shall comply with applicable Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulations regarding radio-frequency emissions. 

B. Permit applications for new or modified wireless communication facilities other than amateur (ham) radio facilities shall include a statement, signed by a licensed professional engineer or other qualified professional competent to perform radio-frequency emissions testing and interpret radio-frequency emissions data, that the proposed communication facility will meet all federal rules and regulations.

C. Within 14 days of the wireless communication facility becoming fully operational, the licensed professional engineer or other qualified professional shall submit a second signed statement verifying that the communication facility as installed meets all federal rules and regulations regarding radio-frequency emissions.

D. The city manager shall have the authority to take any necessary steps to seek FCC enforcement of the relevant standards, or, to the extent consistent with applicable law and FCC regulations, to take such other steps as may be appropriate to rectify any violation of these requirements. [Ord. 16-0426 § 3 (Att. A).]


18.60.160 Fencing and NIER warning signs.

A. All wireless communication facility sites shall comply with all federal guidelines regarding fencing.

B. When a security fence is used, chain link, chain link with slats, plastic, vinyl or wire fencing is prohibited unless it is fully screened from public view.

C. All wireless communication facility sites shall comply with all federal guidelines regarding NIER warning signs. [Ord. 16-0426 § 3 (Att. A).]


18.60.170 Interference.

Wireless communication facilities shall meet all federal interference rules and regulations. Regulating interference is the responsibility of the federal government. [Ord. 16-0426 § 3 (Att. A).]


18.60.180 Noise standards.

Any wireless communication facility that requires a generator or other device that will create noise audible beyond the boundaries of the site must demonstrate compliance with Chapter 8.05 KMC. A noise report, prepared by an acoustical engineer, may be required; the City may require that the report be reviewed by a third party expert at the expense of the applicant. This section does not apply to generators temporarily located at a site to operate a wireless communication facility in times of emergency. [Ord. 16-0426 § 3 (Att. A).]


18.60.190 Minor adjustment to requirements.

A. A wireless communication facility minor adjustment is a Type 2 land use decision under KMC 19.25.020. A minor adjustment shall only apply to a request to modify the following standards:

1. Setback requirements established in KMC 18.60.100;

2. Landscaping requirements established in KMC 18.60.110;

3. Requests for up to five feet in additional facility height above the maximum allowable height, except in the UC west, WC and CB west zones (view zones); or

4. Replacement of nonconforming antennas, communication equipment and/or cabling on a replacement utility or light pole, only if the replacement antennas, communication equipment and/or cabling have the same dimensions (height, width, etc.) as the existing antennas, communication equipment and/or cabling, or as nearly practicable given the dimensions of the replacement utility or light pole.

B. Criteria. An application for a wireless communication facility minor adjustment shall be approved only if all of the following criteria are met:

1. The adjustment is necessary because of the unique characteristics of the wireless communication facility or its location;

2. The adjustment is the minimum necessary to grant relief to the applicant;

3. The applicant has demonstrated that any impacts associated with the adjustment have been minimized to the maximum extent possible through the use of existing site characteristics, including, but not limited to, existing vegetation, topography, or natural features; or through the use of other techniques, such as concealment elements, to improve compatibility with adjacent and nearby existing and permitted land uses; and

4. Approval of the adjustment will result in a better outcome for the community than would strict adherence to the existing standards. [Ord. 18-0454 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 16-0426 § 3 (Att. A).]


18.60.200 Major adjustment to requirements.

A. A major wireless communication facility adjustment is a Type 3 land use decision under KMC 19.25.020. A major adjustment may be used to modify wireless communication facility development standards not reviewable through the minor adjustment process, as well as to allow an otherwise prohibited use.

B. Criteria. An application for a wireless communication facility major adjustment shall be approved only if the applicant demonstrates all of the following criteria:

1. Significant Gap in Service Coverage or Capacity.

a. A significant gap exists in the service coverage or capacity of the applicant’s network. The gap must exist under present conditions or be expected to occur within two years following submittal of the application for the facility, as demonstrated in a report provided to the City by the applicant.

b. The significant service gap can be filled only through an adjustment in one or more of the provisions of this chapter; and

c. The adjustment is narrowly tailored to fill the significant service gap such that the wireless communication facility conforms to this chapter’s standards to the greatest extent possible, and is the least intrusive alternative. 

2. Minimization of Impacts. The adjustment would be the least intrusive means and minimize to the greatest extent possible negative impacts to surrounding properties and their uses, through facility design and/or a utilization of existing site characteristics, including, but not limited to, the site’s size, shape, location, topography, improvements, and natural features. In order to demonstrate the proposed adjustment is the least intrusive alternative, the owner must provide a feasibility analysis which provides meaningful comparison of the feasibility of alternative facilities and site locations.

Negative impacts are minimized if there is:

a. A reduction in negative visual impacts, including, but not limited to, visual clutter, based on a visual analysis; or

b. Better preservation of views or view corridors. [Ord. 16-0426 § 3 (Att. A).]


18.60.210 Cessation of use.

An antenna shall be removed from a tower or alternative transmission support structure within 180 days after the antenna is no longer operational unless the owner of the antenna can show to the City’s satisfaction that the antenna is likely to be used again within the next six months. A tower for wireless communication facilities shall be removed within one year of the date the last antenna is removed. Antennas or towers that are not removed within the time frames described herein may be removed by the City or a contractor designated by the City, and the owner of the antenna or tower shall reimburse the City for its costs in removing the antenna or tower. The City may extend the deadlines listed in this section. Nothing herein prevents a landlord from removing antennas of tenants who are in default under the terms of a lease agreement. [Ord. 16-0426 § 3 (Att. A).]


18.60.220 Third party review.

In certain instances there may be a need for expert review by a third party of the technical data submitted by the applicant. The City may require such technical review, to be paid for by the applicant for the wireless communication facility. The selection of the third party expert shall be by mutual agreement between the applicant and the City, such agreement not to be unreasonably withheld by either party. The third party expert shall have recognized training and qualifications in the field of radio frequency engineering.

The expert review is intended to be a site-specific review of technical aspects of the wireless communication facility and other matters as described herein. In particular, but without limitation, the expert shall be entitled to provide a recommendation on the location and height of the proposed facilities relative to the applicant’s coverage objectives and system design parameters. Such review should address the accuracy and completeness of the technical data, whether the analysis techniques and methodologies are legitimate, the validity of the conclusions and any specific technical issues outlined by the City or other interested parties. Based on the results of the third party review, the City may require changes to the application for the wireless communication facility that comply with the recommendations of the expert. [Ord. 16-0426 § 3 (Att. A).]


18.60.230 Nonconformance.

Except for eligible communication facility modifications to nonconforming facilities authorized in KMC 18.60.130 or minor adjustments to nonconforming facilities authorized in KMC 18.60.190(A)(4), modifications to nonconforming wireless communication facilities shall be addressed through Chapter 18.100 KMC, with the following additional requirements:

A. Facilities nonconforming as to height may not increase the height of the facility through the provisions of KMC 18.100.070(A)(1).

B. If a conditional use permit is required under KMC 18.100.070(C), the additional permit review criteria specified in KMC 18.60.050 Footnote 2 shall be considered. Compliance with the concealment element standards in KMC 18.60.120 shall also be required to the maximum extent practical, as determined by the city manager. [Ord. 16-0426 § 3 (Att. A).]


Chapter 18.70 ANIMALS

Sections:

18.70.010    Purpose.

18.70.020    Animal regulations – Small animals and household pets.

18.70.025    Kennels and catteries.

18.70.030    Animal regulations – Livestock – Purpose.

18.70.040    Animal regulations – Livestock – Densities.

18.70.060    Animal regulations – Livestock – Management standards.

18.70.070    Animal regulations – Livestock – Building requirements.

18.70.075    Animal regulations – Livestock – Setbacks for buildings and manure storage areas.

18.70.080    Animal regulations – Livestock – Education and enforcement.

18.70.090    Nonconformances.


18.70.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to enhance and preserve the compatibility between neighboring properties by regulating the scope and intensity of accessory uses or activities involving the keeping of animals. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.70.020 Animal regulations – Small animals and household pets.

The raising, keeping, breeding or boarding of small animals and household pets are subject to Chapter 6.05 KMC, Animal Care and Control, and the following requirements:

A. The following household pets shall not be limited in number, except as may be provided in KMC Title 6:

1. Household pets in aquariums, terrariums, cages or similar containers;

2. Cats kept indoors.

B. Dogs kept indoors as household pets shall be limited to five.

C. Small animals, including cats and dogs not kept indoors as household pets but excluding bees, shall be limited as follows: 

1. Three per household on lots less than 20,000 square feet in size;

2. Five per household on lots of 20,000 to 35,000 square feet in size;

3. An additional two small animals per acre of site area over 35,000 square feet up to a maximum of 20.

4. Mink and fox are permitted only on sites having a minimum area of five acres.

D. Excluding kennels and catteries, the total number of unaltered adult cats and/or dogs per household shall not exceed three. All unaltered animals kept outdoors must be kept on a leash or in a confined area, except as authorized for a hobby kennel or cattery or commercial kennel or cattery pursuant to Chapter 6.05 KMC.

E. All small animals shall be confined within a building, pen, aviary or similar structure, or a securely fenced portion of the site. Any covered structure used to house or contain such animals shall maintain a distance of not less than 10 feet to any property line, except structures used to house mink and fox shall be a distance of not less than 150 feet.

F. An aviary or loft shall provide a minimum of one-half square foot for each parakeet, canary or similarly sized bird, one square foot for each pigeon, small parrot or similarly sized bird, and two square feet for each large parrot, macaw or similarly sized bird.

G. A structure housing poultry, hamsters, nutria, chinchilla, or rabbits shall provide a minimum of one square foot of structure for each animal.

H. Beekeeping is limited as follows:

1. Beehives are limited to 50 on sites less than five acres;

2. The number of beehives shall not be limited on sites of five acres or greater;

3. Colonies shall be maintained in movable-frame hives at all times;

4. Adequate space shall be provided in each hive to prevent overcrowding and swarming;

5. Colonies shall be requeened following any swarming or aggressive behavior;

6. All colonies shall be registered with the extension agent prior to April 1st of each year, on a State registration form acceptable to the City; and

7. Abandoned colonies, diseased bees, or bees living in trees, buildings, or any other space except in movable-frame hives shall constitute a public nuisance, and shall be abated as set forth in Chapter 18.125 KMC, Enforcement.

I. Limits on the allowable number of small animals described in this section may be exceeded only through approval of a conditional use permit, subject to the following:

1. The minimum site area shall be one-half acre.

2. Aviaries or lofts shall not exceed 2,000 square feet and shall be set back at least 20 feet from any dwelling unit.

3. Structures used to house poultry, hamsters, nutria, chinchilla, and rabbits are limited to a maximum of 2,000 square feet. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.70.025 Kennels and catteries. 

Kennels and catteries are subject to the following requirements:

A. For kennels located on residential zoned sites:

1. The minimum site area shall be five acres; and

2. Structures housing animals and outdoor animal runs shall be a minimum distance of 100 feet from property lines abutting residential zones;

B. For kennels located on nonresidential zoned sites, run areas shall be completely surrounded by an eight-foot solid wall or fence; and

C. Catteries shall be on sites of 35,000 square feet or more, and buildings used to house cats shall be a minimum distance of 50 feet from property lines abutting residential zones. 

D. See Chapter 6.05 KMC for standards related to hobby kennels or catteries. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.70.030 Animal regulations – Livestock – Purpose.

The primary purpose of KMC 18.70.040 through 18.70.080 is to support the raising and keeping of livestock in the City in a manner that minimizes the adverse impacts of livestock on the environment, particularly with regard to their impacts on water quality and salmonid fisheries habitat in City watersheds. The following sections establish regulations which set livestock densities and require implementation of best management practices for minimizing nonpoint pollution from livestock in a manner that recognizes the need for integrated resource management within City watersheds. They are intended to be consistent with livestock welfare; however, these concerns are more appropriately addressed through Chapter 6.05 KMC. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.70.040 Animal regulations – Livestock – Densities.

The raising, keeping, breeding or fee boarding of livestock is subject to Chapter 6.05 KMC, Animal Care and Control, and the following requirements:

A. The minimum lot size on which livestock may be kept shall be 20,000 square feet; provided, that the portion of the total lot area used for confinement or grazing meets the requirements of this section.

B. The maximum number of livestock shall be as follows:

1. Commercial dairy farms in full compliance with a Washington State Department of Ecology NPDES general or special use permit – as consistent with the permit requirements. Otherwise, subsection (B)(4) of this section applies. 

2. The keeping of livestock consistent with a King County farm management plan approved prior to January 1, 2011. Otherwise, subsection (B)(4) of this section applies.

3. Six resident animal units per gross acre in stables, barns and other livestock operations with covered confinement areas; provided, that no more than three animal units per gross acre are allowed to use uncovered grazing or confinement areas on a full-time basis, and the standards in KMC 18.70.060 are met. 

4. For all livestock not covered by subsection (B)(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section, three animal units per gross acre of vegetated site area; provided, that the standards in KMC 18.70.060 are met.

5. For purposes of these regulations, an animal unit shall consist of one adult horse or bovine, two ponies, five small livestock, or equivalent thereof (excluding sucklings); provided, that miniature horses and feeder calves (up to one year of age) shall be considered small livestock. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.70.060 Animal regulations – Livestock – Management standards.

Property owners with farms containing large livestock at densities greater than one animal unit per two acres, and/or small livestock at densities greater than five animals per acre, shall adhere to the following management standards. This section shall apply as long as farm practices do not result in violation of any federal, State or local water quality standards or the critical area regulations in Chapter 18.55 KMC.

A. Livestock Watering. To minimize livestock access to streams, property owners shall utilize the following livestock watering options:

1. The preferred option shall be a domestic water supply, stock watering pond, roof runoff collection system, or approved pumped supply from the stream so that livestock are not required to enter streams for their water supply.

2. Livestock access to streams and their buffers shall be limited to stream crossing and watering points approved under the provisions of Chapter 18.55 KMC.

a. Fencing shall be used as necessary to prevent livestock access to streams, wetlands and their buffers.

B. Grazing and Pasture Management.

1. Fencing shall be used to establish and maintain critical areas and their buffers.

2. Fencing installed prior to August 31, 1998, at setbacks other than those specified in Chapter 18.55 KMC shall be deemed to constitute compliance with those requirements.

3. Grazing areas within 200 feet of a stream or wetland shall not be plowed during the rainy season (October 1st through April 15th).

4. Grazing areas may extend to the property line; provided, that streams and wetlands adjacent to the property line are buffered in accordance with Chapter 18.55 KMC.

C. Confinement Area Management.

1. Confinement areas located within 200 feet of any streams, wetlands or drainageways shall:

a. Have a 20-foot-wide vegetative filter strip downhill from the confinement area, consisting of heavy grasses or other ground cover with high stem density and which may also include tree cover;

b. Have roof drains of any buildings in the confinement area diverted away from the confinement area.

2. Confinement areas may extend to the property line; provided, that streams and wetlands adjacent to the property line are buffered in accordance with Chapter 18.55 KMC.

D. Manure Management.

1. Manure storage areas shall be managed as follows:

a. Surface flows and roof runoff shall be diverted away from manure storage areas.

b. During the winter months (October 15th to April 15th), all manure stockpiled within 200 feet uphill of any stream or wetland shall be covered in a manner that excludes precipitation and allows free flow of air to minimize fire danger; or, in the alternative, shall be placed in an uncovered concrete bunker or manure lagoon or held for pickup in a dumpster, vehicle or other facility designed to prevent leachate from reaching any streams or wetlands. Concrete bunkers shall be monitored quarterly for the first two years after installation, then annually unless problems were identified in the first two years, in which case quarterly monitoring shall continue and appropriate adjustments shall be made.

c. Manure shall be stored in a location that avoids having runoff from the manure enter streams or wetlands. Manure piles shall not be located within any stream or wetland buffer.

2. Manure shall be spread on fields only during the growing season, and not on saturated or frozen fields. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.70.070 Animal regulations – Livestock – Building requirements.

A. In residential zones, free boarding of livestock other than in a legally established stable shall only be as an accessory use to a residence on the subject property.

B. A barn or stable may contain a caretaker’s accessory living quarters under the following conditions:

1. Only one accessory living quarter per primary detached dwelling unit;

2. The accessory living quarter shall not exceed 500 square feet; and

3. The structure must be constructed in conformance with the State Building Code.

C. A barn or stable may contain a caretaker’s accessory dwelling unit as allowed pursuant to the provisions of this title relating to accessory dwelling units. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.70.075 Animal regulations – Livestock – Setbacks for buildings and manure storage areas.

A. The minimum interior setback for any building used to house, confine or feed swine shall be 90 feet.

B. The minimum interior setback for any building used to house, confine or feed any other livestock shall be 25 feet.

C. The minimum interior setback for any manure storage area shall be 35 feet. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.70.080 Animal regulations – Livestock – Education and enforcement.

A. Education. Enforcement of these livestock standards shall initially emphasize achieving compliance with the standards as the primary objective, rather than the collection of fines or penalties. Fines or penalties are appropriate when a property owner or livestock operator has been advised of necessary corrective actions, and has not made those corrections. Where violations of the standards do occur, and such violations are directly linked to identified hazards or the discharge of prohibited contaminants, as enumerated in KMC 13.45.030, code enforcement must emphasize immediate correction of the practices resulting in the hazard or prohibited discharge.

B. Both the property owner and any renter or lessee of the property, hereinafter referred to as “livestock operator,” shall be held responsible for compliance with these standards.

C. Prima Facie Evidence. Establishment of and adherence to a farm management plan or the management standards provided by KMC 18.70.060 shall be prima facie proof of compliance with the regulatory provisions of KMC 13.45.040.

D. Violations of Specific Standards. The City shall be responsible for enforcement of the standards set out in this chapter. The City shall be responsible for enforcement of water quality violations pursuant to Chapter 13.45 KMC for prohibited discharges and hazards. If a specific standard identified in this chapter is not being adhered to, the operator and owner shall be given notice of noncompliance. The notice shall specify what actions must be taken to bring the property into compliance. The operator and owner shall be given 45 days in which to adhere to the management standards of KMC 18.70.060. Should the owner and/or livestock operator fail to bring the property into compliance with the standards, the City, after notice, may commence abatement proceedings and impose civil fines 30 days thereafter, to the extent necessary for compliance. Thereafter, upon exhaustion of any appeals and failure of the operator and owner to comply with any continuing order to abate, the operator and owner shall be subject to civil and criminal penalties, and other procedures, as set forth in this title and Chapter 1.20 KMC. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.70.090 Nonconformances.

Animals being lawfully kept prior to August 2, 2011, shall be allowed to remain until they are sold, moved, or have lived out their life. The City shall notify property owners regarding any known nonconforming animals so that they will not be replaced or their numbers increased following this date. Owners of nonconforming animals also shall be subject to the management practices of this chapter. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 18.73 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS, HOME OCCUPATION, HOME INDUSTRY

Sections:

18.73.100    Accessory dwelling units.

18.73.110    Home occupation.

18.73.120    Home industry.


18.73.100 Accessory dwelling units.

A. Only one accessory dwelling is allowed per primary single detached dwelling unit;

B. An accessory dwelling unit is allowed only in the same building as the primary dwelling unit on a lot that is less than 10,000 square feet in area, or on a lot containing more than one primary dwelling;

C. The primary dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit shall be owner occupied;

D.1. If the accessory dwelling unit is attached to the primary dwelling unit, then the dwelling units shall not exceed a floor area of 1,000 square feet or 50 percent of the living area of the primary residence, whichever is greater; and

2. When the primary and accessory dwelling units are located in the same building, only one entrance may be located on each street side of the building;

3. If the accessory dwelling unit is detached from the primary residence, then the accessory dwelling unit may be 10 percent of the lot size, or 50 percent of the primary dwelling unit, whichever is less;

E. One additional off-street parking space shall be provided;

F. The accessory dwelling unit shall be converted to another permitted use or shall be removed if one of the dwelling units ceases to be owner occupied;

G. An applicant seeking to build an accessory dwelling unit shall file a notice approved by the department with the records and elections division which identifies the dwelling unit as accessory. The notice shall run with the land. The applicant shall submit proof that the notice was filed before the department shall approve any permit for the construction of the accessory dwelling unit. The required contents and form of the notice shall be set forth in administrative rules;

H. The total number of occupants in the principal dwelling unit and the accessory dwelling unit combined shall not exceed the maximum number established for a single-family dwelling as defined in KMC 18.20.1010. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.73.110 Home occupation.

Residents of a dwelling unit may conduct one or more home occupations as accessory activities, provided:

A. The total area devoted to all home occupation(s) shall not exceed 20 percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit. Areas with attached garages and storage buildings shall not be considered part of the dwelling unit for purposes of calculating allowable home occupation area but may be used for storage of goods associated with the home occupation;

B. In residential zones, all the activities of the home occupation(s) shall be conducted indoors, except for those related to growing or storing of plants used by the home occupation(s);

C. No more than one nonresident shall be employed by the home occupation(s);

D. The following activities shall be prohibited in residential zones only:

1. Automobile, truck and heavy equipment repair;

2. Autobody work or painting;

3. Parking and storage of heavy equipment; and

4. Storage of building materials for use on other properties;

E. In addition to required parking for the dwelling unit, on-site parking shall be provided as follows:

1. One stall for a nonresident employed by the home occupation(s); and

2. One stall for patrons when services are rendered on site.

3. For specialized instruction schools, the number of stalls shall be as required by Chapter 18.40 KMC;

F. Sales shall be limited to:

1. Mail order sales; and

2. Telephone sales with off-site delivery;

G. Specialized instruction schools shall be limited to:

1. Twelve students per one-hour session;

2. Structures used for the school shall maintain a distance of 25 feet from property lines adjoining residential zones;

H. Services to patrons shall be arranged by appointment or provided off site;

I. The home occupation(s) may use or store a vehicle for pickup of materials used by the home occupation(s) or the distribution of products from the site, provided:

1. No more than one such vehicle shall be allowed;

2. Such vehicle shall not park within any required setback areas of the lot or on adjacent streets; and

3. Such vehicle shall not exceed a weight capacity of one ton;

J. The home occupation(s) shall not use electrical or mechanical equipment that results in:

1. A change to the occupancy type of the structure(s) used for the home occupation(s);

2. Visual or audible interference in radio or television receivers, or electronic equipment located off-premises; or

3. Fluctuations in line voltage off-premises; and

K. Uses not allowed as home occupations may be allowed as a home industry pursuant to this chapter. [Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.73.120 Home industry.

In all zones except R-12, R-18, R-24, CB Juanita subarea, and NB, a resident may establish a home industry as an accessory activity, provided:

A. In the R-1, R-4 and R-6 zones, a conditional use permit is obtained;

B. The site area shall be no less than one acre;

C. The area of the home industry shall not exceed 50 percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit. Areas within attached garages and storage buildings shall not be considered part of the dwelling unit for purposes of calculating allowable home industry area but may be used for storage of goods associated with the home occupation;

D. No more than four nonresidents shall be employed in a home industry;

E. In addition to required parking for the dwelling unit, on-site parking shall be provided as follows:

1. One stall for each nonresident employee of the home industry; and

2. One stall for customer parking;

F. Additional customer parking shall be calculated for areas devoted to the home industry at the rate of one stall per:

1. One thousand square feet of building floor area; and

2. Two thousand square feet of outdoor work or storage area;

G. Sales shall be limited to items produced on site, except for items collected, traded and occasionally sold by hobbyists, such as coins, stamps, and antiques;

H. Ten feet of Type I landscaping shall be provided around portions of parking and outside storage areas which are otherwise visible from adjacent properties or public rights-of-way; and

I. The city manager shall ensure compatibility of the home industry by:

1. Limiting the type and size of equipment used by the home industry to those which are compatible with the surrounding neighborhood;

2. Providing for setbacks or screening as needed to protect adjacent residential properties;

3. Specifying hours of operation;

4. Determining acceptable levels of outdoor lighting; and

5. Requiring sound level tests for activities determined to produce sound levels which may be excessive. [Ord. 18-0454 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 17-0438 § 2 (Att. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 18.77 AFFORDABLE HOUSING

Sections:

18.77.010    Affordable housing – Purpose and intent.

18.77.015    General provisions.

18.77.020    Downtown residential and downtown commercial zones.

18.77.030    Transit oriented development (TOD) district overlay.

18.77.040    Community business zone, Juanita subarea.

18.77.045    Alternative compliance.

18.77.050    Affordability agreement.


18.77.010 Affordable housing – Purpose and intent. 

The purpose of this chapter is to implement, through regulations, the responsibility of the City under the Washington State Growth Management Act to consider the housing needs of all economic segments of the community, and to assure an adequate affordable housing supply in the City. The City recognizes that the marketplace is the primary supplier of adequate housing for those in the upper economic groups, but that some combination of appropriately zoned land, regulatory incentives, innovative planning techniques, and requirements will be necessary to make adequate provisions for the needs of households whose incomes are at or below median income. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.77.015 General provisions.

A. Determination of Number of Affordable Housing Units Required – Rounding. See KMC 18.30.020(D) for method of rounding to determine the number of affordable housing units required.

B. Adjacent Developments. Adjacent developments by the same or affiliated developer will be considered as a single development for the purpose of applying the thresholds for compliance.

C. Designation of Affordable Housing Units. Prior to the issuance of any permit(s), the City shall review and approve the location and unit mix of the affordable housing units consistent with the following standards:

1. Location. The location of the affordable housing units shall be approved by the City, with the intent that they generally be intermingled with all other dwelling units in the development.

2. Tenure. The tenure of the affordable housing units (ownership or rental) shall be the same as the tenure for the rest of the housing units in the development.

3. Size (Bedroom). The affordable housing units shall consist of a range of number of bedrooms that is comparable to units in the overall development.

4. Size (Square Footage). The size of the affordable housing units, if smaller than the other units with the same number of bedrooms in the development, shall be approved by the city manager. If there is a proposal that the affordable units be smaller than the market rate units, in no case shall the affordable housing units be less than 500 square feet for a studio unit, 600 square feet for a one-bedroom unit, 800 square feet for a two-bedroom unit, or 1,000 square feet for a three-bedroom unit.

5. Design. The exterior design of the affordable housing units shall be compatible and comparable with the rest of the dwelling units in the development and shall comply with any applicable design standards. The interior finish and quality of construction of the affordable housing units shall at a minimum be comparable to entry level rental or ownership housing in the City.

D. Duration. Housing shall serve only income-eligible households for a minimum period of 50 years from the latter of the date when the affordability agreement between the housing owner and the City, as described in KMC 18.77.050, is recorded, or the date when the affordable housing becomes available for occupancy as determined by the City.

E. Timing/Phasing. The affordable housing units shall be available for occupancy in a time frame comparable to the availability of the rest of the dwelling units in the development. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A).]


18.77.020 Downtown residential and downtown commercial zones.

The provisions of this section shall apply to multifamily residential developments proposed on property four acres or greater in size within the downtown residential or downtown commercial zones that lie west of 68th Avenue NE, and which are providing for more than 20 multiple-family dwelling units.

A. Twenty-five percent of the total number of units in the development shall be moderate-income affordable housing units.

B. Subject to City authorization, the affordable units need not be provided within the development, but must be provided within the downtown commercial, downtown residential, urban corridor, waterfront commercial, or regional business zone. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.77.030 Transit oriented development (TOD) district overlay.

A. Properties developed under the TOD district overlay, Chapter 18.29 KMC, shall include affordable housing units.

B. Cap on Total Number of Affordable Housing Units Required. Affordable housing requirements shall be capped at 10 percent of the total number of dwelling units being provided.

C. Number of Affordable Housing Units Required. Affordable housing units shall be provided for any development exceeding the base density of the underlying zone as follows:

1. Tier 1. If the number of bonus units is less than or equal to 30 percent of the total number of dwelling units, then for every three bonus units, one dwelling unit shall be a moderate-income affordable housing unit and two bonus dwelling units may be bonus market rate dwelling units.

2. Tier 2. If the number of bonus units is greater than 30 percent of the total number of dwelling units and if the overall project density is less than or equal to 120 dwelling units per acre, then a combination of low-income affordable housing units and moderate-income affordable housing units shall be provided as follows: For every four bonus units allowed beyond that needed to achieve the 10 percent moderate-income affordable housing units, one of the moderate-income affordable housing units shall be made into a low-income affordable housing unit up to a maximum of 33 percent of the affordable housing units (or 3.3 percent of the total dwelling units in the development).

3. Tier 3. If the overall development density is greater than 120 dwelling units per acre, a combination of very low-income affordable housing units, low-income affordable housing units and moderate-income affordable housing units shall be provided as follows: The required numbers of low-income affordable housing units and moderate-income affordable housing units shall be equivalent to those that would be required under Tier 2, assuming that the project were to be developed at a density of 120 dwelling units per acre. An amount of very low-income affordable housing shall be required so that the total combined amount of very low-income, low-income and moderate-income affordable housing units is equal to 10 percent of the total number of dwelling units in the development.

4. Affordable Housing Example. Example is a one-and-one-half-acre property with a base density of 48 dwelling units (du)/acre. Without the TOD district overlay, the property could achieve up to 72 dwelling units.

Tier 1 example: Proposed TOD development would achieve 93 dwelling units on site for 62 du/acre. This provides 21 “bonus” dwelling units above the 48 du/acre base density of the zone. Since the number of bonus units (21) is less than 30 percent of the total units (93), seven of the 21 bonus units must be affordable to moderate-income households, meeting Tier 1 affordability requirements.

Tier 2 example: Proposed TOD development would achieve 113 dwelling units on site for 75 du/acre. This provides 41 “bonus” dwelling units above the 48 du/acre base density of the zone.

Since the number of bonus units (41) is greater than 30 percent of the total units (113), 11 of the 41 bonus units must be affordable, meeting the 10 percent affordability cap. Nine of these are affordable to moderate-income households and two are affordable to low-income households (33 of the bonus units used toward achieving 10 percent affordable units (11*3) plus eight of the bonus units applied toward making two of the affordable units low-income affordable units (8*.25=2).

Tier 3 example: Proposed TOD development would achieve 210 dwelling units on site for 140 du/acre. The first step is to determine how many affordable units would have been required assuming 120 du/acre using the Tier 2 formula This calculation results in 13 moderate-income affordable housing units and five low-income affordable housing units. To achieve the requirement that 10 percent of the total units in the development be affordable, three additional affordable housing units would be needed (21-18=3). These three units would be required to be very low-income affordable housing units. In summary, the development would provide 13 moderate-income affordable housing units, five low-income affordable housing units, and three very low-income affordable housing units. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 13-0363 § 5; Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.77.040 Community business zone, Juanita subarea.

A. For properties choosing to develop at higher residential densities in the CB Juanita subarea, Chapter 18.23 KMC, affordable housing units shall be provided for any development exceeding the base density of 24 dwelling units per acre as follows:

1. For every four bonus units, one bonus dwelling unit shall be a moderate-income affordable housing unit and three bonus dwelling units may be bonus market rate dwelling units.

2. Each low-income affordable housing unit provided counts as two moderate-income affordable housing units for the purpose of satisfying the affordable unit requirement under subsection (A)(1) of this section.

Example: Proposed development would achieve 36 dwelling units on a one-acre site for a density of 36 du/acre. This provides 12 “bonus” dwelling units above the 24 du/acre base density of the zone. Three of the 12 bonus units must be moderate-income affordable housing units. Alternatively, the project could provide two low-income affordable housing units (rounded). [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A).]


18.77.045 Alternative compliance.

Alternative Compliance. The city manager may approve a request for satisfying all or part of the affordable housing requirements with alternative compliance methods as follows:

A. Application. Applications for alternative compliance shall be submitted at the time of permit application, and must be approved prior to issuance of any building permit.

B. Off-Site Provision. A project proponent may propose to satisfy all or part of affordable housing requirements off site.

1. The project proponent must demonstrate that off-site provision of new affordable housing achieves a result equal to or better than providing affordable housing on site.

2. Affordable housing units provided through this method must be the same type of units as the units in the project which gave rise to the requirement.

3. Priority is for the project to be located within the same zoning district as the development responsible for providing affordable housing. However, the city manager may approve a project located outside the zoning district if the location has access to commercial uses and transit, does not result in an undue concentration of affordable housing, and has adequate infrastructure.

4. The proposal must demonstrate that the affordable units provided off site will be completed before or within the same time period as the development generating the affordable housing requirement. For projects approved for off-site affordable housing, there will be a recorded agreement on both the “sending” property and the “receiving” property. The covenant on the sending site will be released once the affordable housing is completed on the receiving property.

C. Contribution to Preservation of Existing Affordable Housing. A project proponent may propose to satisfy all or part of affordable housing requirements through purchase and long-term preservation of existing affordable housing, particularly in the City’s manufactured housing communities. The applicant shall provide information demonstrating affordability of the units to be preserved and a long-term covenant shall be placed over the preserved units, ensuring preservation and maintenance of the affordable units.

D. Fee in Lieu. Cash payments in lieu of providing actual housing units may be proposed and, if approved by the City, shall be used only for the subsequent preservation or provision of affordable housing units by the City or other housing provider approved by the city manager. Payments in lieu shall be based on the difference between the cost of construction for a prototype affordable housing unit on the subject property, including land costs and development fees, and the revenue generated by an affordable housing unit. The payment obligation will be established at the time of issuance of building permits for the project. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A).]


18.77.050 Affordability agreement.

A. Prior to issuing any building permit, an agreement in a form approved by the city manager that addresses price restrictions, homebuyer or tenant qualifications, phasing of construction, monitoring of affordability, duration of affordability, and any other applicable topics of the affordable housing units shall be recorded with King County Department of Records and Elections. This agreement shall be a covenant running with the land and shall be binding on the assigns, heirs and successors of the applicant. The City may agree, at its sole discretion, to subordinate any affordable housing regulatory agreement for the purpose of enabling the owner to obtain financing for development of the property.

B. Monitoring and Fees. The City reserves the right to establish, in the affordability agreement referred to in subsection A of this section, monitoring fees for the affordable housing unit, which can be adjusted over time to account for inflation. The purpose of any monitoring fee is for the review and processing of documents to maintain compliance with income and affordability restrictions of the affordability agreement. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A).]


Chapter 18.80 RESIDENTIAL DENSITY INCENTIVES AND TRANSFER OF DENSITY

Sections:

18.80.010    Purpose.

18.80.020    Permitted locations of residential density incentives.

18.80.030    Maximum densities permitted through residential density incentive review.

18.80.040    Public benefits and density incentives.

18.80.050    Rules for calculating total permitted dwelling units.

18.80.060    Review process.

18.80.070    Minor adjustments in final site plans.

18.80.080    Applicability of development standards.

18.80.090    Transfer of density credits.


18.80.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to:

A. Provide density incentives to developers of residential property, in exchange for public benefits to help achieve comprehensive plan goals of affordable housing, open space protection, and parkland acquisition by:

l. Defining in quantified terms the public benefits that can be used to earn density incentives;

2. Providing rules and formulae for computing density incentives earned by each benefit.

B. Provide a method to realize the development potential of:

1. Sites containing critical areas or of unique size or shape;

2. Specific sites preserved in order to achieve comprehensive plan goals as identified by the city council.

C. Provide a review process to allow evaluation of proposed density increases, using residential density incentives and the public benefits offered to earn them, and give the public opportunities to review and comment. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.80.020 Permitted locations of residential density incentives.

Residential density incentives (RDIs) shall be used only on sites served by public sewers and only in the following zones:

A. In R-4 through R-24 and downtown residential zones; and

B. In DC, NB, CB, UC, WC, and RB zones when part of a multiple-family dwelling or mixed use development. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.80.030 Maximum densities permitted through residential density incentive review.

The maximum density permitted through RDI review shall be specified in the underlying zone of the development site. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.80.040 Public benefits and density incentives.

A. The public benefits eligible to earn increased densities, and the maximum incentive to be earned by each benefit, are in subsection E of this section. The density incentive is expressed as additional bonus dwelling units, or fractions of dwelling units, earned per amount of public benefit provided.

B. Bonus dwelling units may be earned through any combination of the listed public benefits.

C. Bonus dwelling units may also be earned and transferred to the project site through the transfer of density credit (TDC) process from sites other than that of the RDI development.

D. Residential development in R-4 through R-24 and downtown residential zones with property-specific development standards requiring any public benefit enumerated in this chapter shall be eligible to earn bonus dwelling units in accordance with subsection E of this section if the public benefits provided exceed the basic development standards of this title. If a development is located in a special overlay district, bonus units may be earned if the development provides public benefits exceeding corresponding standards of the special district.

E. The following are the public benefits eligible to earn density incentives through RDI review:

	BENEFIT	DENSITY INCENTIVE

	1. AFFORDABLE HOUSING	 

	a. Benefit units consisting of rental housing permanently priced to serve low-income households (i.e., no greater than 30 percent of gross income for households at or below 50 percent of King County median income, adjusted for household size). A covenant on the site that specifies the income level being served, rent levels and requirements for reporting to the City shall be recorded at final approval.	2.0 bonus units per benefit unit.

	b. Benefit units consisting of assisted housing units 600 square feet or less.	1.0 bonus unit per benefit unit.

	c. Benefit units consisting of rental housing permanently priced to serve moderate-income households (i.e., no greater than 30 percent of gross income for households at or below 70 percent of King County median income, adjusted for household size). A covenant on the site that specifies the income level being served, rent levels and requirements for reporting to the City shall be recorded at final approval.	1.0 bonus unit per benefit unit.

	d. Benefit units consisting of moderate income housing reserved for income- and asset-qualified home buyers (total household income at or below 80 percent of King County median, adjusted for household size). Benefit units shall be limited to owner-occupied housing, with prices restricted to same income group, based on current underwriting ratios and other lending standards for 30 years from date of first sale. A covenant on the site that specifies the income level and other aspects of buyer eligibility, price levels and requirements for reporting to the City shall be recorded at final approval.	1.0 bonus unit per benefit unit.

	e. Projects in which units are reserved for moderate-income- and asset-qualified buyers (total household income at or below 50 percent of the King County median, adjusted for household size). All units shall be limited to owner-occupied housing with prices restricted based on current underwriting ratios and other lending standards, and with prices restricted to same income group, for 30 years from date of first sale. Final approval conditions shall specify requirements for reporting to the City on both buyer eligibility and housing prices.	2.0 bonus units per benefit unit.

	f. Benefit units consisting of manufactured housing community space or pad reserved for the relocation of an insignia or noninsignia mobile home, that has been or will be displaced due to closure of a manufactured housing community located in the City.	1.0 bonus unit per benefit unit.

	2. OPEN SPACE, TRAILS AND PARKS	 

	a. Dedication of park site or trail right-of-way meeting the City location and size standards for neighborhood, community or regional park, or trail, and accepted by the department.	0.5 bonus unit per acre of park area or quarter-mile of trail exceeding the minimum requirement of Chapter 18.30 KMC for on-site recreation space or trail corridors, computed on the number of dwelling units permitted by the site’s base density.

	b. Improvement of dedicated park site to City standards for developed parks.	0.75 bonus unit per acre of park improvement. If the applicant is dedicating the site of the improvements, the bonus units earned by improvements shall be added to the bonus units earned by the dedication.

	c. Improvement of dedicated trail segment to City standards.	1.8 bonus units per quarter-mile of trail constructed to City standard for pedestrian trails; or

2.5 bonus units per quarter-mile of trail constructed to City standard for multipurpose trails (pedestrian/bicycle/equestrian).

Shorter segments shall be awarded bonus units on a pro rata basis. If the applicant is dedicating the site of the improvements, the bonus units earned by improvements shall be added to the bonus units earned by the dedication.

	d. Dedication of open space, meeting City acquisition standards to the City or a qualified public or private organization such as a nature conservancy.	0.5 bonus unit per acre of open space.

[Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.80.050 Rules for calculating total permitted dwelling units.

A. The formula for calculating the total number of dwelling units permitted through RDI review is as follows:

	DUs allowed by RDI site base Density	+	Bonus DUs	+	DUs allowed by sending site density (if any)	=	TOTAL RDI DUs

B. The total dwelling units permitted through RDI review shall be calculated using the following steps:

1. Calculate the number of dwellings permitted by the base density of the site in accordance with Chapter 18.30 KMC;

2. Calculate the total number of bonus dwelling units earned by providing the public benefits listed in KMC 18.80.040;

3. Add the number of bonus dwelling units earned to the number of dwelling units permitted by the base density;

4. Add the number of dwelling units permitted by the base density of the site sending TDCs, if any;

5. Round fractional dwelling units to the nearest whole number; 0.49 or less dwelling units are rounded down; and

6. On sites with more than one zone or zone density, the maximum density shall be calculated for the site area of each zone. Bonus units may be reallocated within the zones in the same manner set forth for base units. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.80.060 Review process.

A. All RDI proposals shall be reviewed concurrently with a primary proposal to consider the proposed site plan and methods used to earn extra density.

1. When the primary proposal requires a public hearing under this code or KMC Title 17, the public hearing on the primary proposal shall serve as the hearing on the RDI proposal, and the reviewing authority shall make a consolidated decision on the proposed development and use of RDI;

2. When the primary proposal does not require a public hearing under this code or KMC Title 17, the RDI proposal shall be processed as a Type 2 land use decision subject to the decision criteria for conditional use permits outlined in Chapter 18.115 KMC; and

3. The notice for the RDI proposal also shall include the development’s proposed density and a general description of the public benefits offered to earn extra density.

B. RDI applications which propose to earn bonus units by dedicating real property or public facilities shall include a letter from the receiving agency certifying that the proposed dedication qualifies for the density incentive and will be accepted by the agency or other qualifying organization. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.80.070 Minor adjustments in final site plans.

When issuing building permits in an approved RDI development, the department may allow minor adjustments in the approved site plan involving the location or dimensions of buildings or landscaping, provided such adjustments shall not:

A. Increase the number of dwelling units;

B. Decrease the amount of perimeter landscaping (if any);

C. Decrease residential parking facilities (unless the number of dwelling units is decreased);

D. Locate structures closer to any site boundary line; or

E. Change the locations of any points of ingress and egress to the site. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.80.080 Applicability of development standards.

A. RDI developments shall comply with dimensional standards of the zone with a base density most closely comparable to the total approved density of the RDI development; provided, that an RDI proposal in the R-4 through R-6 zones shall conform to the height requirements of the underlying zone in which it is located.

B. RDI developments in the R-4 through R-6 zones shall be landscaped as follows:

1. When 75 percent or more of the units in the RDI development consist of townhouses or apartments, the development shall provide perimeter landscaping and tree retention in accordance with Chapters 18.35 and 18.57 KMC for townhouse or apartment projects.

2. When less than 75 percent of the units in the RDI consist of townhouses or apartments, the development shall provide landscaping and tree retention in accordance with Chapters 18.35 and 18.57 KMC for townhouses or apartments on the portion(s) of the development containing such units; provided, that if buildings containing such units are more than 100 feet from the development’s perimeter, the required landscaping may be reduced by 50 percent.

3. All other portions of the RDI shall provide landscaping or retain trees in accordance with Chapters 18.35 and 18.57 KMC.

C. RDI developments in all other zones shall be landscaped or retain trees in accordance with Chapters 18.35 and 18.57 KMC.

D. RDI developments shall provide parking as follows:

1. Projects with 100 percent affordable housing shall provide one off-street parking space per unit. The city manager may require additional parking, up to the maximum standards for attached dwelling units, which may be provided in common parking areas.

2. All other RDI proposals shall provide parking for:

a. Market rate/bonus units at levels consistent with Chapter 18.40 KMC; and

b. Benefit units at:

(1) One or two bedrooms: one parking space per unit;

(2) Three bedrooms: one and one-half parking spaces per unit;

(3) Parking may be further reduced if a parking demand analysis is provided per KMC 18.40.030(B).

E. RDI developments shall provide on-site recreation space as follows:

1. Projects with 100 percent affordable housing shall provide recreation space at 50 percent of the levels required in Chapter 18.30 KMC.

2. All other RDI proposals shall provide recreation space for:

a. Market rate/bonus units at levels consistent with Chapter 18.30 KMC; and

b. Benefit units at 50 percent of the levels required for market rate/bonus units. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.80.090 Transfer of density credits.

In order to realize the development potential of sites containing critical areas or of unique size or shape, or sites preserved in order to attain comprehensive plan goals, an opportunity to transfer unused density from one site to another shall be provided. Transfer of density credit transactions shall be handled between the private parties, with documentation provided to the City, until such time as the City enters into a formalized transfer of development rights (TDR) process through King County or another agency.

A. Transfer of Density from Sites Constrained by Critical Areas or of Unique Size and Shape. A development proponent may apply to transfer unused density from a site constrained by critical areas or of unique size or shape to another site through a Type 2 land use decision.

1. The number of density credits that a sending site is eligible to send to a receiving site shall be determined by applying the base density of the zone the sending site is located in to the total sending site area, less any portion of the sending site already in a conservation easement or other encumbrance, or any land area already used to calculate residential density for other development on the sending site. A plot plan showing critical areas and buffers, conservation easements or other encumbrances shall be submitted as part of the development application to demonstrate compliance with the density calculation rules set forth in Chapter 18.30 KMC.

2. Sending sites with critical areas that have been declared unbuildable under Chapter 18.30 KMC shall be considered to have a base density calculated in accordance with that chapter, except that the areas of the sending and receiving sites shall be combined to calculate the overall site percentage of critical areas and buffers necessary for determining the allowable density credit as set forth in Chapter 18.55 KMC.

3. When the sending site consists only of a portion(s) of an unsubdivided parcel, said portion(s) shall be segregated from the remainder of the lot pursuant to KMC Title 17 or deed restrictions documenting the density credit transfers shall be recorded with the title to both the sending and receiving sites. A parcel need not segregate a sending site from the remainder of the parcel when the entire parcel is subject to a conservation easement pursuant to subsection (A)(4) of this section.

4. Conservation easements shall be required for land contained in the sending site, whether or not such land is dedicated, as follows: a conservation easement shall be recorded on the sending site to indicate development limitations on the sending site.

B. Transfer of Density from Sites in Order to Attain Comprehensive Plan Goals. A development proponent may apply to transfer unused density from a sending site to a receiving site to achieve comprehensive plan goals as specified by the city council. The city council shall identify by ordinance circumstances in which this code section may be applied.

1. As of April 23, 2019, the city council has determined that unused density may be transferred from a property zoned MHC to a receiving site if long-term preservation of the manufactured housing community is assured. Unused density shall be defined as the number of dwelling units allowable under existing zoning as of April 22, 2019, less the number of existing dwelling units on the property as of April 23, 2019, multiplied by two and one-half.

2. Density shall not be transferred to projects in the R-1, R-4 or R-6 zoning districts.

C. Density credits from one sending site may be allocated to more than one receiving site.

D. The transfer of density request shall be processed as part of the underlying permit for the project on the receiving site.

E. Upon submitting an application to develop a receiving site under the provisions of this section, the applicant shall provide evidence of ownership or full legal control of the density credits proposed to be used in calculating total density on the receiving site.

F. Density credits from a sending site shall be considered transferred to a receiving site when the sending site is permanently protected by a land dedication, conservation easement or preservation agreement submitted to and approved by the city manager. This document shall be recorded with King County prior to approval of the receiving site permit.

G. TDC developments shall comply with dimensional standards of the zone with a base density most closely comparable to the total approved density of the TDC development. [Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 18.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS – NONCONFORMANCE, EXISTING LEGAL USES, AND TEMPORARY USES

Sections:

18.100.010    Purpose.

18.100.020    Nonconformance – Applicability.

18.100.030    Nonconformance – Creation, continuation, and forfeiture of nonconformance status.

18.100.040    Nonconformance – Abatement of illegal use, structure or development.

18.100.050    Nonconformance – Re-establishment of discontinued nonconforming use, or damaged or destroyed nonconforming structure or site improvement.

18.100.060    Nonconformance – Modifications to nonconforming use, structure, or site improvement.

18.100.070    Nonconformance – Expansions of nonconforming uses, structures, or site improvements.

18.100.080    Nonconformance – Required findings.

18.100.085    Existing legal uses abandonment.

18.100.087    Existing legal uses expansion.

18.100.090    Nonconformance – Residences.

18.100.100    Temporary use permits.

18.100.110    Temporary use permits – Exemptions to permit requirement.

18.100.120    Temporary use permits – Duration and frequency.

18.100.125    Temporary use permits – Decision criteria.

18.100.130    Temporary use permits – Parking.

18.100.140    Temporary use permits – Traffic control.

18.100.150    Temporary construction buildings.

18.100.160    Temporary construction residence.

18.100.170    Temporary mobile home for medical hardship.

18.100.180    Temporary real estate offices.

18.100.190    Temporary school facilities.

18.100.200    Indoor and outdoor temporary homeless shelters.

18.100.210    Cold-weather low-barrier shelters.


18.100.010 Purpose.

The purposes of this chapter are to: 

A. Establish the legal status of a nonconformance by creating provisions through which a nonconformance may be maintained, altered, reconstructed, expanded or terminated; 

B. Establish the rules for an existing legal use by creating provisions through which an existing legal use may be maintained, altered, reconstructed, expanded or terminated; and

C. Provide for the temporary establishment of uses that are not otherwise permitted in a zone or that do not meet all development standards of a zone and to regulate such uses by their scope and period of use. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.100.020 Nonconformance – Applicability.

A. All nonconformances shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter, except for nonconforming billboards, which shall be subject to KMC 18.42.150.

B. The provisions of this chapter do not supersede or relieve a property owner from compliance with:

1. The requirements of the International Building and Fire Codes; or

2. The provisions of this code beyond the specific nonconformance addressed by this chapter. [Ord. 17-0445B § 3; Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.100.030 Nonconformance – Creation, continuation, and forfeiture of nonconformance status.

Once created pursuant to KMC 18.20.1860, a nonconformance may be continued in a manner consistent with the provisions of this chapter. However, nonconformance status is forfeited if the nonconformance is discontinued beyond the provisions of KMC 18.100.050. Once nonconformance status is forfeited, the nonconformance shall not be re-established. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.100.040 Nonconformance – Abatement of illegal use, structure or development.

Any use, structure or other site improvement not established in compliance with use and development standards in effect at the time of establishment shall be deemed illegal and shall be discontinued or terminated and subject to removal pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.20 KMC. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.100.050 Nonconformance – Re-establishment of discontinued nonconforming use, or damaged or destroyed nonconforming structure or site improvement.

A nonconforming use which has been discontinued, or a nonconforming structure or site improvement which has been damaged or destroyed, may be re-established or reconstructed if: 

A. The nonconforming use, structure, or site improvement which previously existed is not expanded;

B. A new nonconformance is not created; 

C. The use has not been discontinued for more than 12 months prior to its re-establishment, or the nonconforming structure or site improvement is reconstructed pursuant to a complete permit application submitted to the department within 12 months of the occurrence of damage or destruction and the construction is diligently pursued according to issued permits; and

D. Requests for extension of the period identified in subsection C of this section to continue the use or submit construction applications may be made to the city manager in writing prior to the expiration of 12-month period, and shall be treated as a Type 2 permit review. The city manager shall determine whether to grant the extension for use continuance or reconstruction on (1) the basis of a good faith effort by the applicant either to lease property or to make a complete application or pursue the fulfillment of approved development permits with diligence, and (2) extenuating circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have caused a delay towards continuing the use or towards preparation of a complete application or diligent pursuit of construction. Examples of situations that would not qualify as extenuating circumstances include a change in economic market conditions for a use or delays in financing. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.100.060 Nonconformance – Modifications to nonconforming use, structure, or site improvement.

Modifications to a nonconforming use, structure, or site improvement may be reviewed and approved by the department; provided, that: 

A. The modification does not expand or intensify any existing nonconformance; and 

B. The modification does not create a new type of nonconformance. Proposed expansions of a nonconformance are governed by KMC 18.100.070. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.100.070 Nonconformance – Expansions of nonconforming uses, structures, or site improvements.

A nonconforming use, structure, or site improvement may be expanded, provided the expansion does not extend beyond the original parcels at the time the use or structure or site improvements became nonconforming, only as follows: 

A. The department may review and approve an expansion of a nonconformance; provided, that:

1. The expansion shall conform to all other provisions of this title, except that the extent of the project-wide nonconformance in each of the following may be increased up to 10 percent: 

a. Building square footage (for a floor area ratio or building size nonconformance);

b. Impervious surface;

c. Parking; or

d. Building height.

2. Unless provisions specifically indicate conditions under which full compliance with standards is required, when expansions are proposed pursuant to subsection A, B or C of this section, the percentage (by value) of the required code compliance standards to be installed shall be established by dividing the value of the proposed improvement by the assessed value of the existing lot and structure improvements up to 100 percent; the city manager shall have the authority to specify the location and phasing sequence of the required improvements which fall under this section. The percentage (by value) of the required design or development standards to be installed shall be related to the building or site improvement proposed by the applicant. For example, if parking expansions are proposed, parking lot landscaping requirements may be applied. 

3. No subsequent expansion of the same nonconformance shall be approved under this subsection if the cumulative amount of such expansion exceeds the percentage prescribed in subsection (A)(1) of this section.

4. Where an accessory drive-through service use is determined to be nonconforming, but expansion of the principal allowed use is authorized, the nonconforming accessory drive-through service activity may be retained along with the expanded principal allowed use, provided the accessory drive-through service meets required design standards and is not increased in size or scope. 

B. A special use permit shall be required for expansions of a nonconformance within a development authorized by an existing special use permit if the expansions are not consistent with the provisions of subsection A of this section.

C. A conditional use permit shall be required for expansions of a nonconformance not consistent with the provisions of subsections A and B of this section. 

D. No expansion shall be approved that would conflict with City comprehensive plan policies. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.100.080 Nonconformance – Required findings.

Modifications or expansions approved by the department shall be based on written findings that the proposed modification or expansion of a nonconformance located within a development governed by an existing conditional use permit or special use permit shall provide the same level of protection for and compatibility with adjacent land uses as the original land use permit approval. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.100.085 Existing legal uses abandonment.

If an existing legal use has not been discontinued for more than 12 months prior to its re-establishment, or the nonconforming structure or site improvement is reconstructed pursuant to a complete permit application submitted to the department within 12 months of the occurrence of damage or destruction and the construction is diligently pursued according to issued permits, such existing legal use may be retained. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.100.087 Existing legal uses expansion.

Uses listed as permitted “existing legal” uses in a zone may be rebuilt or re-established should they suffer damage. These uses may be remodeled or enlarged subject to current development code requirements (e.g., height limits, lot coverage, density limits, setbacks, parking, etc.). Expansion may occur on original parcels containing the use as of the effective date of “existing legal” status. Expansion of existing legal uses may be permitted to adjacent parcels if the adjacent parcels were and are still owned or leased by the same business or residential use owner at the time the use became existing legal. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.100.090 Nonconformance – Residences.

Any residence nonconforming relative to use may be expanded, after review and approval, subject to all other applicable codes besides those set forth in this chapter for nonconformances. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.100.100 Temporary use permits.

A temporary use permit is a mechanism by which the City may permit a use to locate within the City on an interim basis, without requiring full compliance with the development standards, or by which the City may permit seasonal or transient uses not otherwise permitted.

Except as provided by KMC 18.100.110, a temporary use permit shall be required for:

A. Uses not otherwise permitted in the zone that can be made compatible for periods of limited duration and/or frequency;

B. Uses permitted in a zone which do not meet all of the required development standards but that can be made compatible for periods of limited duration and/or frequency; or

C. Limited expansion of any use that is otherwise allowed in the zone but which exceeds the intended scope of the original land use approval. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.100.110 Temporary use permits – Exemptions to permit requirement.

A. Any use not exceeding a cumulative total of two days each calendar year shall be exempt from requirements for a temporary use permit.

B. The following uses shall be exempt from requirements for a temporary use permit when located in the RB, WC, UC, CB, DC, PSP, P, or NB zone for the time period specified below:

1. Uses not to exceed a total of 30 days each calendar year:

a. Christmas tree lots; and

b. Produce stands.

2. Uses not to exceed a total of 14 days each calendar year:

a. Amusement rides, carnivals, or circuses;

b. Community festivals; and

c. Parking lot sales.

C. Any community event held in a park and not exceeding a period of seven days shall be exempt from requirements for a temporary use permit. 

D. Temporary uses or activities, conducted during an emergency event, or training exercises conducted at emergency sites, designated pursuant to an emergency management plan, shall not be subject to the provisions of this title. [Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.100.120 Temporary use permits – Duration and frequency.

Temporary use permits shall be limited in duration and frequency as follows:

A. The temporary use permit shall be effective for up to 365 days after issuance by the city manager;

B. The temporary use shall not exceed a total of 90 days or as otherwise provided in this title; provided, that this requirement applies only to the days that the event(s) authorized by the permit actually takes place. This time limit may be extended by the city council following a public hearing on the proposal;

C. The temporary use permit shall specify a date upon which the use shall be terminated and removed; and

D. A temporary use permit shall not be granted for the same temporary use on a property more than once per calendar year; provided, that a temporary use permit may be granted for multiple events during the approval period. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.100.125 Temporary use permits – Decision criteria.

A temporary use permit shall be granted by the City only if the applicant demonstrates that:

A. The proposed temporary use will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare;

B. The proposed temporary use is compatible with existing land uses in the immediate vicinity in terms of noise and hours of operation; and

C. Adequate public off-street parking and traffic control for the exclusive use of the proposed temporary use can be provided in a safe manner. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.100.130 Temporary use permits – Parking.

Parking and access for proposed temporary uses shall be approved by the City. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.100.140 Temporary use permits – Traffic control.

The applicant for a proposed temporary use shall provide any parking/traffic control attendants as specified by the department. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.100.150 Temporary construction buildings.

Temporary structures for storage of tools and equipment, or for supervisory offices, may be permitted for construction projects; provided, that such structures are:

A. Allowed only during periods of active construction; and

B. Removed within 30 days of project completion or cessation of work. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.100.160 Temporary construction residence.

A. A mobile home, motor home, travel trailer, or truck camper may be permitted on a lot as a temporary dwelling for the property owner, provided a building permit for a permanent dwelling on the site has been obtained and adequate provisions are made for utility services, including potable water and waste water disposal.

B. The temporary construction residence permit shall be effective as long as the building permit for the permanent dwelling on the site is active.

C. The temporary construction residence shall be removed within 90 days of:

1. The expiration of the building permit for the permanent dwelling on the site; or

2. The issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the permanent residence, whichever occurs first. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.100.170 Temporary mobile home for medical hardship.

A. A mobile home may be permitted as a temporary dwelling on the same lot as a permanent dwelling, provided:

1. The mobile home together with the permanent residence shall meet the setback, height, building footprint, and lot coverage provisions of the applicable zone; and

2. The applicant submits with the permit application a notarized affidavit that contains the following:

a. Certification that the temporary dwelling is necessary to provide daily care, as defined in Chapter 18.20 KMC;

b. Certification that the primary provider of such daily care will reside on-site;

c. Certification that the applicant understands the temporary nature of the permit, subject to the limitations outlined in subsections B and C of this section;

d. Certification that the physician’s signature is both current and valid; and

e. Certification signed by a physician that a resident of the subject property requires daily care, as defined in Chapter 18.20 KMC.

B. Temporary mobile home permits for medical hardships shall be effective for 12 months. Extensions of the temporary mobile home permit may be approved in 12-month increments subject to demonstration of continuing medical hardship in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in subsection A of this section.

C. The mobile home shall be removed within 90 days of:

1. The expiration of the temporary mobile home permit; or

2. The cessation of provision of daily care. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.100.180 Temporary real estate offices.

One temporary real estate office may be located on any new residential development; provided, that activities are limited to the initial sale or rental of property or units within the development. The office use shall be discontinued within one year of recording of a short subdivision of four lots or less or issuance of a final certificate of occupancy for an apartment development, and within two years of the recording of a formal subdivision or short subdivision of more than four lots. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.100.190 Temporary school facilities.

Temporary school structures may be permitted during construction of new school facilities or during remodeling of existing facilities; provided, that such structures:

A. Are allowed only during periods of active construction or remodeling;

B. Do not expand the student capacity beyond the capacity under construction or remodeling; and

C. Are removed within 30 days of project completion or cessation of work. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.100.200 Indoor and outdoor temporary homeless shelters.

A. This section regulates indoor and outdoor temporary homeless shelters, which include temporary homeless encampments (“tent cities”) and temporary homeless indoor shelters, but exclude cold-weather low-barrier shelters, which are regulated by KMC 18.100.210.

B. In recognition of the need for temporary housing for homeless persons, the purpose of this section is to allow sponsoring religious, nonprofit, and governmental organizations (hereafter, “sponsoring organizations”) to use property owned or controlled by them for indoor and outdoor temporary homeless shelters (hereafter, “temporary homeless shelters” or “shelters”), while preventing harmful effects associated with such uses, including but not limited to the possibility of impediments to emergency services, the possibility of environmental degradation, the use of improper sanitary facilities, and the possibility of any other factors that would be considered a nuisance under applicable laws. An outdoor temporary homeless shelter shall include all land and buildings that are used for the shelter, and an indoor temporary homeless shelter shall include all buildings and outdoor areas that are used for the shelter (hereafter, “shelter site”).

C. Temporary homeless shelters may be permitted in accordance with the following procedures, requirements and standards, which shall apply instead of KMC 18.100.120 through 18.100.140:

1. The city manager is authorized to issue temporary use permits for shelters only upon demonstration by the sponsoring organization that all public health and safety requirements of this section have been satisfied or adequately addressed. The city manager may administratively adjust such requirements upon entry of findings and conclusions to support the adjustment. The city manager may terminate a permit upon a determination that the shelter is unfit for human habitation due to safety concerns, bad sanitary conditions or health related concerns, or disorderly or disorganized activities that adversely impact the safety, health, and welfare of the neighborhood adjacent to the shelter site.

2. An application for a temporary homeless shelter shall include the following:

a. The dates of the start and termination of the shelter;

b. The maximum number of residents proposed;

c. The location, including parcel number(s) and address(es);

d. The name(s) of the sponsoring organization(s);

e. A proposed plan regarding self-management;

f. A site plan, which shall:

(1) Show components of the shelter, including but not limited to: dwelling, eating, living, potable water, sanitary, solid waste, and administrative facilities and areas; entry and exit points; pathways; parking areas; and access routes for emergency services; and

(2) Demonstrate compliance with all safety and health requirements of this section, as applicable;

g. A transportation plan, which shall detail the plan for the pick-up and delivery of residents, if any, and include the walking routes from nearby transit stops to the shelter, and provisions for public transit tickets for residents, if any; and

h. A code of conduct, which shall at a minimum:

(1) Require residents to agree to the code prior to being permitted to dwell on site; and

(2) Prohibit drugs, alcohol, weapons, and open flames; prohibit violent behavior and loitering in the area surrounding the site; and establish and require observance to quiet hours.

3. A temporary homeless shelter must meet or the sponsoring organization must implement all of the following health and safety standards:

a. Have a maximum of 50 residents, which the city manager may reduce due to property and shelter conditions or considerations.

b. For outdoor shelters, have a total site area of at least 150 square feet per resident.

c. Have a maximum duration of 125 consecutive days.

d. At approximately the 60-day mark, file a report with the city manager that contains topics, data and information required by the city manager, and thereafter summarize the report at a city council meeting.

e. Enclose outdoor shelters on all sides with a minimum six-foot-tall, sight-obscuring fence; provided, that if the shelter cannot be viewed by a person standing on the ground of or looking out of the window of a building on an abutting property, the fence does not need to be constructed along such abutting property.

f. Use existing permanent structures and not construct new permanent structures.

g. At all times, have a point of contact who can be reached by phone.

h. Prohibit overnight stays by children under the age of 18, unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.

i. Before admitting a potential resident, contact the King County sheriff’s communications center, or other agency or office approved by the City, to determine whether the potential resident is registered as a sex offender or has an active warrant. If the potential resident is a registered sex offender or has an active warrant, prohibit admission to the shelter.

j. Provide adequate sanitary facilities and satisfy all applicable public health requirements.

k. Allow inspections by City and King County health, fire, and police departments at any reasonable time and without notice.

l. Provide a minimum of two off-street parking spaces per 25 residents, except for an indoor shelter with a fluctuating number of residents, which shall require a minimum of four off-street parking spaces. Not displace any required parking for the principal/existing use on the property as a result of the shelter.

m. Restrict smoking to a designated smoking area, which must be a minimum of 25 feet from adjacent properties.

n. Observe quiet hours in accordance with KMC 8.05.025.

4. The sponsoring organization applicant shall accomplish the following:

a. A minimum of 30 days before submittal of the application, mail a notice by first class mail to owners, residents, and tenants of all property within 1,000 feet of the shelter site. The notice at a minimum shall inform these persons of the proposed duration and operation of the shelter, the applicable standards and requirements of this section, the provisions of the proposed code of conduct, and the mechanisms for obtaining information regarding shelters in general and the proposed shelter in particular. At least two business days before mailing the notice, the sponsoring organization shall submit a copy of the draft notice to the city manager.

b. Hold an informational meeting before the city manager’s decision on the application. A minimum of 14 calendar days before the city manager’s decision on the application, the sponsoring organization shall mail notice by first class mail to owners, residents, and tenants of all property within 1,000 feet of the subject property, advising them of the date, time and location of a public informational meeting regarding the application. At least two business days before mailing the notice, the sponsoring organization shall submit a copy of the draft notice to the city manager. At the meeting, the sponsoring organization shall inform the attendees of the proposed duration and operation of the shelter, conditions that will likely be placed on the operation of the shelter, and provisions of the code of conduct, and shall answer questions regarding the proposed shelter.

5. A minimum of 14 calendar days before the city manager’s decision on the application, the City shall update the City’s website with the date of the application, shelter location, and proposed duration and operation of the shelter.

D. The following conditions shall apply to all temporary homeless shelters:

1. Only one indoor or outdoor temporary shelter shall operate in the City per calendar year.

a. The City will accept notices of intent to file an application for a temporary shelter during the month of October.

b. The notice of intent must be for operation of a temporary shelter in the subsequent calendar year only.

c. If more than one letter of intent is filed during the month of October, the city council must rank all potential applicants during the first two weeks of November, after determining a ranking procedure and considering a report from the city manager.

d. The potential applicant with the highest ranking must file a complete application and pay all applicable fees on or before December 30th.

e. If the potential applicant with the highest ranking fails to file a complete application and pay all applicable fees by the deadline or withdraws a complete application, or if the City denies the application, the City shall accept and process applications from other potential applications, in the order of ranking by the city council.

2. There can be one temporary homeless shelter under this section and one cold-weather low-barrier shelter under KMC 18.100.210 in the same calendar year.

3. Shelters are prohibited in critical areas and their buffers. [Ord. 18-0466 (Exh. A).]


18.100.210 Cold-weather low-barrier shelters.

A. This section regulates cold-weather low-barrier shelters. Cold-weather low-barrier shelters are indoor emergency shelters for the homeless that operate for 31 consecutive days or less between October and April and restrict operation to nighttime hours.

B. In recognition of the need for shelter from the cold for homeless persons, the purpose of this section is to allow sponsoring religious, nonprofit, and governmental organizations (hereafter, “sponsoring organizations”) to use property owned or controlled by them for cold-weather low-barrier shelters (hereafter, “cold-weather shelters” or “shelters”), while preventing harmful effects associated with such uses, including but not limited to the possibility of impediments to emergency services, the possibility of environmental degradation, the use of improper sanitary facilities, and the possibility of any other factors that would be considered a nuisance under applicable laws. A cold-weather shelter shall include all buildings and outdoor areas that are used for the shelter (hereafter, “shelter site”).

C. Cold-weather shelters may be permitted in accordance with the following procedures, requirements and standards, which shall apply instead of KMC 18.100.120 through 18.100.140 and 18.100.200:

1. The city manager is authorized to issue temporary use permits for shelters only upon demonstration by the sponsoring organization that all public health and safety requirements of this section have been satisfied or adequately addressed. The city manager may administratively adjust such requirements upon entry of findings and conclusions to support the adjustment. The city manager may terminate a permit upon a determination that the shelter is unfit for human habitation due to safety concerns, bad sanitary conditions or health related concerns, or disorderly or disorganized activities that adversely impact the safety, health, and welfare of the neighborhood adjacent to the shelter site.

2. An application for a cold-weather shelter shall include the following:

a. The dates of the start and termination of the shelter;

b. The maximum number of residents proposed;

c. The address of the proposed shelter site;

d. The name(s) of the sponsoring organization(s);

e. A proposed plan regarding self-management;

f. A site plan, which shall:

(1) Show components of the shelter, including but not limited to: dwelling, eating, living, potable water, sanitary, solid waste, and administrative facilities and areas; entry and exit points; pathways; parking areas; and access routes for emergency services; and

(2) Demonstrate compliance with all safety and health requirements of this section, as applicable;

g. A transportation plan, which shall detail the plan for the pick-up and delivery of residents, if any, and include the walking routes from nearby transit stops to the shelter, and provisions for public transit tickets for residents, if any; and

h. A code of conduct, which shall at a minimum:

(1) Require residents to agree to the code prior to being permitted to dwell on site; and

(2) Prohibit drugs, alcohol, and weapons; prohibit violent behavior and loitering in the area surrounding the shelter site; and establish and require observance to quiet hours.

3. A cold-weather shelter must meet or the sponsoring organization must implement all of the following health and safety standards:

a. Have a maximum of 40 residents, which the city manager may reduce due to property and shelter conditions or considerations.

b. Limit operating hours to between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

c. Restrict smoking to a designated smoking area, which must be located outside of the building and a minimum of 25 feet from adjacent properties.

d. Prohibit reentry to residents after 10:00 p.m., including a return from the outside designated smoking area.

e. Limit duration of operation to 31 consecutive days or less between October and April.

f. Use existing permanent structures and not construct new permanent structures.

g. For up to 30 residents, have a minimum of two staff members who have been trained in de-escalation tactics present in the shelter during all operating hours. For more than 30 residents, have a minimum of three staff members who have been trained in de-escalation tactics present in the shelter during all operating hours.

h. At all times, have a point of contact who can be reached by phone.

i. Prohibit children under the age of 18 from the shelter.

j. Before admitting a potential resident, contact the King County sheriff’s communications center, or other agency or office approved by the City, to determine whether the potential resident is registered as a sex offender or has an active felony warrant. If the potential resident is a registered sex offender or has an active warrant for a felony, prohibit admission to the shelter.

k. Provide adequate sanitary facilities and satisfy all applicable public health requirements.

l. Allow inspections by City and King County health, fire, and police departments at any reasonable time and without notice.

m. Observe quiet hours in accordance with KMC 8.05.025.

4. The sponsoring organization applicant shall accomplish the following:

a. A minimum of 30 days before submittal of the application, mail a notice by first class mail to owners, residents, and tenants of all property within 1,000 feet of the shelter site. The notice at a minimum shall inform these persons of the proposed duration and operation of the shelter, the applicable standards and requirements of this section, the provisions of the proposed code of conduct, and mechanisms for obtaining information regarding shelters in general and the proposed shelter in particular. At least two business days before mailing the notice, the sponsoring organization shall submit a copy of the draft notice to the city manager.

b. Hold an informational meeting before the city manager’s decision on the application. A minimum of 14 calendar days before the city manager’s decision on the application, the sponsoring organization shall mail notice by first class mail to owners, residents, and tenants of all property within 1,000 feet of the subject property, advising them of the date, time and location of a public informational meeting regarding the application. At least two business days before mailing the notice, the sponsoring organization shall submit a copy of the draft notice to the city manager. At the meeting, the sponsoring organization shall inform the attendees of the proposed duration and operation of the shelter, conditions that will likely be placed on the operation of the shelter, and provisions of the code of conduct, and shall answer questions regarding the proposed shelter.

5. A minimum of 14 calendar days before the city manager’s decision on the application, the City shall update the City’s website with the date of the application, shelter location, and proposed duration and operation of the shelter.

D. The following conditions shall apply to all cold-weather shelters:

1. Only one cold-weather shelter shall operate in the City per calendar year.

a. The City will accept notices of intent to file an application for a shelter during the month of June.

b. The notice of intent must be for operation of a shelter in the subsequent cold-weather period (October to April only).

c. If more than one letter of intent is filed during the month of June, the city council must rank all potential applicants during the third or fourth week of July, after determining a ranking procedure and considering a report from the city manager.

d. The potential applicant with the highest ranking must file a complete application and pay all applicable fees on or before August 31st.

e. If the potential applicant with the highest ranking fails to file a complete application and pay all applicable fees by the deadline or withdraws a complete application, or the City denies the application, the City shall accept and process applications from other potential applicants, in the order of ranking by the city council.

2. There can be one cold-weather shelter under this section and one temporary homeless shelter under KMC 18.100.200 in the same calendar year.

3. Shelters are prohibited in critical areas and their buffers.

4. The City shall not accept, process or approve any application for operation of a cold-weather shelter during the year of 2018. [Ord. 18-0466 (Exh. A).]


Chapter 18.105 SITE PLAN REVIEW

Sections:

18.105.010    Purpose.

18.105.020    Applicability.

18.105.030    Process.

18.105.040    Application of development standards.

18.105.050    Approval.

18.105.060    Limitation of permit approval.

18.105.070    Administrative rules.


18.105.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish a comprehensive site plan review process for development proposals on certain sites in selected zones of the City based on their significant size, location, frontage on major public thoroughfares, use, or project scope. This will result in a land use decision which can combine any or all of the following:

A. Site development requirements specified prior to building, grading or engineering permit applications.

B. Site review and application of rules and regulations generally applied to the whole site without regard to existing or proposed internal lot lines.

C. Site development coordination and project phasing occurring over a period of years.

D. Evaluation against specific approval criteria.

E. Evaluation of commercially zoned property for the creation or alteration of lots as part of a binding site plan application. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.105.020 Applicability.

A. An application for site plan review shall be submitted for the following development proposals:

1. Development on sites identified on the City’s Site Plan Review Requirement Map as depicted in Figure 18.105.020.A.1;

2. Development on sites equal to or greater than three acres in size at the time of application in the PSP zone;

3. Development proposed for classified uses which are neither permitted, nor conditionally permitted, nor prohibited in the P, GC or PSP zones; or

4. Development on other sites as determined by the city manager after a preliminary review of the project’s scope.

B. An application for site plan review may be submitted by an applicant for any development proposal.

C. A site plan review is separate from and does not replace other required land use permits. A site plan review may be combined and reviewed concurrently with other land use permits, however.

D. If required or requested under subsection A or B of this section, an applicant shall receive a site plan review prior to the issuance of building, mechanical, plumbing, electrical, clearing, grading, engineering, or other similar administrative permits.

E. Proposed expansion of existing development for sites described under subsection A of this section, with or without an approved site plan review, shall require a new site plan review when such changes are determined by the city manager to be a major modification. For purposes of this section, factors to be considered when determining whether an expansion is a major modification include but are not limited to relocation of access or parking, addition of a building, or incorporation of an additional lot.

F. An applicant may request a waiver of the site plan review requirement from the city manager. Such waiver shall be based on a preliminary review of the development proposal and a written finding that the proposal is consistent with the comprehensive plan and the requirements of this title, is minor in scope, and will have no adverse effects on neighboring properties or the City as a whole.


[IMAGE]


[Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1, 2); Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.105.030 Process.

A site plan review shall be processed as follows:

A. For those sites identified under KMC 18.105.020(A)(1) and (2) and (B), the site plan review shall be processed in accordance with requirements for a Type 2 land use decision as outlined in Chapter 19.25 KMC.

B. For those sites identified under KMC 18.105.020(A)(3), the site plan review shall be processed in accordance with requirements for a Type 4 land use decision as outlined in Chapter 19.25 KMC.

C. For those sites identified under KMC 18.105.020(A)(4), the site plan review shall be processed in accordance with requirements for a Type 2 land use decision as outlined in Chapter 19.25 KMC, unless otherwise determined by the city manager. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.105.040 Application of development standards.

An application for a site plan review shall be reviewed pursuant to all adopted City codes and regulations.

Lot-based standards, such as internal circulation, drainage control, landscaping, signage and setback requirements, are typically applied to each individual lot within the site. However, the city manager may approve an application for site plan review where such standards have been applied to the site as if it consisted of one parcel.

The city manager may modify lot-based or lot line requirements contained within the building, fire and other similar uniform codes adopted by the City; provided, the site is being reviewed concurrently with a binding site plan application. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.105.050 Approval.

A. The city manager may approve, deny, or approve with conditions an application for a site plan review. The decision shall be based on the following approval criteria:

1. Conformity with adopted City and State rules and regulations in effect on the date the complete application was filed;

2. Consideration of the recommendations or comments of interested parties and those agencies having pertinent expertise or jurisdiction, consistent with the requirements of this title;

3. Compatibility with the character and appearance of existing or proposed development in the vicinity of the subject property;

4. Compatibility with plans for existing and proposed pedestrian and vehicular traffic in the vicinity of the subject property; and

5. Conformity with the City’s comprehensive plan.

B. Subsequent permits for the subject site shall be issued only in compliance with the approved site plan review.

C. Approval of the site plan review shall not provide the applicant with a vested right to build without regard to subsequent changes in the building and fire codes listed in KMC Title 15 regulating construction. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.105.060 Limitation of permit approval.

A. A site plan review approved without a phasing plan shall be null and void if the applicant fails to file a complete building permit application(s) for all buildings within three years of the approval date, or by a date specified by the city manager; and fails to have all valid building permits issued within four years of the site plan review approval date; or

B. A site plan review approved with a phasing plan shall be null and void if the applicant fails to meet the conditions and time schedules specified in the approved phasing plan.

C. The city manager may grant one or more extensions of the time limits set forth in subsections A and B of this section, each of a duration determined by the city manager, if the following findings are made:

1. Initial building permits have not been submitted or the project has not been completed due to causes beyond the applicant’s control, such as litigation, acts of God, unanticipated site conditions or adverse economic market conditions;

2. The applicant has shown a good faith effort to commence or complete the project within the time previously allotted;

3. Conditions identified as part of SEPA or other permit processes remain appropriate to address project impacts. The city manager has the authority to establish additional conditions designed to address incremental changes in project impacts arising or occurring as a result of any extension of time; and

4. The period of the extension granted is reasonable in light of the conditions warranting the extension and the incremental changes, if any, in project impacts. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.105.070 Administrative rules.

The city manager may promulgate administrative rules and regulations to implement the provisions and requirements of this chapter. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 18.110 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS

Sections:

18.110.010    Authority.

18.110.020    General provisions.

18.110.030    Development standards – Flexibility.

18.110.040    Enforceability.

18.110.050    Processing procedure.

18.110.060    Status, recording and amendment of development agreement.


18.110.010 Authority.

The City may consider and enter into a development agreement with the owners of real property within the City, or with persons having control of real property within the City if the owners of such real property execute an authorization for such real property to be subject to and bound by the development agreement. In this chapter, the term “owner” shall include both the owner of such real property and such person having control of such property. Per RCW 36.70B.170, the execution of a development agreement is a proper exercise of City police power and contract authority. A development agreement must set forth the development standards and other provisions that shall apply to and govern and vest the development, use and mitigation of the development of the real property for the duration specified in the agreement. The decision of the city council to approve or reject a request for a development agreement is a proper exercise of police power and contract authority and shall be a discretionary, legislative act. [Ord. 15-0395 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 12-0347 § 1 (Att. A).]


18.110.020 General provisions.

A. In this chapter, the term “development regulations” shall have the meaning set forth in KMC 19.10.070.

B. A development agreement shall be consistent with the applicable policies and goals of the City’s comprehensive plan.

C. Any departure requested by the owner from the development standards of this code through a development agreement shall be offset by the owner’s provision of a benefit to the City of equal or greater value relative to the departure requested, as determined by the City.

1. Equivalent value need not be measured monetarily and the proposed benefit need not be of the same type as the existing development standard requirement. For example, the benefit of a public open space dedication may be considered against the benefit of a required street improvement.

2. In considering equivalency for the P-suffix and special district overlay regulations, the scope and scale of the proposed development shall be considered. The P-suffix and special district overlay regulations were applied as mitigation for a major mixed use development and they may be modified or eliminated through the development agreement process.

 In no case shall a departure from the development standards be granted if no equivalent benefit to the City is provided.

D. A development agreement may be proposed and approved only for properties in the downtown commercial (DC), regional business (RB), waterfront commercial (WC), urban corridor (UC), downtown residential (DR), community business (CB), neighborhood business (NB), public and semi-public (PSP), parks (P) and golf course (GC) zones.

E. A development agreement does not supplant any other required land use decision per KMC 19.25.020, including but not limited to a rezone, a shoreline permit, a site plan review, or an environmental review under Chapter 19.35 KMC. Such land use decisions shall be reviewed in conjunction with the development agreement.

F. As applicable, the development agreement must specify the following:

1. Project components which define and detail the permitted uses, residential densities, nonresidential densities and intensities or building sizes;

2. Design standards such as architectural treatment, maximum heights, setbacks, landscaping, drainage and water quality requirements and other development features;

3. Parking;

4. Provisions for affordable housing, if applicable;

5. Parks and common open space preservation;

6. Amount and payment of impact fees imposed or agreed to in accordance with any applicable provisions of State law, any reimbursement provisions, other financial contributions by the property owner, inspection fees or dedications;

7. Mitigation measures, development conditions and other requirements of Chapter 43.21C RCW;

8. Phasing;

9. Build-out or vesting periods for applicable standards; and

10. Other appropriate development requirements or procedures which are based upon a City policy, rule, regulation or standard.

G. A development agreement may obligate a party to dedicate land or easements, or fund or provide services, infrastructure or other facilities.

H. Subsequently adopted development standards which differ from those of an approved development agreement shall apply to the property subject to the development agreement only where necessary to address a serious threat to public health and safety. Subsequently adopted development standards which differ from those of an approved development agreement also shall apply following expiration of any phase or time period specified in the development agreement during which identified standards cannot be modified. [Ord. 15-0395 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0392 § 1; Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0347 § 1 (Att. A).]


18.110.030 Development standards – Flexibility.

A. A development agreement shall be consistent with applicable development regulations to the fullest extent possible. Provided, however, a development agreement may allow for development standards that are different from those standards otherwise imposed under this code in order to provide flexibility to achieve public benefits, respond to changing community needs, or authorize modifications which provide the functional equivalent or adequately achieve the purposes of otherwise applicable development standards.

B. A development agreement cannot authorize deviations from uses, residential densities, floor area ratio limitations, or maximum structure height – whether required by zoning district provisions, property-specific development standards, or special district overlay requirements – unless the city council approves the deviation by a vote of a majority plus one of the whole city council after a minimum of two public hearings on the agreement.

C. A development agreement cannot authorize deviations from the following development standards:

1. KMC Title 15, Buildings and Construction;

2. KMC Title 16, Environment;

3. Chapter 18.55 KMC, Critical Areas; and

4. Chapter 13.35 KMC, Surface Water Runoff Policy, and Chapter 13.45 KMC, Water Quality.

D. Any approved development standards that differ from those in this code shall not require any further variance from development standards or use permit apart from development agreement approval. The development standards as approved through a development agreement shall apply to and govern the development of the property subject to the development agreement in lieu of any conflicting or different standards or requirements elsewhere in this code. [Ord. 15-0395 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0347 § 1 (Att. A).]


18.110.040 Enforceability.

The development agreement shall be binding on the parties and their successors. Unless amended or terminated by agreement of both parties to a development agreement, the agreement is enforceable during its term by a party to the agreement. Except as provided in KMC 18.110.020(H), a development agreement and the development standards in the agreement govern during the term of the agreement, or for all or that part of the build-out period specified in the agreement. The development agreement shall not be subject to an amendment to a development regulation or a new development regulation adopted after the effective date of the agreement, except as provided in KMC 18.110.020(H). Applications for building permits and other permits subject to KMC Title 15, Buildings and Construction, shall be considered under the provisions of KMC Title 15 that are in effect at the time of submittal of a valid and fully complete application. Any land use decision issued by the City pertaining to the property subject to the development agreement after the execution of the development agreement must be consistent with the agreement. [Ord. 15-0395 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 12-0347 § 1 (Att. A).]


18.110.050 Processing procedure.

A. An application for a development agreement shall be filed by the owner of real property within the City on forms provided by the department. An application shall be accompanied by an application fee pursuant to the City’s current fee schedule and a signed agreement on forms provided by the department to reimburse the City for fees of the city attorney pursuant to the City’s current agreement with the city attorney. The development agreement may provide for assignment of a portion of the application fee to other permit fees if a development agreement is ultimately approved by the city council.

B. The city council shall make a threshold decision on each application for a development agreement at a regular meeting of the city council. If a majority of the whole council approves further review of the development agreement, the agreement shall be processed as described in this section.

C. Before voting on a proposed development agreement, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the development agreement. Consistent with KMC 18.110.030(B), two public hearings shall be held on the development agreement if deviations from uses, residential densities, floor area ratio limitations, or maximum structure height – whether required by zoning district provisions, property-specific development standards, or special district overlay requirements – are requested. The city council shall approve, disapprove or modify a development agreement by ordinance adopted by the vote of a majority plus one of the whole city council. The ordinance, if approving or modifying the development agreement, shall authorize the city manager to execute the development agreement on behalf of the City. 

D. The city manager shall prepare a recommendation to the city council on a proposed development agreement. The city manager shall provide the recommendation to the city council, and make it available to the public, at least 10 calendar days prior to the public hearing on the proposed development agreement.

E. If a development agreement is associated with a Type 5 land use decision such as a comprehensive plan amendment, the development agreement shall be processed concurrently with the Type 5 land use decision. A recommendation of the planning commission to the city council on the Type 5 land use decision shall be issued at least 10 calendar days prior to the public hearing on the proposed development agreement.

F. If the owner files an application for a Type 2, 3 or 4 land use decision or a Type 1 land use decision subject to SEPA, the City shall review and process the application concurrently with the development agreement, and the owner shall sign a written waiver of the deadline for issuance of the final land use decision. A final decision of the city manager or hearing examiner on such types of land use decisions shall become effective on the date that the city council passes the ordinance for the development agreement. The period for appealing such final decision shall commence on the date that the city council passes such ordinance. A recommendation of the city manager or hearing examiner to the city council on such types of land use decisions shall be issued at least 10 calendar days prior to the public hearing on the proposed development agreement.

G. The City shall give notice of the meeting at which the city council considers a proposed development agreement, or amendment thereto, and of the public hearing(s) on the proposed development agreement, or amendment thereto, as follows:

1. Not less than 10 calendar days prior to the public hearing date, a notice of the public hearing shall be sent to property owners within 1,000 feet of the property subject to the development agreement and to others who have submitted comments and/or requested notice.

2. Notice of the public hearing shall be posted on the property subject to the development agreement not less than 10 calendar days prior to the hearing date. Notice shall be posted in the manner required by KMC 19.25.065.

3. Notice of the city council meeting and public hearing shall be published in the City’s official newspaper not less than 10 calendar days prior to the meeting or hearing date.

4. All costs associated with the public notice shall be borne by the owner.

5. All notices shall state that the city manager’s recommendation on the proposed development agreement is available for review at the front desk of City Hall and on the City’s website.

H. Any subsequent land use decisions shall be reviewed for compliance with the terms of the development agreement and any associated land use decisions. [Ord. 15-0395 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 14-0391 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 12-0347 § 1 (Att. A).]


18.110.060 Status, recording and amendment of development agreement.

A. Development agreements are not “project permit applications” as defined in RCW 36.70B.020(4). Therefore, there is no deadline for processing a development agreement.

B. The city attorney shall review and approve a proposed development agreement as to form at least 30 calendar days prior to the public hearing on the development agreement. The owner shall sign the development agreement before the public hearing on the development agreement. If a person or corporation has a “substantial beneficial interest in the property” as specifically described below, the owner shall submit to the city manager with the request for development agreement a document stating that such person or corporation concurs in the request and will not object to, contest or appeal any terms and conditions of the approved development agreement. A person or corporation having a “substantial beneficial interest in the property” shall include easement holders, lessees with a lease of one year or more, and persons or corporations with a recorded deed of trust or mortgage on the real property subject to the development agreement. The city manager shall have the authority to determine whether other persons or corporations with an interest in the real property subject to the development agreement have a “substantial beneficial interest in the property.” Within 20 calendar days of receiving written notice that the city manager has determined that other persons or corporations have a “substantial beneficial interest in the property,” the owner shall submit to the city manager the document described above for each such person or corporation.

C. The term of development agreements and extensions thereof shall be as follows:

1. Development agreements may be approved for a maximum period of 20 years.

2. In determining the appropriate term for a development agreement, the city council should consider the type, size and location of development and phasing if proposed. The city council may consider shorter terms with extensions.

3. If extensions are authorized in a development agreement, the owner must request the extension at least 90 calendar days prior to expiration of the term or any extension. For development agreements associated with land use decisions, the city manager may grant an extension for up to five years if the owner can satisfactorily show that, for a residential project, at least 50 percent of the residential units are constructed, or for nonresidential and mixed use projects, at least 50 percent of the gross floor area is constructed. All other requests for extensions shall be reviewed by the city council, unless another process is expressly provided for in the development agreement.

D. The City shall record an approved development agreement with the King County recorder’s office, at the cost of the owner.

E. The owner may request an amendment to a development agreement. Before voting on the amendment, the city council shall hold a public hearing. The city council shall approve, disapprove or modify an amendment by ordinance adopted by the vote of a majority plus one of the whole city council. The ordinance, if approving or modifying the development agreement, shall authorize the city manager to execute the amendment on behalf of the City. The city council shall not approve or modify an amendment unless it is consistent with any associated land use decisions and approved modifications thereto. [Ord. 15-0395 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 12-0347 § 1 (Att. A).]


Chapter 18.115 VARIANCE, CONDITIONAL USE, SPECIAL USE, AND ZONE RECLASSIFICATION PERMITS AND MODIFICATIONS

Sections:

18.115.010    Purpose.

18.115.030    Variance.

18.115.040    Conditional use permit.

18.115.050    Special use permit.

18.115.060    Zone reclassification.

18.115.065    Permit expirations.

18.115.080    Modifications or expansions of uses or developments authorized by existing conditional use or special use permits – When use now permitted outright.

18.115.090    Modifications or expansions of uses authorized by existing conditional use or special use permits – Required findings.

18.115.100    Modifications and expansions – Uses or development authorized by existing conditional use or special use permits.


18.115.010 Purpose.

The purposes of this chapter are to allow for consistent evaluation of land use applications and to protect nearby properties from the possible effects of such requests by:

A. Providing clear criteria on which to base a decision;

B. Recognizing the effects of unique circumstances upon the development potential of a property;

C. Avoiding the granting of special privileges;

D. Avoiding development which may be unnecessarily detrimental to neighboring properties;

E. Requiring that the design, scope and intensity of development are in keeping with the physical aspects of a site and adopted land use policies for the area; and

F. Providing criteria which emphasize protection of the general character of neighborhoods. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.115.030 Variance.

A variance shall be granted by the City only if the applicant demonstrates all of the following:

A. The strict enforcement of the provisions of this title creates an unnecessary hardship to the property owner;

B. The variance is necessary because of the unique size, shape, topography, or location of the subject property;

C. The subject property is deprived, by provisions of this title, of rights and privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under an identical zone;

D. The variance does not create health and safety hazards, is not materially detrimental to the public welfare or is not unduly injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity;

E. The variance does not relieve an applicant from any of the procedural provisions of this title;

F. The variance does not relieve an applicant from any standard or provision that specifically states that no variance from such standard or provision is permitted;

G. The variance does not relieve an applicant from conditions established during prior permit review or from provisions enacted pursuant to Chapter 18.47 KMC, Property-Specific Development Standards/Special District Overlays;

H. The variance does not allow establishment of a use that is not otherwise permitted in the zone in which the proposal is located;

I. The variance does not allow the creation of lots or densities that exceed the base residential density for the zone by more than 10 percent;

J. The variance is the minimum necessary to grant relief to the applicant;

K. The variance from setback or height requirements does not infringe upon or interfere with easement or covenant rights or responsibilities; and

L. The variance does not relieve an applicant from any provisions of Chapter 18.55 KMC, Critical Areas, except for required buffer widths and building setbacks. Variances to the buffer width and building setback provisions of Chapter 18.55 KMC also are addressed in KMC 18.55.170. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.115.040 Conditional use permit.

A conditional use permit shall be granted by the City only if the applicant demonstrates that:

A. The conditional use is designed in a manner which is compatible with the character and appearance of an existing or proposed development in the vicinity of the subject property;

B. The location, size and height of buildings, structures, walls and fences, and screening vegetation for the conditional use shall not hinder neighborhood circulation or discourage the permitted development or use of neighboring properties;

C. The conditional use is designed in a manner that is compatible with the physical characteristics of the subject property;

D. Requested modifications to standards are limited to those which will mitigate impacts in a manner equal to or greater than the standards of this title;

E. The conditional use is not in conflict with the health and safety of the community;

F. The conditional use is such that pedestrian and vehicular traffic associated with the use will not be hazardous or conflict with existing and anticipated traffic in the neighborhood; and

G. The conditional use will be supported by adequate public facilities or services and will not adversely affect public services to the surrounding area or conditions can be established to mitigate adverse impacts on such facilities. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.115.050 Special use permit.

A special use permit shall be granted by the City only if the applicant demonstrates that:

A. The characteristics of the special use will not be unreasonably incompatible with the types of uses permitted in surrounding areas;

B. The special use will not materially endanger the health, safety and welfare of the community;

C. The special use is such that pedestrian and vehicular traffic associated with the use will not be hazardous or conflict with existing and anticipated traffic in the neighborhood;

D. The special use will be supported by adequate public facilities or services and will not adversely affect public services to the surrounding area or conditions can be established to mitigate adverse impacts;

E. The location, size and height of buildings, structures, walls and fences, and screening vegetation for the special use shall not hinder or discourage the appropriate development or use of neighboring properties; and

F. The special use is not in conflict with the policies of the comprehensive plan or the basic purposes of this title. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.115.060 Zone reclassification.

A zone reclassification shall be granted only if the applicant demonstrates that the proposal complies with the criteria for approval specified in KMC 19.30.210 and 19.30.220 and is consistent with the comprehensive plan and applicable functional plans. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.115.065 Permit expirations.

A. Establishment of any use or development activity authorized pursuant to a conditional use permit or variance shall occur within four years of the effective date of the decision for such permit or variance. This period may be extended for one additional year by the city manager if the applicant has submitted the applications necessary to establish the use or authorize the development activity and has provided written justification for the extension.

B. For the purpose of this section, “establishment” shall occur upon the issuance of all local permit(s) for on-site improvements needed to begin the authorized use or development activity; provided, that the improvements or development activity authorized by such permits are completed within the timeframes of said permits.

C. Once a use, activity or improvement allowed by a conditional use permit or variance has been established, it may continue as long as all conditions of permit issuance are met. 

D. Expiration dates for special use permits shall be determined through the land use decision process and shall be specified in the conditions of approval. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.115.080 Modifications or expansions of uses or developments authorized by existing conditional use or special use permits – When use now permitted outright.

Proposed modifications or expansions to a use or development authorized by an existing conditional use or special use permit shall not require an amendment to the existing permit if the use is now permitted outright in the zone district in which it is located. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.115.090 Modifications or expansions of uses authorized by existing conditional use or special use permits – Required findings.

Modifications or expansions approved by the department shall be based on written findings that the proposed modifications or expansions provide the same level of protection for and compatibility with adjacent land uses as the original land use permit. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.115.100 Modifications and expansions – Uses or development authorized by existing conditional use or special use permits.

A. The department may review and approve an expansion of a use or development authorized by an existing conditional use or special use permit; provided, that:

1. The expansion shall conform to all provisions of this title and the original land use permit, except that the project-wide amount of each of the following may be increased up to 10 percent:

a. Building square footage;

b. Impervious surface;

c. Parking; or

d. Building height.

2. No subsequent expansions shall be approved under this subsection if the cumulative amount of such expansion exceeds the percentage prescribed in subsection (A)(1) of this section.

B. A conditional use permit shall be required for expansions within a use or development authorized by an existing conditional use permit if the expansions are not consistent with the provisions of subsection A of this section.

C. A special use permit shall be required for expansions within a use or development authorized by an existing special use permit, if the expansions are not consistent with the provisions of subsection A of this section.

D. This section shall not apply to modifications or expansions of telecommunication facilities, the provisions for which are set forth in Chapter 18.60 KMC, or to modifications or expansions of nonconformances, the provisions for which are set forth in KMC 18.100.070. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 18.120 MASTER PLANS

Sections:

18.120.010    Master plan chapter purpose.

18.120.020    Master plans authorized.

18.120.030    Master plan contents.

18.120.040    Master plan approval process.

18.120.045    Approved master plans.

18.120.050    Modifications of an approved master plan.

18.120.060    Vesting and time limitations.


18.120.010 Master plan chapter purpose.

This chapter is intended to detail the procedures and responsibilities of the City in the processing, consideration and action on proposed master plans. Master plans are authorized or required for certain uses or activities within the comprehensive plan or certain zone districts. These uses may have unique characteristics or potential impacts to the community, and require review and opportunity for public comment. A master plan may also be requested by an applicant to guide development over a period of years and to clarify vesting rights. It is expected that approval of a master plan will guide development within the affected area for a period of at least 10 years. Master plan approval is also intended to allow quicker review and processing of individual, phased construction projects with greater certainty than would be possible if a master plan did not exist. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.120.020 Master plans authorized.

Master plans are authorized or are required as follows:

A. Comprehensive Plan Requirement. Where specified in the Kenmore comprehensive plan land use element as necessary to obtain a comprehensive plan amendment and/or rezone.

B. Zoning – Requirement or Authorization.

1. Parks, Golf Course, or Public and Semi-Public Zones. Master plans may be proposed for permitted or conditionally permitted uses in a phased manner for a minimum 10-year planning period. 

2. P-Suffix Conditions. Required to develop allowed uses in certain zones with P-suffix conditions pursuant to KMC 18.47.030.

C. Other.

1. Authorized or required in ordinances or development agreements approved by the City. 

2. Elected by an applicant. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.120.030 Master plan contents.

A. Master plans shall contain the following information:

1. For properties with master plans authorized or required as stated in KMC 18.120.020 except the parks zone and P-suffix conditions:

a. A master plan shall provide a general narrative description of all long-term land uses, circulation and infrastructure, open space, and development phasing for an area or property to guide future development.

b. The master plan shall, in a general manner, depict the site layout by showing development areas by type of land use, circulation patterns, site access, utilities, infrastructure, maximum square footage of uses (if applicable), and any open space areas and buffers.

c. The plan shall also illustrate the relationship between the site and adjoining properties.

d. It is intended that master plan maps and graphics be developed in a general, conceptual manner.

2. Master plans for properties included in the parks zone:

a. City-Owned Parks. Master plans shall consist of City parks and recreation functional plans or other legislatively approved conceptual plans.

b. Non-City-Owned Parks. Master plans shall conform to the requirements in subsection (A)(1) of this section.

c. Any Property Zoned Parks. Any single master plan proposal submitted to the City for approval shall include a park or recreation use for the overall area included in the master plan application.

3. Master plans for properties with P-suffix conditions per KMC 18.120.020(B). Master plans shall contain the information required in the P-suffix condition. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.120.040 Master plan approval process.

A. Master Plan Approval Process.

1. Comprehensive Plan Requirement. Master plans that are required by the Kenmore comprehensive plan land use element as necessary to obtain a comprehensive plan amendment and/or rezone shall be subject to the Type 5 permit process.

2. Zoning Requirement or Authorization.

a. Parks, Golf Course, or Public and Semi-Public Zones.

(1) City-Owned Property: The City may prepare and amend master plans for City property subject to city council approval.

(2) Non-City-Owned Property: Type 4.

b. P-Suffix Condition: Type 4.

3. Other.

a. Authorized or required in ordinances or development agreements approved by the City: Consistent with adopting ordinance or development agreement, but no less than Type 2 process.

b. Elected by an applicant: Type 4.

B. Master Plan Approval Criteria. At a minimum, master plans shall be consistent with the review criteria contained in KMC 18.115.050 (same as special use criteria). Master plans shall also be consistent with review criteria specified in any applicable P-suffix conditions, ordinance, development agreements, or recorded instrument.

C. Consistency with Master Plan. All property identified in the master plan shall be developed in a manner consistent with the provisions of the master plan. 

D. A site with an approved master plan does not require a site plan review pursuant to Chapter 18.105 KMC prior to submittal of building or other development permits. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.120.045 Approved master plans.

A. Parks Zone. The following master plans have been approved by the City as of December 11, 2006, for City-owned park property. Please contact the City for an up-to-date list of approved master plans or for master plans in progress.

1. City of Kenmore Parks and Recreation Master Plan, April 2003 (all City parks except Northshore Summit).

2. Conceptual master plans as revised and updated in 2006: Wallace Swamp Creek Park, Linwood Park, Northshore Summit Park, Tracey Owen Station, Kenmore (Rhododendron) Park, Moorlands Park.

B. Bastyr University Master Plan, December 2009, approved by City Ordinance 09-0304.

C. Lakepointe Mixed Use Development Master Plan, August 1998. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.120.050 Modifications of an approved master plan.

A. Project sponsors may submit an application(s) to modify approved master plans. Modifications that do not substantially change the nature or level of use or that do not require a new environmental review may be considered minor amendments and may be approved by the city manager as a Type 2 decision or in accordance with the permit process authorized in an ordinance, development agreement, or recorded instrument.

B. Modifications that would result in a substantial change of use, or substantially change the nature or level of activity, or that would require the need for additional environmental review, shall be considered a major modification and shall be processed consistent with the permit type required to establish the original master plan in KMC 18.120.040 or in accordance with the permit process authorized in an ordinance, development agreement, or recorded instrument. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.120.060 Vesting and time limitations.

Unless alternative vesting and time limitations are stated in the approval of a master plan and specified in an ordinance, development agreement, or recorded instrument as appropriate, the following shall apply:

A. Time Limitations. An approved master plan shall remain in effect for a period of not less than 10 years, subject to the following conditions:

1. Submittal of biennial status reports to the city manager during the term of the master plan no later than December 31st of each biennial period;

2. Submittal of interim reports to the city manager regarding any proposed changes or revisions to the master plan implementation schedule no later than December 31st of each biennial period;

3. Issuance of construction permits for at least one-half of the new construction projects identified in each phase of the master plan implementation schedule no later than the projected completion date for the particular phase.

B. Vesting. Master plans shall be vested to the regulations in effect at the time of approval, as specified by ordinance, development agreement, or recorded instrument. Such vesting measures shall not preclude the City from taking such actions as shall be necessary to protect the public health and safety. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 18.125 ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

18.125.010    Purpose.

18.125.020    Authority and application.

18.125.040    Violations defined.

18.125.050    Permit suspension, revocation or modification.

18.125.060    Initiation of revocation or modification proceedings.


18.125.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to promote compliance with this title by establishing enforcement authority, defining violations, and setting standards for initiating the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.20 KMC, when violations of this title occur. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.125.020 Authority and application.

The city manager is authorized to enforce the provisions of this code, any implementing administrative rules, administration, and approval conditions attached to any land use approval, through revocation or modification of permits, or through the enforcement, penalty and abatement provisions of Chapter 1.20 KMC. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.125.040 Violations defined.

No building permit or land use approval in conflict with the provisions of this title shall be issued. Structures or uses which do not conform to this title, except legal nonconformances specified in Chapter 18.100 KMC and approved variances, are violations subject to the enforcement, penalty and abatement provisions of Chapter 1.20 KMC, including but not limited to:

A. Establishing a use not permitted in the zone in which it is located;

B. Constructing, expanding or placing a structure in violation of setback, height and other dimensional standards in this title;

C. Establishing a permitted use without complying with applicable development standards set forth in other titles, ordinances, rules or other laws, including, but not limited to, road construction, surface water management, the fire code, and rules of the department of public health;

D. Failing to carry out or observe conditions of land use or permit approval, including contract development standards;

E. Failing to secure required land use or permit approval prior to establishing a permitted use; and

F. Failing to maintain site improvements, such as landscaping, parking or drainage control facilities as required by this code or other City ordinances. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.125.050 Permit suspension, revocation or modification.

A. Any permit, variance, or other land use approval issued by the City pursuant to this title may be suspended, revoked or modified on one or more of the following grounds:

1. The approval was obtained by fraud;

2. The approval was based on inadequate or inaccurate information;

3. The approval, when given, conflicted with existing laws or regulations applicable thereto;

4. An error of procedure occurred which prevented consideration of the interests of persons directly affected by the approval;

5. The approval or permit granted is being exercised contrary to the terms or conditions of such approval or in violation of any statute, law or regulation;

6. The use for which the approval was granted is being exercised in a manner detrimental to the public health or safety;

7. The holder of the permit or approval interferes with the city manager or any authorized representative in the performance of his or her duties; or

8. The holder of the permit or approval fails to comply with any notice and order issued pursuant to Chapter 1.20 KMC.

B. Authority to revoke or modify a permit or land use approval shall be exercised by the decisionmaker, as described in KMC 19.25.020. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


18.125.060 Initiation of revocation or modification proceedings.

A. The city manager may suspend any permit, variance or land use approval issued by any City issuing agency and processed by the department pending its revocation or modification, or pending a public hearing on its revocation or modification;

B. The issuing agency may initiate proceedings to revoke or modify any permit or land use approval it has issued; and

C. Persons who are aggrieved may petition the issuing agency to initiate revocation or modification proceedings, and may petition the city manager to suspend a permit, variance or land use approval pending consideration of its revocation or modification. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Title 19 LAND USE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES

Chapters:

19.05    General Provisions

19.10    Definitions

19.15    Repealed

19.20    Amendment of Comprehensive Plan or of Development Regulations – Public Participation

19.25    Procedures for Land Use Decisions, Public Notice, Hearings and Appeals

19.30    Hearing Examiner

19.35    Environmental Procedures


Chapter 19.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

19.05.020    Catchline legality.


19.05.020 Catchline legality.

Section captions as used in this title do not constitute any part of the law. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 19.10 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

19.10.003    Scope of chapter.

19.10.005    Applicant.

19.10.010    Area zoning.

19.10.030    City.

19.10.035    City manager.

19.10.040    Comprehensive plan.

19.10.050    Council.

19.10.060    Department.

19.10.070    Development regulations.

19.10.080    Docket.

19.10.085    Emergency amendment.

19.10.105    Hearing examiner.

19.10.110    Reclassification.

19.10.120    Site-specific comprehensive plan land use map amendment.

19.10.130    Subarea plan.


19.10.003 Scope of chapter.

This chapter contains definitions of technical and procedural terms used throughout this title. Defined terms are shown in italics in the text of the title. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.10.005 Applicant.

“Applicant” means a person who files an application for a permit under this chapter and who is either the owner of the land on which that proposed activity would be located, a contract purchaser, or the authorized agent of such a person. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.10.010 Area zoning.

“Area zoning” means procedures initiated by the City which result in the adoption or amendment of zoning maps on an area-wide basis. This type of zoning is characterized by being comprehensive in nature, and deals with distinct communities, specific geographic areas and other types of districts having unified interests within the City. Area zoning, unlike a reclassification, usually involves many separate properties under various ownerships and utilizes several of the zoning classifications available to express the City’s current comprehensive plan and subarea plan policies in zoning map form. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.10.030 City.

“City” means the City of Kenmore. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.10.035 City manager.

“City manager” means the City of Kenmore city manager or his or her designee(s). [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.10.040 Comprehensive plan.

“Comprehensive plan” means the principles, goals, objectives, policies and criteria approved by the council to meet the requirements of the Washington State Growth Management Act, and:

A. As a beginning step in planning for the development of the City;

B. As the means for coordinating City programs and services;

C. As policy direction for official regulations and controls;

D. As a means of promoting the general welfare. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.10.050 Council.

“Council” means the Kenmore city council. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.10.060 Department.

“Department” means the City department or outside agency assigned by the city manager to administer a portion of the City code. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.10.070 Development regulations.

“Development regulations” means the controls placed on development or land use activities by the City including, but not limited to, zoning ordinances, critical areas ordinances, shoreline master programs, surface water runoff policies, street standards, subdivision ordinances and binding site plan ordinances, together with any amendments thereto. A development regulation includes a zoning map amendment that is related to a comprehensive plan map amendment. A development regulation does not include a decision to approve a project permit application, as defined in RCW 36.70B.020, even though the decision may be expressed in an ordinance by the City. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.10.080 Docket.

“Docket” (noun) means the list of suggested changes to the comprehensive plan or development regulations maintained by the department. “Docket” (verb) means to record with the department a suggested change to the comprehensive plan or development regulations. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.10.085 Emergency amendment.

An “emergency amendment” shall be defined as an amendment that is required to the comprehensive plan or development regulations for the immediate protection of public health, safety, property, or peace. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.10.105 Hearing examiner.

“Hearing examiner” means the hearing examiner as established by Chapter 19.30 KMC. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.10.110 Reclassification.

“Reclassification” means a change in the zone classification on the zoning map pursuant to a Type 4 land use permit decision, where the reclassification is not related to a comprehensive plan land use map amendment. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.10.120 Site-specific comprehensive plan land use map amendment.

“Site-specific comprehensive plan land use map amendment” means an amendment to the comprehensive plan land use map which includes one property or a small group of specific properties. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.10.130 Subarea plan.

“Subarea plan” means a detailed local land use plan which implements and is an element of the comprehensive plan containing specific policies, guidelines and criteria adopted by the council to guide development and capital improvement decisions within specific subareas of the City. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 19.15 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN

(Repealed by Ord. 12-0334)


Chapter 19.20 AMENDMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN OR OF DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS – PUBLIC PARTICIPATION

Sections:

19.20.020    Purpose.

19.20.030    Applicability.

19.20.040    Authority.

19.20.050    Annual amendment process.

19.20.060    Initiation of annual amendment process.

19.20.070    Submittal requirements.

19.20.080    Threshold review criteria.

19.20.090    Amendment decision criteria.


19.20.020 Purpose.

A. This chapter establishes the process and criteria by which the comprehensive plan and development regulations are amended in accordance with Chapter 36.70A RCW.

B. This chapter also establishes the means of public participation in the comprehensive plan and development regulation amendment process as required in RCW 36.70A.130(2) and 36.70A.140.

C. This chapter sets forth additional submittal requirements for comprehensive plan and development regulation amendments in recognition of the additional information and fee requirements of the comprehensive plan and development regulation amendments. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.20.030 Applicability.

A. This chapter establishes a mechanism for the City to amend the comprehensive plan and development regulations.

B. Proposed amendments may be submitted by the mayor, city council, planning commission, City staff, or any interested private parties, including citizens, applicants, or government agencies. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.20.040 Authority.

A. The city manager shall have the authority to administer this chapter.

B. The planning commission shall have the authority to review and study proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan and development regulations that are included in a city council- approved annual docket work program for each year. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing, deliberate, and make recommendations to the city council on said proposals.

C. The city council shall have the authority to make a threshold review of each proposal to amend the comprehensive plan and development regulations and establish the planning commission’s annual docket work program for each year. The city council shall have the authority to make a final decision upon applications pursuant to this section after the planning commission has provided a recommendation to the city council. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.20.050 Annual amendment process.

A. Comprehensive plan amendments are considered by the city council no more frequently than once a year as part of the amendment cycle established in this chapter, except that the city council may consider amendments more frequently or outside the annual docket amendment cycle detailed in this section under the following circumstances:

1. The city council finds an emergency amendment is required as defined in KMC 19.10.085;

2. The initial adoption of a subarea plan that does not modify the comprehensive plan policies and designations applicable to the subarea;

3. The adoption or amendment of a shoreline master program under the procedures set forth in Chapter 90.58 RCW;

4. The amendment of the capital facilities element of the comprehensive plan that occurs concurrently with the adoption or amendment of the City budget; and

5. The amendment is required as a result of an order of the growth management hearings board created in RCW 36.70A.250 or a court with jurisdiction.

B. Development regulations consistent with the comprehensive plan may be considered outside of the annual amendment process at the discretion of the city council, so long as the amendment is considered through a public participation process consistent with RCW 36.70A.130(2). Development regulation amendments associated with comprehensive plan amendments should be processed with comprehensive plan amendments whenever practicable.

C. Zoning reclassification requests as defined in KMC 19.10.110 are subject to the Type 4 permit process in Chapter 19.25 KMC. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.20.060 Initiation of annual amendment process.

A. The comprehensive plan and development regulations may be amended pursuant to this chapter, no more frequently than once a year as part of the amendment cycle established in this chapter, except as provided in KMC 19.20.050.

B. Application Initiation and Deadline.

1. The public shall be made aware of the deadline to submit proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan and development regulations by means of two publications in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, with the first notice published at least 30 days prior to the deadline.

2. The deadline for submitting an application for amendment pursuant to this chapter is December 1st of each year, or the next business day if December 1st falls on a Saturday or Sunday.

C. Submittal Requirements. Only applications that have fulfilled the submittal requirements of KMC 19.20.070 by the deadline in subsection B of this section shall be considered for the next annual amendment process.

D. Prescreening/Threshold Decision.

1. The department shall review all complete applications submitted by the deadline set forth in subsection B of this section and issue a recommendation on each application submitted based upon threshold criteria set forth in KMC 19.20.080 by the last city council meeting in January of each year.

2. The city council shall make a threshold decision on each application submitted and reviewed by the last city council meeting in February of each year.

3. Threshold decisions and recommendations shall be for one of the following:

a. Accept application for review by the planning commission or other city council- appointed advisory body in the current amendment cycle;

b. Recommend delay of the amendment to the next amendment cycle; or

c. Denial of amendment based upon criteria set forth in KMC 19.20.080 or other findings of fact.

E. Planning Commission Review and Public Participation.

1. The planning commission or other advisory body approved by the city council shall review all amendments approved by the city council pursuant to subsection (D)(3)(a) of this section and shall make such amendments a priority of their work program for the year. The planning commission or other advisory body shall hold study sessions on proposed amendments, as deemed necessary in order to make an informed decision.

2. Public Participation Plan. Public participation shall consist of, at minimum, a public hearing before the planning commission. The city manager is further authorized to establish additional public participation for a particular matter at the beginning of the annual docket process, utilizing types of participation including but not limited to: public meetings, workshops, and/or open houses.

F. Public Hearing.

1. The planning commission or other advisory body approved by the city council shall hold the public hearing on the proposed amendments each year. Public notice shall be given as set forth in subsection (F)(2) of this section.

2. Public Notice of Public Hearing.

a. Notice of a public hearing on the annual cycle of amendments shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and shall be posted at City Hall and on the City website within 14 calendar days of the public hearing.

b. Additional Public Notice Requirements for Site-Specific Amendments. In addition to the public notice requirements of subsection (F)(2)(a) of this section, applicants for site-specific comprehensive plan land use map amendments shall also post the site and mail notice to residences and employers within 1,000 feet of the subject site.

3. Recommendation to City Council. Upon consideration of all the information presented to the planning commission, the planning commission shall deliberate after the public hearing and shall make a recommendation to the city council based upon the criteria found in KMC 19.20.090.

4. Second Public Hearing. If the planning commission recommends a modification which was not within the scope of the alternatives available at the public hearing for public comment, the planning commission shall conduct a new public hearing on the proposal as modified.

G. Final Decision.

1. City Council Decision. The city council, upon receipt of the planning commission’s recommendations for the annual amendment cycle, shall make the final decision on proposed amendments consistent with criteria contained in KMC 19.20.090.

2. Circumstances Requiring Public Hearing. The city council may, in its discretion, hold an additional public hearing on the planning commission’s recommendations for the annual amendment cycle. However, if the city council recommends a modification which was not within the scope of the alternatives available at the planning commission hearing for public comment, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposal as modified prior to final decision.

H. Pursuant to RCW 36.70A.106, the department shall notify the State of its intent to adopt amendments to the comprehensive plan or to development regulations at least 60 days prior to the city council’s final adoption of the proposal, except for regulations or amendments which are procedural, ministerial or required to address an emergency.

I. Within 10 days of final adoption, the city clerk shall transmit to the State any adopted plan, amendment to the comprehensive plan or development regulation. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.20.070 Submittal requirements.

Applications for the annual cycle of comprehensive plan and development regulation amendments shall include the following submittal requirements:

A. Submittal requirements enumerated in KMC 19.25.040 that are not waived by the city manager.

B. An application form provided by the department and completed by the applicant that includes, at minimum, the applicant’s name, address, contact information, and proposed amendment.

1. For site-specific comprehensive plan land use map amendments, the application form shall also include the following information: property address or location, parcel number(s), existing and proposed future land use designation and zoning designation, and property owner’s signature.

C. A completed environmental checklist, if required by Chapter 19.35 KMC.

D. A narrative clearly stating the proposal and what the amendment is attempting to accomplish.

1. For site-specific comprehensive plan land use map amendments, the narrative shall be accompanied by a vicinity map drawn to scale clearly showing the subject site and its surroundings.

E. A narrative indicating how the proposed amendment meets the criteria outlined in KMC 19.20.080 and 19.20.090.

F. An application fee pursuant to the City’s current fee schedule or a written request for a fee waiver.

1. One fee waiver is allowed per applicant per year.

2. The fee waiver request shall only be granted in the following cases: requests involving a topic of a City-wide nature; or a neighborhood-wide request; or a request made by a nonprofit organization when involving more than one property. Fee waivers are not allowed for site-specific comprehensive plan land use map amendments.

3. City-Sponsored Proposals Exempt. City-sponsored proposals are exempt from application fees.

G. Unless one or more of the submittal requirements outlined in this section is waived by the city manager, then an application that does not contain all of the submittal requirements so enumerated by the deadline set forth in KMC 19.20.060(B) shall be considered incomplete and ineligible for consideration in the annual amendment cycle. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.20.080 Threshold review criteria.

The City shall use the following criteria in selecting proposals for further consideration in the annual docketing process. Proposals shall meet subsections A and B of this section, and either subsection C or D of this section:

A. The City has the resources, including staff and budget, necessary to review the proposal; and

B. It has been more than two years since the proposed amendment has been considered unless a compelling reason for changed circumstances can be made; and

C. The proposal would correct an inconsistency within or make a clarification to a provision of the comprehensive plan; or

D. All of the following:

1. The proposal demonstrates a strong potential to serve the public interest by implementing specifically identified goals and policies of the comprehensive plan; and

2. The public interest would best be served by considering the proposal in the current year, rather than delaying consideration to a later subarea plan review or plan amendment process. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.20.090 Amendment decision criteria.

All proposed amendments, whether or not considered through the annual amendment process, must meet the decision criteria in subsection A of this section. If the proposal is a site-specific comprehensive plan land use map amendment, then it must meet the decision criteria of subsections A and B of this section. If the proposal is an amendment to development regulations, then it must meet the decision criteria of subsections A and C of this section.

A. Review Criteria Applicable to All Proposed Amendments. All proposed amendments must meet the following criteria:

1. The proposed amendment is consistent with the Growth Management Act and the countywide planning policies; and

2. The proposed amendment eliminates an inconsistency or does not create an inconsistency within the comprehensive plan; and

3. The proposed amendment meets at least one of the following criteria:

a. The proposed amendment is beneficial to the City as a whole and will not adversely affect public health, safety, and welfare; or

b. The proposed amendment addresses changed circumstances within the City as a whole; or

c. The proposed amendment accommodates new policy direction from the city council.

B. Additional Review Criteria Applicable to Site-Specific Amendments. All site-specific comprehensive plan land use map amendments must meet the following additional decision criteria:

1. The proposed amendment is consistent with the policies, objectives and goals of the comprehensive plan (including any applicable subarea plans), the countywide planning policies and the State Growth Management Act; and

2. The subject property is suitable for development in conformance with the standards under the classification being proposed; and

3. The proposed amendment is compatible with adjacent and nearby existing and permitted land uses; and

4. The proposed amendment is compatible with the surrounding development pattern; and

5. The proposed amendment meets the zoning map decision criteria of KMC 19.30.210 and 19.30.220.

C. Additional Review Criteria for Development Regulations.

1. The proposed amendment is consistent with the policies, objectives, and goals of the comprehensive plan; and

2. The proposed amendment does not duplicate or conflict with other portions of the Kenmore Municipal Code. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 19.25 PROCEDURES FOR LAND USE DECISIONS, PUBLIC NOTICE, HEARINGS AND APPEALS

Sections:

19.25.010    Chapter purpose.

19.25.020    Classifications of land use decision processes.

19.25.030    Preapplication conferences.

19.25.040    Application requirements.

19.25.050    Determination of completeness.

19.25.055    Vesting.

19.25.060    Notice of application.

19.25.065    Public notice boards.

19.25.080    Applications – Modifications to proposal.

19.25.083    Application cancelled for inactivity.

19.25.085    Type 2 decisions.

19.25.090    Notice of decision.

19.25.092    Appeals.

19.25.095    Applications – Limitations on refiling of applications.

19.25.100    Permit issuance.


19.25.010 Chapter purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish standard procedures for land use decisions, including public notice, hearings and appeals. These procedures are designed to promote timely and informed public participation in discretionary land use decisions; eliminate redundancy in the application, permit review, hearing and appeal processes; provide for uniformity in public notice procedures; minimize delay and expense; and result in development approvals that implement the policies of the comprehensive plan. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.25.020 Classifications of land use decision processes.

A. Land use decisions are classified into five types, based on the amount of discretion associated with each decision. Procedures for the five different types are distinguished according to who makes the decision, whether public notice is required, whether a public hearing is required before a decision is made and whether administrative appeals are provided. The types of land use decisions are listed in Exhibit A of this section.

1. Type 1 decisions are made by the city manager. Type 1 decisions are nonappealable administrative decisions that require the exercise of little or no administrative discretion. Public notice is not required for Type 1 decisions.

2. Type 2 decisions are made by the city manager. Type 2 decisions are discretionary decisions that are subject to administrative appeal.

3. Type 3 decisions are quasi-judicial decisions made by the hearing examiner following an open record hearing. Type 3 decisions may be appealed directly to King County superior court, pursuant to Chapter 36.70C RCW, the Land Use Petition Act, based on the record established by the hearing examiner.

4. Type 4 decisions are quasi-judicial decisions made by the city council based on the record established by the hearing examiner.

5. Type 5 decisions are legislative decisions made by the city council.

B. Except as provided in KMC 16.75.060 and 19.35.160 or unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant, all Type 2, 3 and 4 decisions included in consolidated permit applications that would require more than one type of land use decision process may be processed and decided together, including any administrative appeals, using the highest-numbered land use decision type applicable to the project application. KMC 16.75.060 sets out the combined hearing authority for shoreline exemptions, shoreline substantial development permits, shoreline variances, and shoreline conditional use permits.

C. Certain development proposals are subject to additional procedural requirements beyond the standard procedures established in this chapter.

D. Land use permits that are categorically exempt from review under SEPA do not require a threshold determination (determination of nonsignificance (DNS) or determination of significance (DS)). For all other projects, the SEPA review procedures in Chapter 19.35 KMC are supplemental to the procedures in this chapter.

 

Exhibit A 

LAND USE DECISION TYPES  

	TYPE 12	Decision by city manager; no administrative appeal	Building; demolition; moving; engineering; clearing and grading; sign; change of use and/or classification under KMC Title 15; accessory dwelling unit; home occupation; boundary line adjustment; right-of-way; street standards variance; adjustment under Chapter 13.35 KMC; shoreline exemption; temporary use; binding site plan; preliminary subdivision or short subdivision revision if not a substantial change; short plat alteration if not a substantial change.

	TYPE 2	Decision by city manager; appealable to hearing examiner; no further administrative appeal1, 5	Home industry; short subdivision; preliminary short subdivision revision; short plat alteration; zoning variance; conditional use permit; shoreline substantial development permit; shoreline variance; shoreline conditional use permit; site plan review for uses allowed by zone; wireless communication facility minor adjustment under Chapter 18.60 KMC; approval of residential density incentives under KMC 18.80.060(A)(2) or transfer of development credits under KMC 18.80.090(A); reuse of public schools; reasonable use exceptions under KMC 18.55.180; public agency and utility exceptions under KMC 18.55.160; other critical areas exceptions, variances and decisions to require studies or to approve, condition or deny a development proposal based on Chapter 18.55 KMC.

	TYPE 3	Recommendation by city manager; hearing and decision by hearing examiner; appealable directly to King County superior court, pursuant to Chapter 36.70C RCW, the Land Use Petition Act, on the record	Preliminary subdivision; plat alteration; preliminary subdivision revision; special use; wireless communication facility major adjustment under Chapter 18.60 KMC.

	TYPE 4	Recommendation by city manager; hearing and recommendation by hearing examiner; decision by city council on the record	Zone reclassification not related to a site-specific comprehensive plan land use map amendment3; shoreline environment redesignation; plat vacation; short plat vacation; site plan review for uses not allowed by zone pursuant to Chapter 18.105 KMC; master plans other than those required in order to obtain a comprehensive plan amendment or related zoning map or text amendment.

	TYPE 5	Hearing and recommendation by planning commission or other city council-appointed advisory body4; decision by city council on the record. Appealable to Growth Management Hearings Board pursuant to Chapter 36.70A RCW	Comprehensive plan amendment; development regulation amendment; zoning map amendment related to a site-specific comprehensive plan land use map amendment; master plans required in order to obtain a comprehensive plan amendment or related zoning map or text amendment pursuant to Chapter 18.120 KMC.

1 All shoreline permits, including shoreline variances and conditional uses, are appealable to the State Shorelines Hearings Board and not to the hearing examiner.

2 Type 1 land use decisions that are not categorically exempt from environmental review under Chapter 43.21C RCW (State Environmental Policy Act) shall provide a notice of application per KMC 19.25.060 and a notice of decision per KMC 19.25.090. The notice of decision may be a copy of the permit.

3 Approvals that are consistent with the comprehensive plan may be considered by the city council at any time. Zone reclassifications that are not consistent with the comprehensive plan land use map require a site-specific comprehensive plan land use map amendment and the city council’s hearing, and consideration shall be considered a Type 5 land use decision and scheduled with the amendment to the comprehensive plan under Chapter 19.20 KMC.

4 If the proposal is being considered as part of the annual docket work program as described in Chapter 19.20 KMC. If the proposal is not part of the annual docket, the city council conducts the public participation process and makes the decision on the record.

5 Decisions on shoreline variance and shoreline conditional use permits require approval by the Department of Ecology.

[Ord. 19-0481 § 2 (Exh. A); Ord. 16-0426 § 8 (Att. F); Ord. 12-0334 § 18; Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.25.030 Preapplication conferences.

A. Prior to filing a permit application for a Type 1 decision for new commercial or multifamily development, for a change of use and/or classification, for a portable/modular structure, or for moving a building, the applicant shall contact the department to schedule a preapplication conference which shall be held prior to filing the application, except as provided herein.

Prior to filing a permit application requiring a Type 2, 3 or 4 decision, the applicant shall contact the department to schedule a preapplication conference which shall be held prior to filing the application, except as provided herein. The purpose of the preapplication conference is to review and discuss the application requirements with the applicant and provide comments on the development proposal.

B. The preapplication conference shall be scheduled by the department, at the request of an applicant, and shall be held in a timely manner, within 30 days from the date of the applicant’s request.

C. The city manager may waive the requirement for a preapplication conference if it is determined to be unnecessary for review of an application.

D. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require more than one preapplication conference or to prohibit the applicant from filing an application if the department is unable to schedule a preapplication conference within 30 days following the applicant’s request.

E. At or subsequent to a preapplication conference, the department may issue a preliminary determination that a proposed development is not permissible under applicable City policies or regulations. In that event, the applicant shall have the option to appeal the preliminary determination to the hearing examiner, as provided for in Chapter 19.30 KMC, as an alternative to proceeding with a complete application. Mailed and published notice of the appeal shall be provided for as in KMC 19.25.060(E)(2) and (3). 

F. A preapplication conference also may be held for other Type 1 land use decisions, if requested by an applicant or required by the department. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.25.040 Application requirements.

A. The department shall not commence review of any application for a land use decision until the applicant has submitted the materials and fees specified for complete applications.

B. The department shall specify the application requirements for Type 1 and Type 5 land use decisions on forms provided to the public.

C. For Type 2, 3 and 4 land use decisions, the applicant shall file the following information with the department:

1. A complete permit application, with supporting affidavits, on forms provided by the department;

2. Information specified on the application checklist provided by the department for the requested decision(s); and

3. Any additional information or materials that the department specifies at the pre-application meeting.

D. The applicant may file a single application form for all Type 2, 3 and 4 land use decisions requested for the development proposal at the time the application is filed.

E. A permit application is complete for purposes of this section when it meets the procedural submission requirements of the department and is sufficient for continued processing even though additional information may be required or project modifications may be undertaken subsequently. The determination of completeness shall not preclude the department from requesting additional information or studies either at the time of notice of completeness or subsequently if new or additional information is required or substantial changes in the proposed action occur, as determined by the department.

F. The city manager may waive any specific submittal requirements that are determined to be unnecessary for review of an application.

G. The applicant shall attest by written oath to the accuracy of all information submitted for an application. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.25.050 Determination of completeness.

A. Within 28 calendar days following receipt of a land use permit application, the department shall mail or provide written notice to the applicant that the application is either complete or incomplete. If the application is incomplete, the notice shall state with specificity what is necessary to make the application complete. To the extent known by the department, the notice shall identify other agencies of local, State, regional or federal governments that may have jurisdiction over some aspects of the development proposal.

B. An application shall be deemed complete under this section if the department does not provide written notice to the applicant that the application is incomplete within the 28-day period as provided herein.

C. If the application is incomplete and the applicant submits the additional information requested by the department, the department shall notify the applicant in writing within 14 calendar days whether the application is complete or what additional information specified by the department as provided in subsection A of this section is necessary to make the application complete. An application shall be deemed complete if the department fails to provide written notice to the applicant within the 14-day period that the application is incomplete.

D. The department’s determination of completeness as provided in subsection A or C of this section, or the failure of the department to provide such determination as provided in subsection B or C of this section, shall cause an application to be conclusively deemed to be complete and vested as provided in this chapter. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.25.055 Vesting.

A. Applications for Type 1, 2, and 3 land use decisions, except those which seek variance from or exception to land use regulations, shall be considered under the zoning and other land use control ordinances in effect on the date a complete application is filed meeting all of the requirements of this chapter. The department’s issuance of a determination of completeness as provided in this chapter, or the failure of the department to provide such a notice as provided in this chapter, shall cause an application to be conclusively deemed to be vested as provided herein.

B. Supplemental information required after vesting of a complete application shall not affect the validity of the vesting for such application.

C. Vesting of an application does not vest any subsequently required permits, nor does it affect the requirements for vesting of subsequent permits or approvals. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.25.060 Notice of application.

A. A notice of application shall be provided to the public for all land use permit applications requiring Type 2, 3 or 4 decisions or Type 1 decisions subject to SEPA.

B. A public comment period of at least 21 calendar days shall be provided, except as otherwise provided in WAC 173-27-110 and 173-27-120 regarding shoreline permits and RCW 58.17.215 regarding subdivision alterations. The public comment period shall commence on the third calendar day following the department’s mailing of the notice of application as provided for in subsection E of this section.

C. All required notices of application shall contain the following information:

1. The file number;

2. The name of the applicant;

3. The date of application, the date of the determination of completeness and the date of the notice of application;

4. A description of the project, the location, a list of the permits included in the application and the location where the application and any environmental documents or studies can be reviewed;

5. A site plan on eight-and-one-half-by-14-inch paper, if applicable;

6. The procedures and deadline for filing comments, requesting notice of any required hearings and any appeal procedure;

7. The date, time, place and type of hearing, if applicable and scheduled at the time of notice;

8. The identification of other permits not included in the application to the extent known;

9. The identification of existing environmental documents that evaluate the proposed project; and

10. A statement of the preliminary determination, if one has been made, of those development regulations that will be used for project mitigation and of consistency with applicable City plans and regulations.



D. If the optional DNS process under KMC 19.35.100 is used, the notice of application shall identify the SEPA comment period and other information as required by WAC 197-11-355.

E. Within 14 calendar days of the determination of completeness for the application, the notice of application shall be:

1. Posted at the project site on one or more public notice boards as provided in KMC 19.25.065;

2. Mailed by first class mail as follows:

a. To owners of record of property in an area within 1,000 feet of the site, but the area shall be expanded as necessary to send mailed notices to at least 20 different property owners;

b. To the State Department of Transportation, if the site adjoins a State highway;

c. To the affected tribes;

d. To any agency or community group which the department may identify as having an interest in the proposal;

e. For preliminary plats only, to all cities within one mile of the proposed preliminary plat, and to all airports within two miles of the proposed preliminary plat;

f. For residential uses of 10 or more dwelling units only, to affected school districts.

3. Published in the City’s official newspaper of record.

F. An affidavit of posting shall be submitted to the department by the applicant within 14 calendar days following the department’s determination of completeness to allow continued processing of the application by the department.

G. Mailed notice shall be considered supplementary to posted notice and be deemed satisfactory despite the failure of one or more owners to receive mailed notice. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.25.065 Public notice boards.

Public notice boards shall be installed by the applicant for Type 2, 3 and 4 land use decisions or Type 1 decisions subject to SEPA within 14 days following the department’s determination of completeness as follows:

A. A single notice board shall be installed for a project:

1. At the midpoint of the site street frontage or as otherwise directed by the department for maximum visibility;

2. Five feet inside the street property line unless otherwise approved by the department;

3. So that the top of the notice board is between seven and nine feet above grade; and

4. Where it is completely visible to pedestrians;

B. Additional notice boards may be required when:

1. The site does not abut a public street;

2. A large site abuts more than one public street; or

3. The department determines that additional notice boards are necessary to provide adequate public notice;

C. Notice boards shall be:

1. Maintained in good condition by the applicant during the notice period through the time of the final City decision on the proposal, including the expiration of any applicable appeal periods;

2. Removed within 14 calendar days after the end of the administrative appeal period for Type 2 decisions and within 14 calendar days after the final City decision on the application for Type 3 and 4 decisions or Type 1 decisions subject to SEPA;

D. Removal of the notice board before the end of the time period specified in subsection (C)(2) of this section may be cause for discontinuance of City review or extension of the appeal period until the notice board is replaced and remains in place for the specified time period;

E. Notice boards shall be constructed and installed in accordance with specifications promulgated by the department. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.25.080 Applications – Modifications to proposal.

A. Modifications required by the City to a pending application shall not be deemed a new application.

B. An applicant-requested modification occurring either before or after issuance of the permit shall be deemed a new application when such modification would result in a substantial change in a project’s review requirements, as determined by the department. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.25.083 Application cancelled for inactivity.

An application for a decision under this chapter may be cancelled for inactivity if an applicant fails to respond to the department’s written request for revisions, corrections, or additional information within 90 days of the date of request. This written request shall include clear notice to the applicant that this cancellation may occur. The department may extend the response period beyond 90 days if, within the original 90-day time period, the applicant provides and subsequently adheres to an approved schedule with specific target dates for submitting the full revisions, corrections, or other information needed by the department. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.25.085 Type 2 decisions.

A. Type 2 land use decisions shall be based upon compliance with the development standards and approval criteria for the requested decision.

B. The written decision contained in the record shall show:

1. Facts, findings and conclusions supporting the decision and demonstrating compliance with the applicable decision criteria; and

2. Any conditions and limitations imposed, if the request is granted.

C. Rules. The city manager shall keep a public record of his or her actions, findings, waivers and determinations. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.25.090 Notice of decision.

The department shall provide notice in a timely manner of the final decision on Type 2, 3, and 4 land use decisions or Type 1 decisions subject to SEPA, including the threshold determination, if any, and the procedures for administrative appeals, if applicable. Notice shall be provided to the applicant, to the Department of Ecology and Attorney General as provided in Chapter 90.58 RCW (Shoreline Management Act), and to any person who, prior to the decision, had requested notice of the decision or submitted comments on the application. The notice of decision shall be posted on the public notice board(s) as provided in KMC 19.25.065 and an affidavit of posting shall be submitted to the department by the applicant within six calendar days following the department’s mailing of the notice. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.25.092 Appeals.

Except for shoreline permits which are appealable to the State Shorelines Hearings Board, all notices of appeal to the hearing examiner of Type 2 land use decisions made by the city manager shall be filed within 21 calendar days from the date of issuance of the notice of decision as provided in KMC 19.30.080. A notice of appeal shall include a statement of appeal in accordance with KMC 19.30.080(B). [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.25.095 Applications – Limitations on refiling of applications.

Upon denial by the hearing examiner or council of a zone reclassification or a special use permit, no new application for substantially the same proposal shall be accepted within one year from the date of denial. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.25.100 Permit issuance.

A. Final decisions by the City on all permits and approvals subject to the procedures of this chapter shall be issued within 120 calendar days from the date the applicant is notified by the department pursuant to this chapter that the application is complete.

The following periods shall be excluded from this 120-day period:

1. Any period of time during which the applicant has been requested by the department or hearing examiner to correct plans, perform required studies or provide additional information, including street variances and adjustments required under Chapter 13.35 KMC. The period shall be calculated from the date of notice to the applicant of the need for additional information until the earlier of the date the City advises the applicant that the additional information satisfies the City’s request, or 14 calendar days after the date the information has been provided. If the City determines that the correction, study or other information submitted by the applicant is insufficient, it shall notify the applicant of the deficiencies and the procedures of this section shall apply as if a new request for information had been made.

a. The department shall set a reasonable deadline for the submittal of corrections, studies or other information when requested, and shall provide written notification to the applicant. An extension of such deadline may be granted upon submittal by an applicant of a written request providing satisfactory justification of an extension.

b. Failure by the applicant to meet such deadline shall be cause for the department to cancel/deny the application.

c. When granting a request for a deadline extension, the department shall give consideration to the number of days between receipt by the department of a written request for a deadline extension and the mailing to the applicant of the department’s decision regarding that request.

2. The period of time, as set forth in KMC 19.35.090, during which an environmental impact statement is being prepared following a determination of significance pursuant to Chapter 43.21C RCW.

3. A period of no more than 90 calendar days for an open record appeal hearing by the hearing examiner on a Type 2 land use decision.

4. Any period of time during which an applicant fails to post the property, if required by this chapter, following the date notice is required until an affidavit of posting is provided to the department by the applicant.

5. Any time extension mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the department.

B. The time limits established in this section shall not apply if a proposed development:

1. Requires an amendment to the comprehensive plan or a development regulation;

2. Requires the siting of an essential public facility as provided for in RCW 36.70A.200; or

3. Is substantially revised by the applicant, when such revisions will result in a substantial change in a project’s review requirements, as determined by the department, in which case the time period shall start from the date at which the revised project application is determined to be complete.

C. If the department is unable to issue its final decision within the time limits established by this section, it shall provide written notice of this fact to the project applicant. The notice shall include a statement of reasons why the time limits have not been met and an estimated date for issuance of the notice of final decision. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 19.30 HEARING EXAMINER

Sections:

19.30.010    Chapter purpose.

19.30.020    Office created.

19.30.030    Appointment.

19.30.040    Type 3 decisions.

19.30.050    Type 4 recommendations to the council.

19.30.060    Expeditious processing.

19.30.070    Appeals.

19.30.080    Notice of appeal to hearing examiner – Filing.

19.30.090    Dismissal of untimely appeals.

19.30.100    Expeditious processing of appeals.

19.30.120    Quasi-judicial powers.

19.30.130    Freedom from improper influence.

19.30.140    Public hearing.

19.30.150    Consolidation of hearings.

19.30.160    Prehearing conference.

19.30.170    Report by department.

19.30.180    Notice.

19.30.190    Rules and conduct of hearings.

19.30.200    Case management techniques.

19.30.210    Hearing examiner findings.

19.30.220    Additional hearing examiner findings – Reclassifications and shoreline environment redesignations.

19.30.230    Additional hearing examiner findings – Preliminary subdivisions.

19.30.240    Additional hearing examiner findings – Master plans, site plan reviews, and special uses.

19.30.250    Written decisions – Appeals.

19.30.260    Voluntary mediation.


19.30.010 Chapter purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide a system of considering and applying regulatory devices which will best satisfy the need to expand the principles of fairness and due process in public hearings. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.30.020 Office created.

The office of hearing examiner is created. The hearing examiner shall act on behalf of the City in considering and applying adopted City policies and regulations as provided herein. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.30.030 Appointment.

The city manager is authorized to appoint a hearing examiner(s) and to execute the necessary contract documents as appropriate. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.30.040 Type 3 decisions.

A. The hearing examiner shall receive and examine available information, conduct open record public hearings and prepare records and reports thereof, and issue decisions on Type 3 land use permit applications, including findings and conclusions, based on the issues and evidence in the record. The decision of the hearing examiner on Type 3 land use permit applications shall be appealable directly to the King County superior court, pursuant to Chapter 36.70C RCW, the Land Use Petition Act, on the record established by the hearing examiner.

B. The hearing examiner’s decision may be to grant or deny the application, or the hearing examiner may grant the application with such conditions, modifications and restrictions as the hearing examiner finds necessary. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.30.050 Type 4 recommendations to the council.

A. The hearing examiner shall receive and examine available information, conduct open record public hearings and prepare records and reports thereof and issue recommendations, including findings and conclusions, to the council based on the issues and evidence in the record in the following cases:

1. All Type 4 land use decisions;

2. Other applications that the council may prescribe by ordinance.

B. The hearing examiner’s recommendation may be to grant or deny the application, or the hearing examiner may recommend that the council adopt the application with such conditions, modifications and restrictions as the hearing examiner finds necessary. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.30.060 Expeditious processing.

A. Hearings on Type 3 or Type 4 applications shall be scheduled by the hearing examiner to ensure that final decisions are issued within the time periods provided in KMC 19.25.100.

B. In all matters where the hearing examiner holds a hearing on a Type 3 or Type 4 application, the hearing shall be completed and the hearing examiner’s written report and decision or recommendation issued within 14 calendar days from the date the hearing closes, excluding any time required by the applicant or the department to obtain and provide additional information requested by the hearing examiner and necessary for action on the application consistent with applicable laws and regulations. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.30.070 Appeals.

A. The hearing examiner shall receive and examine available information, conduct open record public hearings and prepare records and reports thereof, and issue final decisions, including findings and conclusions, based on the issues and evidence in the record, which shall be appealable to superior court, or to other designated authority in the following cases:

1. Appeals of all Type 2 land use decisions with the exception of appeals of shoreline permits including shoreline variances and conditional uses which are appealable to the State Shoreline Hearings Board;

2. Appeals from notices of violation pursuant to Chapter 1.20 KMC;

3. Appeals from decisions regarding the abatement of a nonconformance;

4. Appeals from decisions of the city manager on requests for rate adjustments to surface and stormwater management rates and charges;

5. Appeals from police department seizures and intended forfeitures, when properly designated by the chief law enforcement officer of that department as provided in RCW 69.50.505;

6. Appeals from notices and certifications of junk vehicles to be removed as a public nuisance as provided in KMC Title 18;

7. Appeals from the city manager’s final decisions regarding the transportation concurrency, safe site access, and impact fees and intersection provisions of Chapter 12.80 KMC;

8. Appeals under Chapter 19.35 KMC (the State Environmental Policy Act – SEPA);

9. Appeals of decisions for the licensing of adult cabarets and adult retail businesses;

10. Appeals from written interpretations of the zoning code under KMC 18.10.070;

11. Appeals of flood hazard area boundaries under KMC 18.55.723(C);

12. Appeals from a preliminary determination that a proposed development is not permissible under KMC 19.25.030; and

13. Other appeals which the council may prescribe by ordinance.

B. The hearing examiner’s decision may be to grant or deny the application or appeal, or the hearing examiner may grant the application or appeal with such conditions, modifications and restrictions as the hearing examiner finds necessary. 

C. The process for appeals shall be as specified in this chapter, unless otherwise described in the specific appeals provisions of other chapters of the KMC, including Chapter 1.20 KMC, Code Enforcement. [Ord. 16-0420 § 6 (Exh. 4); Ord. 12-0334 § 19; Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.30.080 Notice of appeal to hearing examiner – Filing.

A. Except as otherwise provided herein, all notices of appeal to the hearing examiner shall be filed with the city clerk.

B. The statement of appeal required as part of the notice of appeal shall identify the decision being appealed and the alleged errors in that decision. Further, the statement of appeal shall state specific reasons why the decision should be reversed or modified, state the harm suffered or anticipated by the appellant, and state the relief sought. The scope of an appeal shall be based principally on matters or issues raised in the statement of appeal.

C. Failure to timely file a notice of appeal, or appeal fee, deprives the hearing examiner of jurisdiction to consider the appeal. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.30.090 Dismissal of untimely appeals.

On its own motion, or on the motion of a party, the hearing examiner shall dismiss an appeal for untimeliness or lack of jurisdiction. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.30.100 Expeditious processing of appeals.

A. Appeals shall be processed by the hearing examiner as expeditiously as possible, giving appropriate consideration to the procedural due process rights of the parties. In every appeal heard by the hearing examiner pursuant to KMC 19.30.070, the appeal process, including a written decision, shall be completed within 90 days from the date the hearing examiner’s office is notified of the filing of a notice of appeal pursuant to KMC 19.30.080. When reasonably necessary to enable the attendance of all necessary parties at the hearing, or the production of evidence, or to otherwise assure that due process is afforded and the objectives of this chapter are met, this time period may be extended by the hearing examiner at the hearing examiner’s discretion for an additional 30 days. With the consent of all parties, the time periods may be extended indefinitely. In all such cases, the reason for such extension shall be stated in the hearing examiner’s recommendation or decision. Failure to complete the hearing process within the stated time shall not terminate the jurisdiction of the hearing examiner.

B. Unless a longer period is agreed to by the parties, or the hearing examiner determines that the size and scope of the project are so compelling that a longer period is required, a public hearing shall occur within 45 calendar days from the date the office of the hearing examiner is notified that a complete statement of appeal has been filed. Where the hearing examiner has determined that the size and scope warrant an extension, this time period may be extended by the hearing examiner at the hearing examiner’s discretion for not more than 20 calendar days. The reason for the extension shall be stated in the hearing examiner’s decision. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.30.120 Quasi-judicial powers.

The hearing examiner may also exercise administrative powers and such other quasi-judicial powers as may be granted by City ordinance. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.30.130 Freedom from improper influence.

Individual councilmembers or any other person shall not interfere with or attempt to interfere with the hearing examiner in the performance of his or her designated duties. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.30.140 Public hearing.

When it is found that an application meets the filing requirements of the department or an appeal meets the filing rules, it shall be accepted and a date assigned for public hearing. If for any reason testimony on any matter set for public hearing, or being heard, cannot be completed on the date set for such hearing, the matter shall be continued to the soonest available date. A matter should be heard, to the extent practicable, on consecutive days until it is concluded. For purposes of proceedings identified in KMC 19.30.050, the public hearing by the hearing examiner shall constitute the hearing by the council. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.30.150 Consolidation of hearings.

Whenever a project application includes more than one City permit, approval or determination for which a public hearing is required or for which an appeal is provided pursuant to this chapter, the hearings and any such appeals may be consolidated into a single proceeding before the hearing examiner pursuant to KMC 19.25.020. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.30.160 Prehearing conference.

A prehearing conference may be called by the hearing examiner pursuant to this chapter upon the request of a party, or on the hearing examiner’s own motion. A prehearing conference shall be held in every appeal brought pursuant to this chapter if timely requested by any party. The prehearing conference shall be held at such time as ordered by the hearing examiner, but not less than 14 calendar days prior to the scheduled hearing with not less than seven calendar days’ notice to those who are then parties of record to the proceeding. The purpose of a prehearing conference shall be to identify, to the extent possible, the facts in dispute, issues, laws, parties and witnesses in the case. In addition, the prehearing conference is intended to establish a timeline for the presentation of the case. The hearing examiner shall establish rules for the conduct of prehearing conferences.

Any party who does not attend the prehearing conference, or anyone who becomes a party of record after notice of the prehearing conference has been sent to the parties, shall nevertheless be entitled to present testimony and evidence to the hearing examiner at the hearing. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.30.170 Report by department.

When an application or appeal has been set for public hearing, the department shall coordinate and assemble the reviews of other departments and governmental agencies having an interest in the application or appeal and shall prepare a report summarizing the factors involved and the department findings and recommendation or decision. At least 14 calendar days prior to the scheduled hearing, the report, and in the case of appeals any written appeal arguments submitted to the City, shall be filed with the hearing examiner. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.30.180 Notice.

Notice of the time and place of any hearing on an application or appeal before the hearing examiner pursuant to this chapter shall be mailed by first class mail at least 14 calendar days prior to the scheduled hearing date to all persons who commented on the application or requested notice of the hearing and all owners of record of property in an area within 1,000 feet of the site, although the area shall be expanded as necessary to send mailed notices to at least 20 different property owners. Included with the notice shall be the report by the City, and in the case of appeals any written appeal arguments submitted to the City. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.30.190 Rules and conduct of hearings.

The hearing examiner shall adopt rules for the conduct of hearings and for any mediation process consistent with this chapter. Such rules shall be published and available upon request to all interested parties. The hearing examiner shall have the power to issue summons and subpoena to compel the appearance of witnesses and production of documents and materials, to order discovery, to administer oaths, and to preserve order.

To avoid unnecessary delay and to promote efficiency of the hearing process, the hearing examiner shall limit testimony, including cross examination, to that which is relevant to the matter being heard, in light of City policies and regulations, and shall exclude evidence and cross examination that is irrelevant, cumulative or unduly repetitious. The hearing examiner may establish reasonable time limits for the presentation of direct oral testimony, cross examination and argument. Any written submittals will be admitted only when authorized by the hearing examiner under pertinent and promulgated administrative rules. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.30.200 Case management techniques.

In all matters heard by the hearing examiner, the hearing examiner shall use case management techniques to the extent reasonable including: limiting testimony and argument to relevant issues and to matters identified in the prehearing order (if applicable); prehearing identification and submission of exhibits (if applicable); stipulated testimony or facts; prehearing dispositive motions (if applicable); and other methods to promote efficiency and to avoid delay. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.30.210 Hearing examiner findings.

When the hearing examiner renders a decision or recommendation, he or she shall make and enter findings of fact and conclusions from the record which support the decision, and the findings and conclusions shall set forth and demonstrate the manner in which the decision or recommendation is consistent with, carries out and helps implement applicable State laws and regulations and the regulations, policies, objectives and goals of the comprehensive plan, subarea or neighborhood plans, the zoning code (KMC Title 18), the subdivision code (KMC Title 17), and other official laws, policies and objectives of the City, and that the recommendation or decision will not be unreasonably incompatible with or detrimental to affected properties and the general public. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.30.220 Additional hearing examiner findings – Reclassifications and shoreline environment redesignations.

When the hearing examiner issues a recommendation regarding an application for a reclassification of property or for a shoreline environment redesignation, the recommendation shall include additional findings that support the conclusion that at least one of the following circumstances applies:

A. An adopted subarea plan or area zoning specifies that the property shall be subsequently considered through an individual reclassification application;

B. Where a subarea plan has been adopted but subsequent area zoning has not been adopted, that the proposed reclassification or shoreline redesignation is consistent with the adopted subarea plan; or

C. The applicant has demonstrated with substantial evidence that:

1. Since the last previous area zoning or shoreline environment designation of the subject property, authorized public improvements, permitted private development or other conditions or circumstances affecting the subject property have undergone substantial and material change not anticipated or contemplated in the subarea plan or area zoning;

2. The impacts from the changed conditions or circumstances affect the subject property in a manner and to a degree different than other properties in the vicinity such that area rezoning or redesignation is not appropriate. For the purposes of this subsection, “changed conditions or circumstances” does not include actions taken by the current or former property owners to facilitate a more intense development of the property including but not limited to changing tax limitations, adjusting property lines, extending services, or changing property ownership;

3. For proposals to increase residential density, that the proposal meets the criteria in the comprehensive plan; and

4. The requested reclassification or redesignation is in the public interest. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.30.230 Additional hearing examiner findings – Preliminary subdivisions.

When the hearing examiner makes a decision regarding an application for a proposed preliminary subdivision, the decision shall include additional findings as to whether:

A. Appropriate provisions are made for the public health, safety, and general welfare and for such open spaces, drainage ways, streets or roads, alleys, other public ways, transit stops, potable water supplies, sanitary wastes, parks and recreation, playgrounds, schools and school grounds and all other relevant facts, including sidewalks and other planning features that assure safe walking conditions for students who only walk to and from school; and

B. The public use and interest will be served by the platting of such subdivision and dedication. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.30.240 Additional hearing examiner findings – Master plans, site plan reviews, and special uses.

When the hearing examiner makes a recommendation or decision regarding an application for a proposed master plan, site plan review or special use, the recommendation or decision shall include additional findings as to whether the proposal complies with the criteria in KMC 18.105.050(A), 18.115.050 and/or 18.120.040(B). [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.30.250 Written decisions – Appeals.

A. The hearing examiner’s written decision on an appeal shall be transmitted to all parties of record.

B. Decisions of the hearing examiner in cases identified in KMC 19.30.040 may be appealed to the King County superior court by an aggrieved party by filing a notice of appeal in accordance with the Land Use Petition Act. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.30.260 Voluntary mediation.

As to any appeal pursuant to this chapter which is or could become the subject of a public hearing, the department or the hearing examiner may at their own discretion or at the request of the applicant or any person with standing to the appeal, at any state of the proceedings on the appeal, initiate a mediation process to resolve disputes as to such appeal. The mediation process shall be voluntarily agreed to by all participants to the hearing process, and conducted by an independent impartial mediator who shall not be a City employee or any person who will have any role in making any recommendation or decision on the appeal. The mediation shall be conducted in accordance with rules of mediation prepared by the hearing examiner. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Chapter 19.35 ENVIRONMENTAL PROCEDURES

Sections:

19.35.010    User guide.

19.35.020    Definitions and abbreviations.

19.35.030    Lead agency.

19.35.040    Responsible official.

19.35.050    General requirements.

19.35.060    Categorical exemptions.

19.35.070    Substantive authority.

19.35.080    Threshold determinations.

19.35.090    Environmental impact statements and other environmental documents.

19.35.100    Comments and public notice.

19.35.110    Use of existing environmental documents.

19.35.120    Use of environmental documents.

19.35.130    SEPA/GMA integration.

19.35.140    Planned actions.

19.35.150    Responsibility as consulted agency.

19.35.160    Appeals.

19.35.170    Fees.

19.35.180    Forms.


19.35.010 User guide.

This chapter contains the City’s laws that implement the State Environmental Policy Act (Chapter 43.21C RCW). This chapter contains several references to Chapter 197-11 WAC, which also implements the State Environmental Policy Act. Subsections of this chapter may reference sections of Chapter 197-11 WAC that are adopted by reference. These WAC sections, as well as Chapter 43.21C RCW, should be consulted for complete information regarding SEPA. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.35.020 Definitions and abbreviations.

A. The City adopts by reference the following sections of the WAC which contain information on the usage and definition of terms under SEPA:

197-11-040    Definitions;

197-11-220    SEPA/GMA definitions;

197-11-700    Definitions;

197-11-702    Act;

197-11-704    Action;

197-11-706    Addendum;

197-11-708    Adoption;

197-11-710    Affected tribe;

197-11-712    Affecting;

197-11-714    Agency;

197-11-716    Applicant;

197-11-718    Built environment;

197-11-720    Categorical exemption;

197-11-721    Closed record appeal;

197-11-722    Consolidated appeal;

197-11-724    Consulted agency;

197-11-726    Cost-benefit analysis;

197-11-728    County/city;

197-11-730    Decision maker;

197-11-732    Department;

197-11-734    Determination of nonsignificance (DNS);

197-11-736    Determination of significance (DS);

197-11-738    EIS;

197-11-740    Environment;

197-11-742    Environmental checklist;

197-11-744    Environmental document;

197-11-746    Environmental review;

197-11-750    Expanded scoping;

197-11-752    Impacts;

197-11-754    Incorporation by reference;

197-11-756    Lands covered by water;

197-11-758    Lead agency;

197-11-760    License;

197-11-762    Local agency;

197-11-764    Major action;

197-11-766    Mitigated DNS;

197-11-768    Mitigation;

197-11-770    Natural environment;

197-11-772    NEPA;

197-11-774    Nonproject;

197-11-775    Open record hearing;

197-11-776    Phased review;

197-11-778    Preparation;

197-11-780    Private project;

197-11-782    Probable;

197-11-784    Proposal;

197-11-786    Reasonable alternative;

197-11-788    Responsible official;

197-11-790    SEPA;

197-11-792    Scope;

197-11-793    Scoping;

197-11-794    Significant;

197-11-796    State agency;

197-11-797    Threshold determination;

197-11-799    Underlying governmental action.

B. The following abbreviations are used in this chapter:

1. SEPA – State Environmental Policy Act;

2. DNS – Determination of nonsignificance;

3. DOE – Washington State Department of Ecology;

4. DS – Determination of significance;

5. EIS – Environmental impact statement. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.35.030 Lead agency.

The procedures and standards regarding lead agency responsibility contained in the following sections of the WAC are adopted:

197-11-050    Lead agency;

197-11-900    Purpose of this part;

197-11-922    Lead agency rules;

197-11-924    Determining lead agency;

197-11-926    Lead agency for governmental proposals;

197-11-928    Lead agency for public and private proposals;

197-11-930    Lead agency for private projects with one agency with jurisdiction;

197-11-932    Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from more than one agency, when one of the agencies is a county/city;

197-11-934    Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from a local agency, not a county/city; and one or more state agencies;

197-11-936    Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from more than one state agency;

197-11-938    Lead agencies for specific proposals;

197-11-940    Transfer lead agency status to a state agency;

197-11-942    Agreements on lead agency status;

197-11-944    Agreements on division of lead agency duties;

197-11-946    DOE resolution of lead agency disputes;

197-11-948    Assumption of lead agency status.

[Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.35.040 Responsible official.

For all proposals for which the City is the lead agency, the responsible official shall be the city manager. For these proposals, the responsible official shall make the threshold determination, supervise scoping and preparation of any required EIS, and perform any other functions assigned to the “lead agency” or “responsible official” by this chapter. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.35.050 General requirements.

The procedures and standards regarding the general requirements that apply to the SEPA process are adopted:

197-11-055    Timing of the SEPA process;

197-11-060    Content of environmental review;

197-11-070    Limitations on action during SEPA process;

197-11-080    Incomplete or unavailable information;

197-11-090    Supporting documents;

197-11-100    Information required of applicants;

197-11-158    GMA project review – Reliance on existing plans, laws and regulations;

197-11-238    Monitoring;

197-11-300    Purpose of this part;

197-11-650    Purpose of this part;

197-11-655    Implementation;

197-11-900    Purpose of this part;

197-11-902    Agency SEPA policies;

197-11-904    Agency SEPA procedures;

197-11-906    Content and consistency of agency procedures;

197-11-910    Designation of responsible official;

197-11-912    Procedures of consulted agencies;

197-11-916    Application to ongoing actions;

197-11-920    Agencies with environmental expertise.

A. The optional provision of WAC 197-11-060(3)(c) is adopted.

B. Under WAC 197-11-100, the applicant shall prepare the initial environmental checklist. The department shall make a reasonable effort to verify the information in the environmental checklist and shall have the authority to determine the final content of the environmental checklist.

C. The city manager may set reasonable deadlines for the submittal of information, studies, or documents necessary for, or subsequent to, threshold determinations. Failure to meet such deadlines shall cause the application to be deemed withdrawn, and plans or other data previously submitted for review may be returned to the applicant together with any unexpended portion of the application review fees. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.35.060 Categorical exemptions.

The City adopts by reference the following sections of the WAC which contain information on categorical exemptions:

197-11-305    Categorical exemptions;

197-11-800    Categorical exemptions;

197-11-880    Emergencies;

197-11-890    Petitioning DOE to change exemptions;

197-11-908    Critical areas.

A. The following exempt threshold levels are hereby established pursuant to WAC 197-11-800(1)(c) except as provided in WAC 197-11-305 and 197-11-800(1)(a):

1. The construction or location of any residential structures of 20 or fewer dwelling units;

2. The construction of a barn, loafing shed, farm equipment storage building, produce storage or packing structure, or similar agricultural structure, covering 30,000 square feet and to be used only by the property owner or his or her agent in the conduct of farming the property. This exemption shall not apply to feed lots;

3. The construction of an office, school, commercial, recreational, service or storage building with 12,000 square feet of gross floor area, and with associated parking facilities designed for 40 automobiles;

4. The construction of a parking lot designed for 40 automobiles;

5. Any fill or excavation of 500 cubic yards throughout the total lifetime of the fill or excavation and any fill or excavation classified as a Class I, II, or III forest practice under RCW 76.09.050 or regulation thereunder.

B. The following categorical exemptions do not apply in frequently flooded areas (flood hazard areas) pursuant to WAC 197-11-908:

1. WAC 197-11-800(1);

2. WAC 197-11-800(2)(a), (b), (c), (d), and (g);

3. WAC 197-11-800(2)(e), except that for residential structures, addition or modification of floor area above the ground floor that does not increase the ground floor area shall continue to be exempt; provided, that the cost of the addition or modification does not exceed 50 percent of the market value of the existing structure;

4. WAC 197-11-800(6)(a);

5. WAC 197-11-800(13)(c);

6. WAC 197-11-800(23)(a), (b), (c), (d), and (g), except that repair and maintenance that does not change the action from an exempt class shall continue to be exempt; and

7. WAC 197-11-800(24)(e) and (g).

C. The determination of whether a proposal is categorically exempt shall be made by the department. [Ord. 12-0337 § 1; Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.35.070 Substantive authority.

The following section of the WAC regarding substantive authority and mitigation is adopted:

197-11-660    Substantive authority and mitigation.

A. For the purposes of RCW 43.21C.060 and WAC 197-11-660(a), the following policies, plans, rules and regulations, and all amendments thereto, are designated as potential bases for the exercise of the City’s substantive authority under SEPA, subject to the provisions of RCW 43.21C.240 and subsection B of this section:

1. The policies of the State Environmental Policy Act, RCW 43.21C.020;

2. The City of Kenmore comprehensive plan, its addenda, and revisions and neighborhood and subarea plans;

3. Surface water management plans;

4. The City of Kenmore grading regulations, Chapter 15.25 KMC;

5. The City of Kenmore land division regulations, KMC Title 17;

6. The City of Kenmore zoning code, KMC Title 18;

7. The City of Kenmore landmarks preservation code, Chapter 2.20 KMC;

8. The City of Kenmore noise regulations, Chapter 8.05 KMC;

9. The City of Kenmore shoreline management and flood hazard codes, KMC Title 16;

10. The City of Kenmore surface water runoff policy, Chapter 13.35 KMC;

11. The City of Kenmore water quality standards, Chapter 13.45 KMC; 

12. The City of Kenmore street regulations, KMC Title 12.

B. Substantive SEPA authority to condition or deny new development proposals or other actions shall be used only in cases where specific adverse environmental impacts are not addressed by regulations as set forth above or unusual circumstances exist. In cases where the City has adopted regulations to systematically avoid or mitigate adverse impacts, those standards and regulations will normally constitute adequate mitigation of the impacts of new development. Unusual circumstances related to a site or to a proposal, as well as environmental impacts not mitigated by the regulations, will be subject to site-specific or project-specific SEPA mitigation.

C. Any decision to deny or approve with conditions pursuant to RCW 43.21C.060 shall be contained in a responsible official’s decision document. The written decision shall contain facts and conclusions based on the proposal’s specific adverse environmental impacts as identified in an environmental checklist, EIS, threshold determination, other environmental document including a department staff report and recommendation to a decisionmaker, or findings made pursuant to a public hearing authorized or required by law or ordinance. The decision document shall state the specific plan, policy or regulation which supports the SEPA decision and, if mitigation beyond existing development regulations is required, the specific adverse environmental impacts and the reasons why additional mitigation is needed to comply with SEPA.

D. This chapter shall not be construed as a limitation on the authority of the City to approve, deny or condition a proposal for reasons based upon other statutes, ordinances or regulations. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.35.080 Threshold determinations.

The City adopts by reference the following sections of the WAC which contain related information:

197-11-310    Threshold determination required;

197-11-315    Environmental checklist;

197-11-330    Threshold determination process;

197-11-335    Additional information;

197-11-340    Determination of nonsignificance (DNS);

197-11-350    Mitigated DNS;

197-11-360    Determination of significance (DS)/initiation of scoping;

197-11-390    Effect of threshold determination;

197-11-660    Substantive authority and mitigation.

The mitigated DNS provision of WAC 197-11-350 shall be enforced as follows:

A. If the department issues a mitigated DNS, conditions requiring compliance with the mitigation measures which were specified in the application and environmental checklist shall be deemed conditions of any decision or recommendation of approval of the action.

B. If at any time the proposed mitigation measures are withdrawn or substantially changed, the responsible official shall review the threshold determination and, if necessary, may withdraw the mitigated DNS and issue a DS. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.35.090 Environmental impact statements and other environmental documents.

The following sections of the WAC related to procedures and standards for preparation of environmental impact statements and other environmental documents are adopted:

197-11-400    Purpose of EIS;

197-11-402    General requirements;

197-11-405    EIS types;

197-11-406    EIS timing;

197-11-408    Scoping;

197-11-410    Expanded scoping;

197-11-420    EIS preparation;

197-11-425    Style and size;

197-11-430    Format;

197-11-435    Cover letter or memo;

197-11-440    EIS contents;

197-11-442    Contents of EIS on nonproject proposals;

197-11-443    EIS contents when prior nonproject EIS;

197-11-444    Elements of the environment;

197-11-448    Relationship of EIS to other considerations;

197-11-450    Cost-benefit analysis;

197-11-455    Issuance of DEIS;

197-11-460    Issuance of FEIS.

A. Pursuant to WAC 197-11-408(2)(a), all comments on determinations of significance and scoping notices shall be in writing, except where a public meeting on EIS scoping occurs pursuant to WAC 197-11-410(1)(b).

B. Pursuant to WAC 197-11-420, 197-11-620, and 197-11-625, the department shall be responsible for preparation and content of EISs and other environmental documents. The department shall contract with consultants as necessary for the preparation of environmental documents. The department may consider the opinion of the applicant regarding the qualifications of the consultant but the department shall retain sole authority for selecting persons or firms to author, co-author, provide special services or otherwise participate in the preparation of required environmental documents.

C. Consultants or subconsultants selected by the City to prepare environmental documents for a private development proposal shall not: act as agents for the applicant in preparation or acquisition of associated underlying permits; have a financial interest in the proposal for which the environmental document is being prepared; perform any work or provide any services for the applicant in connection with or related to the proposal.

D. The department may establish and maintain one or more lists of qualified consultants who are eligible to receive contracts for preparation of environmental documents. Separate lists may be maintained to reflect specialized qualifications or expertise. When the department requires consultant services to prepare environmental documents, the department shall select a consultant and negotiate a contract for such services. 

E. All costs of preparing the environment document shall be borne by the applicant.

F. In the event an applicant decides to suspend or abandon the project, the applicant must provide formal written notice to the department and consultant. The applicant shall continue to be responsible for all monies expended by the City or consultants to the point of receipt of notification to suspend or abandon, or other obligations or penalties under the terms of any contract let for preparation of the environmental documents.

G. The department shall only publish an environmental impact statement (EIS) when it believes that the EIS adequately discloses: the significant direct, indirect, and cumulative adverse impacts of the proposal and its alternatives; mitigation measures proposed and committed to by the applicant, and their effectiveness in significantly mitigating impacts; mitigation measures that could be implemented or required; and unavoidable significant adverse impacts. Unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant, a final environmental impact statement shall be issued by the department within 270 calendar days following the issuance of a DS for the proposal, except for public projects and nonproject actions, unless the department determines at the time of issuance of the DS that a longer time period will be required because of the extraordinary size of the proposal or the scope of the environmental impacts resulting therefrom; provided, that the additional time shall not exceed 90 calendar days unless agreed to by the applicant.

H. The following periods shall be excluded from the 270-day time period for issuing a final environmental impact statement:

1. Any time period during which the applicant has failed to pay required environmental review fees to the department;

2. Any period of time during which the applicant has been requested to provide additional information required for preparation of the environmental impact statement; and

3. Any period of time during which the applicant has not authorized the department to proceed with preparation of the environmental impact statement. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.35.100 Comments and public notice.

This section contains rules for commenting on and responding to environmental documents, including rules for public notices and hearings. The City adopts by reference the following related sections of the WAC:

197-11-355    Optional DNS process;

197-11-500    Purpose of this part;

197-11-502    Inviting comment;

197-11-504    Availability and cost of environmental documents;

197-11-508    SEPA register;

197-11-510    Public notice;

197-11-535    Public hearings and meetings;

197-11-545    Effect of no comment;

197-11-550    Specificity of comments;

197-11-560    FEIS response to comments;

197-11-570    Consultant agency costs to assist lead agency.

A. A public comment period for a proposed DNS is required pursuant to WAC 197-11-502 when the proposed action involves: (i) another agency with jurisdiction; (ii) demolition of any structure or facility not exempted by WAC 197-11-800(2)(f) or 197-11-880; (iii) issuance of clearing or grading permits not exempted in Part Nine of the SEPA rules; (iv) a DNS under WAC 197-11-350(2), (3) or 197-11-360(4); or (v) a GMA action. For these projects, the optional DNS process may be used to combine the SEPA comment period with the 21-day notice of application comment period, if any, for the underlying permit. If a notice of application is not required for the underlying permit, the 14-day SEPA comment period shall follow issuance of the DNS and shall be concluded prior to the decision on the underlying action.

B. Publication of notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the proposal is located also shall be required for all nonproject actions and for all other proposals that are subject to the provisions of this chapter but are not classified as land use decisions in this title.

C. The responsible official may require further notice if deemed necessary to provide adequate public notice of a pending action. Failure to require further or alternative notice shall not be a violation of any notice procedure. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.35.110 Use of existing environmental documents.

The following procedures and standards of the WAC are adopted regarding use of existing environmental documents: 

197-11-600    When to use existing environmental documents;

197-11-610    Use of NEPA documents;

197-11-620    Supplemental environmental impact statement – Procedures;

197-11-625    Addenda procedures;

197-11-630    Adoption procedures;

197-11-635    Incorporation by reference procedures;

197-11-640    Combining documents.

[Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.35.120 Use of environmental documents.

For nonexempt proposals, the DNS or final EIS and SEIS for the proposal shall accompany the City’s staff recommendation to the appropriate decisionmaker. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.35.130 SEPA/GMA integration.

The following procedures and standards of the WAC regarding the timing and content of environmental review are hereby adopted: 

197-11-210    SEPA/GMA integration;

197-11-228    Overall SEPA/GMA integration procedures;

197-11-230    Timing of an integrated SEPA/GMA process;

197-11-232    SEPA/GMA integration procedures for preliminary planning, environmental analysis, and expanded scoping;

197-11-235    Documents.

[Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.35.140 Planned actions.

The following procedures and standards of the WAC are adopted regarding the designation of planned actions: 

197-11-164    Planned actions – Definition and criteria;

197-11-168    Ordinances or resolutions designating planned actions – Procedures for adoption;

197-11-172    Planned actions – Project review.

[Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.35.150 Responsibility as consulted agency.

All requests from other agencies that the City consult on threshold investigations, the scope process, EISs or other environmental documents shall be submitted to the department. The department shall be responsible for compiling and transmitting the City’s response to such requests for consultation. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.35.160 Appeals.

The following procedures and standards of the WAC regarding appeals are hereby adopted: 

197-11-680    Appeals.

A. Appeals of threshold determinations or the adequacy of a final EIS are conducted by the hearing examiner pursuant to the provisions of KMC 19.30.070, subject to the following:

1. Only one appeal of each threshold determination shall be allowed on a proposal.

2. As provided in RCW 43.21C.075(3)(d), the decision of the responsible official shall be entitled to substantial weight.

3. For Type 2 decisions, an administrative SEPA appeal hearing shall be consolidated in all cases with an administrative appeal hearing, if any, on the underlying proposal. For Type 3 and 4 decisions, an administrative SEPA appeal hearing shall be consolidated with the open record hearing on the underlying action.

B. An appeal of a threshold determination shall be filed with the City within 14 calendar days of the date the determination is issued by the responsible official, unless a public comment period under WAC 197-11-340(2) is provided or the optional DNS process is used in which case the appeal period is 21 calendar days.

C. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections A and B of this section, the department may adopt procedures under which an administrative appeal shall not be provided if the city manager finds that consideration of an appeal would be likely to cause the department to violate a compliance, enforcement or other specific mandatory order or specific legal obligation. The city manager’s determination shall be included in the notice of the SEPA determination, and the city manager shall provide a written summary upon which the determination is based within five days of receiving a written request. Because there would be no administrative appeal in such situations, review may be sought before a court of competent jurisdiction under RCW 43.21C.075 and applicable regulations, in connection with an appeal of the underlying governmental action.

D. There is no administrative appeal of a DNS, MDNS, DS or EIS adequacy associated with a Type 1 decision or a Type 5 or other legislative decision. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.35.170 Fees.

The City shall require fees as set forth in KMC Title 20. [Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


19.35.180 Forms.

The City adopts by reference the following sections of the WAC which contain information on forms:

197-11-960    Environmental checklist;

197-11-965    Adoption notice;

197-11-970    Determination of nonsignificance (DNS);

197-11-980    Determination of significance and scoping notice (DS);

197-11-985    Notice of assumption of lead agency status;

197-11-990    Notice of action.

[Ord. 11-0329 § 3 (Exh. 1).]


Title 20 DEVELOPMENT PERMITS

Chapters:

20.05    Purpose – General Provisions

20.10    Definitions

20.15    Building Permit

20.20    Grading Permit

20.25    Shoreline Management Permits

20.30    Special Review

20.35    Subdivision Permit

20.40    Uniform Fire Code Permit

20.45    Zoning and Land Use Permit

20.47    Transportation, Park and School Impact Fees

20.50    Repealed

20.55    Master Plan Development Permit Fees

20.60    Department of Natural Resources Fees

20.65    Right-of-Way Use Permits


Chapter 20.05 PURPOSE – GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

20.05.010    Purpose.

20.05.020    Relationship to comprehensive plan and Growth Management Act.

20.05.030    General provisions.

20.05.040    Late penalty.

20.05.050    Fee waivers.

20.05.060    Fee assessment.

20.05.070    Refunds.

20.05.080    Code enforcement fees.

20.05.090    Financial guarantees fee.

20.05.100    Overtime fees.

20.05.110    General research.

20.05.120    Contract fees.

20.05.130    Preapplication fees.

20.05.140    Applications processed pursuant to interlocal agreement with county.


20.05.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this title is to prescribe equitable fees and fee collection for all development and environmental review services provided by the department of community development. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.02.010).]


20.05.020 Relationship to comprehensive plan and Growth Management Act.

This title is hereby enacted to be consistent and implement the comprehensive plan in accordance with Chapter 36.70A RCW. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.02.015).]


20.05.030 General provisions.

This chapter deals with provisions general to the administration of this title and includes late penalties, fee waivers, fee assessments, refunds, code enforcement fees, overtime fees, general research, and financial guarantees. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.02.020).]


20.05.040 Late penalty.

All invoiced fees shall be due and payable on or before the thirtieth day after receipt of an invoice. A late penalty payment equal to one and one-half percent of the delinquent unpaid balance, compounded monthly, shall be assessed on the delinquent unpaid balance. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.02.030).]


20.05.050 Fee waivers.

The director shall have the discretion to waive all or a portion of the development review fees administered by the department and required pursuant to this title; provided, the waiver is warranted in the director’s judgment or building permit fees are assessed to replace, repair, abate or demolish a structure due to property damage caused by a natural disaster. Additional fee reduction provisions may be specified elsewhere in this title. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.02.040).]


20.05.060 Fee assessment.

Unless otherwise required by this title, development permit and environmental review fees shall be assessed at the fee rate in effect at the time the fee is collected. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.02.050).]


20.05.070 Refunds.

No refund shall be made for any service already rendered. When requested due to a clerical error on the part of the City, a full refund may be made. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.02.060).]


20.05.080 Code enforcement fees.

A fee assessed at a rate imposed by the City by resolution shall be charged for department staff time associated with code enforcement actions on all permits and reviews covered by this title. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.02.070).]


20.05.090 Financial guarantees fee.

A fee assessed at a rate imposed by the City by resolution shall be charged for department staff time associated with all work done in conjunction with the setting, intake, monitoring, inspection, release and enforcement of financial guarantees for development permits. A minimum of one hour’s fee shall be charged for intake or release of any guarantee. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.02.080).]


20.05.100 Overtime fees.

The hourly fee for work requested by an applicant to be done on overtime shall be at a rate imposed by the City by resolution, at minimum increments of one-half hour. The overtime charge shall be in addition to other permit fees established by this code. The minimum fee for each overtime request be shall at a rate imposed by the City by resolution. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.02.090).]


20.05.110 General research.

An hourly general research fee shall be charged for all research performed outside the context of a pending application review. Such fees shall be paid by the party requesting the research at a rate imposed by the City by resolution. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.02.100).]


20.05.120 Contract fees.

An applicant may elect to have a review, inspection, or permit approval completed by a department approved and hired contractor. For reviews, inspections, and permit approvals completed by a department approved contractor, the department is authorized to charge the applicant the contract amount in addition to the required review, inspection, or permit fee. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.02.110).]


20.05.130 Preapplication fees.

A preapplication fee imposed by the City by resolution shall be charged at the time of scheduling a preapplication meeting for a proposed project. Based on information from that meeting, and from other applicable sources, City staff shall estimate any additional preapplication costs associated with the project and shall require the prospective applicant to deposit that amount with the City prior to any further City action on the project. Until such funds are deposited, staff shall cease all work on the project. If the City exhausts the amount deposited by the prospective applicant, staff shall make a further estimate of costs and shall cease all work on the project until such funds are deposited with the City. All funds deposited with the City that are not expended in the course of the preapplication process shall be returned to the prospective applicant upon submittal of a complete application or notice that the prospective applicant chooses not to proceed with the project. [Ord. 02-139 § 1; Ord. 01-0127 § 1.]


20.05.140 Applications processed pursuant to interlocal agreement with county.

King County Ordinance No. 13332, attached to the ordinance codified in this section and incorporated in full by reference, is hereby adopted as the interim development permit fees and interim financial guarantees for the City of Kenmore, for any building permit or land use permit application filed with and processed pursuant to interlocal agreement by King County on Kenmore’s behalf. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1.]


Chapter 20.10 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

20.10.010    Building official.

20.10.020    Department.

20.10.030    Development permits.

20.10.040    Director.

20.10.050    Impact fee.

20.10.060    Environmental review.

20.10.070    Permit fee.

20.10.080    Valuation.


20.10.010 Building official.

“Building official” means the director of the department of community development or the director’s designee. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.04.003).]


20.10.020 Department.

“Department” means the department of community development. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.04.005).]


20.10.030 Development permits.

“Development permits” mean all permits, reviews, and approvals administered by the department of community development including, but not limited to, right-of-way use permits, grading permits, building permits, Uniform Fire Code permits, subdivisions, short subdivisions, binding site plans, planned unit developments, zoning permits, master plan development permits, current use permits, boundary line adjustments, and environmental review and shoreline permits. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.04.010).]


20.10.040 Director.

“Director” means the director of the department of community development or his or her designee. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.04.015).]


20.10.050 Impact fee.

“Impact fee” means a payment of money authorized by State law and City ordinance to be imposed upon development as a condition of development approval to pay for public facilities needed to serve new growth and development. Impact fees include but are not limited to roads mitigation payment fees and school impact fees. “Impact fees” do not include fees imposed to cover the costs of processing applications, inspecting and reviewing plans or other information required to be submitted for purpose of evaluation of an application, or inspecting or monitoring development activity. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.04.025).]


20.10.060 Environmental review.

“Environmental review” means all permits, reviews, and approvals administered pursuant to Chapter 19.35 KMC. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.04.028).]


20.10.070 Permit fee.

“Permit fee” means a payment of money imposed upon development as a condition of application for or approval of development to cover the costs of processing applications, inspecting and reviewing plans or other information required to be submitted for purpose of evaluation of an application, or inspecting or monitoring development activity. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.04.040).]


20.10.080 Valuation.

“Valuation” means the determination of value made by the building official. In determining the applicable fee based on valuation, total valuation shall be determined based on current nationally recognized valuation tables, such as R.S. Means cost data publications, Dodge cost data publications or the current valuation data published by the International Conference of Building Officials. In determining the valuation for permit and plan review fees, the valuation includes the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued, including all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilation and air conditioning, elevators, fire systems and any other permanent fixtures. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.04.050).]


Chapter 20.15 BUILDING PERMIT

Sections

20.15.010    Building permit fee.

20.15.020    Building permit base fees.

20.15.030    Plan review and inspection fees.

20.15.040    Structural-mechanical review and inspection fees.

20.15.050    Fire protection plan review and inspection fees.

20.15.060    Site development fees, including commercial site development fees.

20.15.070    Site development – Construction inspection.

20.15.080    Building permit general fees.

20.15.090    Preapplication fees.


20.15.010 Building permit fee.

Fees shall be collected to compensate the department for the investigation, permit administration, plan review and inspection of building permit applications pursuant to the provisions of KMC Titles 15 and 18. Building permit fees shall be composed of five main elements: preapplication fees, base fees, plan review fees, inspection fees, and site development plan fees. 

A. Preapplication Fees. Preapplication fees shall compensate the department for preliminary review and evaluation of large commercial and multifamily projects and for advising the permit applicant prior to the submittal of a formal application for a building permit. Preapplication fees shall be collected at the time preapplication review services are rendered.

B. Base Fees. Base fees shall compensate the department for preliminary application screening, and the establishment and administration of the permit application file. Base fees shall be distinguished by group occupancy to reflect file administration complexity. Base fees shall be collected at the time of permit application or, in the case of plan revisions submitted prior to permit issuance, at the time of each revision submittal.

C. Plan Review Fees. Plan review fees shall compensate the department for the plan review necessary to determine compliance with the adopted uniform codes and other City regulations. Plan review fees shall be based on either the gross area of the proposed structure or, when determined applicable by the director, on the value of the structure, together with any “per item” or “per occurrence” fees for mechanical or fire protection plan review. Prior to issuance of the permit, the permit applicant shall pay any residual charges assessed for special reviews.

D. Inspection Fees. Inspection fees shall compensate the department for inspections necessary to determine compliance with the adopted uniform codes, other City regulations, and the approved plan. Inspection fees shall be based on the same method and components used to calculate plan review fees, and consist of the remaining portion of said fees after subtracting the plan review fees.

E. Site Development Plan Fees. Site development plan fees shall include commercial site development review and shall compensate the department for field investigation, plan review and post-approval inspection of the nonstructure portions of the building permit application, including review related to traffic, circulation, parking, drainage, landscaping and site plans. Site development plan fees for preliminary field investigation and plan review shall be collected at the time of permit application. Fees to cover post-approval inspections shall be collected at the time of the permit issuance and, if applicable, at 12-month intervals thereafter. The first year inspection fees shall be based on the City’s estimate of construction cost (as presented in bond quantities worksheet). Initial fees shall be based upon the construction bond amount (i.e., bond quantities worksheet amount), or if no bond is required, upon the City’s estimate of construction cost. Annual construction inspection fees shall be charged an hourly rate for the inspection of facilities after the first 12 months’ plan approval until final construction approval. Site development plan fees shall not be assessed against applications for group R-3 or M occupancies, where site related review is covered by the base, plan review and inspection fees. In no case shall site development fees related to residential drainage requirement review exceed the fee for the underlying permit. There shall be no inspection of a site without a valid building permit.

F. General Building Permit Fee Provisions. General building permit fees shall compensate the department for reviews and inspections associated with changes in use or occupancy, mobile homes, oversized buildings, condominium conversions, special plan reviews, preinspections, demolitions, billboard alterations or relocations, supplemental inspections, reinspections, certification of permit completion, Section 309s, priority reviews, and radon measurement testing. General fee provisions also address allowances for residential and commercial discounts, and fee permit extensions. The following general provisions shall apply to permit/review fees authorized by this chapter:

1. Work without a Permit. Whenever any work for which a building permit is required by this code has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, or has proceeded without obtaining necessary inspections; an investigation fee, in addition to the building permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the building permit required by this section. For the purposes of this section the building permit fee shall include base, plan review, and inspection fees. 

2. Revisions. Revisions submitted either prior or subsequent to permit issuance shall be charged an additional base fee to cover file updating plus any special plan review hourly fees deemed necessary to determine compliance with regulations and standards.

3. Extensions. Expiring building permits may be extended as set forth in Chapter 15.20 KMC upon payment of a permit extension fee at the rate in effect at the time of extension. Extension fees may be distinguished by both the group occupancy involved and the amount of review and inspection yet to be completed on the permit.

4. Residential and Commercial Permit Discounts. Residential permit fee discounts will be allowed for all group R-1, R-3 and M occupancies involving basic or repetitive residential plans, factory built housing, relocated residences with minimum repairs, and relocated residences with extensive repairs. Commercial permit fee discounts will be allowed for commercial coaches, portable schools, and relocated commercial buildings, and occupancies involving repetitive commercial plans.

5. General Research. An hourly general research fee shall be charged for all special research performed outside the context of pending application review. Such fees will be paid by the party requesting the special research or investigation.

6. Fees for typical inspection services, including but not limited to fire/flood damage, minimum housing, code compliance, billboard alteration or relocation site inspection, relocation of structures, demolition, reinspection and supplemental inspections shall be collected in addition to any typical structural or site development inspection fees and shall be paid at the time of occurrence. Separate permit review fees for mobile homes, condominium conversions and change of use or occupancy shall be added to the base fees set forth in this section and shall be collected at the time of application submittal.

7. Special Review Fees. In addition to the building permit fees set forth in this section, fees contained in Chapters 20.15 through 20.45 KMC may be applicable to individual building permit applications. Such fees include, but are not limited to, shoreline management, SEPA, right-of-way use, grading, or critical areas review fees.

8. Radon Measurement Devices and Testing Fee. An additional “per device” fee shall be charged for radon measurement devices and testing. Fees to cover the provision of radon measurement devices and testing shall be collected at the time of permit issuance and shall be charged at the rate in effect at the time of permit application; provided, that for permits issued prior to July 13, 1992, the fees shall be collected at the time of final inspection and shall be charged at the rate set forth in this chapter; and provided further, that for permit applications received prior to July 13, 1992, for which no permit is issued prior to July 13, 1992, the fees shall be collected at the time of permit issuance and shall be charged at the rate set forth in this chapter. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.08.010).]


20.15.020 Building permit base fees.

Building permit base fees shall be imposed by the City by resolution based on use or occupancy group. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.08.020).]


20.15.030 Plan review and inspection fees.

Plan review and inspection fees shall be imposed by the City by resolution based on:

A. Total valuation;

B. Gross area. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.08.030, 27.08.040).]


20.15.040 Structural-mechanical review and inspection fees.

The city council shall adopt the following fees by resolution:

A. Installation or relocation of each forced air or gravity-type furnace or burner, including ducts and vents attached to such appliance.

B. Installation or relocation of each heat pump with auxiliary heating (single or split system), including ductwork, or air conditioner with heating, including ductwork.

C. Installation or relocation of each air conditioner without heating, including ductwork.

D. Installation or relocation of each gas, oil or electric suspended heater, recessed wall heater or floor-mounted space heater, wall furnace, circulating heater.

E. Installation, relocation, or replacement of each solid fuel burning appliance or fireplace permit.

F. Repair, or alteration of, or addition to, each heating appliance, refrigeration unit, comfort cooling unit, absorption unit, or each comfort heating, cooling, absorption, or evaporative cooling system.

G. Installation or relocation of each boiler or compressor. (Additional permits for all commercial boiler and compressor installations shall be obtained from the State of Washington Department of Labor and Industries.)

H. Each air handling unit.

I. Installation or relocation of each evaporative cooler other than portable type.

J. Installation or relocation of each ventilation fan connected to:

1. A single duct (except group R-1 and R-3 occupancies).

2. Multiple inlets.

K. Installation or relocation of each hood which is served by mechanical exhaust, including the ducts for such hood (except group R-1 and R-3 occupancies).

L. Installation or relocation of each commercial or industrial type incinerator.

M. Installation or relation of each product-conveying ventilation system (Ref: Chapter 11, UMC), including collection/filter device, exhaust fan and ductwork.

N. Each appliance or piece of equipment or other work regulated by the Uniform Mechanical Code for which no other fee is listed in this section. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.08.050).]


20.15.050 Fire protection plan review and inspection fees.

The following fire protection plan review and inspection fees shall be imposed by the City by resolution:

A. Fire Alarm Systems.

1. One to four zones.

2. Each additional zone.

3. Each addressable panel.

4. Plus for each device.

B. Fire extinguishing systems (plus for each nozzle).

C. Automatic Sprinkler Systems.

1. Commercial – each riser (plus for each head or plug).

2. Residential – each riser (plus for each head or plug).

D. Standpipe Systems.

1. Class I.

2. Class II.

3. Class III.

4. Each outlet for Class I or II.

5. Fire pump.

E. Flammable/Combustible Liquids Storage Tanks.

1. Underground, first tank (plus for each additional tank).

2. Above-ground, each tank.

F. Hazardous Materials Storage Tanks.

1. Less than 500 gallons.

2. Five hundred to 1,199 gallons.

3. One thousand, two hundred gallons or more.

G. Liquefied Petroleum Tanks.

1. Less than 500 gallons.

2. Five hundred to 9,999 gallons.

3. Ten thousand gallons or more.

H. Gaseous Oxygen Systems.

1. Less than 6,000 cubic feet.

2. Six thousand to 11,999 cubic feet.

3. Twelve thousand cubic feet or more.

I. Nitrous oxide systems (plus each outlet).

J. Medical Gas Systems.

1. Gaseous system (plus each outlet).

2. Liquefied system (plus each outlet).

K. Hazardous Material Recycling Systems.

1. One hundred ten gallons or less per day capacity.

2. More than 110 gallons per day capacity.

L. Vapor Recovery Systems (Per Tank).

1. Phase I – tank truck and tank.

2. Phase II – vehicle fueled and tank.

M. Cryogenic tanks (each).

N. Flammable Liquid Devices.

1. Spray booths – updraft (each).

2. Dip tank (each).

3. Spray booths – downdraft (each).

4. Flow coaters (each).

5. Mixing/handling room.

O. Fiberglass Work Systems.

1. Spray or chopper booth.

2. Lay-up areas.

P. Organic peroxide storage facility.

Q. Explosives Storage Magazines.

1. Class I.

2. Class II.

R. Compressed natural gas systems (each).

S. Liquefied natural gas systems.

T. High piled storage racks.

U. Smoke removal systems.

V. High rise emergency evacuation plans.

W. Commercial candle-holding devices.

X. Computer rooms.

Y. Floor or layout plans required by the fire code for public assembly, special sales, outdoor storage of flammable liquids in drums or indoor storage of combustibles.

Z. Fire clearances when requested of the fire marshal including but not limited to the following:

1. State funding of school projects.

2. State or federal school, hospital, nursing home, rehabilitative facilities, or custodial facilities accreditation.

3. State licensing of mini-day care, day care, foster home, boarding home.

4. State liquor license.

5. State gambling license.

6. Special out of occupancy uses.

7. City house moving permits.

8. Fire clearance for City business license.

AA. Approval of carpet samples or decorative materials.

BB. Special inspections for occupancy determinations or change of use requirements.

CC. Requested preliminary inspections.

DD. Each retest or reinspection of a fire protection or hazardous materials system prior to acceptance of the system, issuance of a permit, or issuance of a certificate of occupancy (the first test or inspection will be made without charge).

EE. Witnessing tests of used underground flammable liquids storage tanks prior to installation.

FF. Investigating and processing leaking underground storage tanks or hazardous materials spills, and the subsequent containment and recovery of lost product (per hour).

GG. Underground piping to flammable or combustible liquid storage tanks.

HH. Removal or Abandonment of Commercial Underground Flammable or Combustible Liquid Storage Tanks.

1. First tank.

2. Each additional tank.

II. Witnessing tests of underground flammable or combustible liquid storage tanks for tank tightness.

JJ. Conducting fire flows tests or analysis.

KK. Fuel Tanks for Oil Burning Equipment.

1. Commercial.

2. Residential.

LL. Monitoring transmitters (plus each device).

MM. Sprinkler system supply mains (public main to sprinkler riser – each).

NN. Emergency or standby power systems.

OO. Plan review of construction fire protection system.

PP. Confidence testing of fire protection system.

QQ. High rise fire system review. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.08.060).]


20.15.060 Site development fees, including commercial site development fees.

The following site development fees shall be imposed by the City by resolution:

A. Parking.

1. New or additional spaces.

2. Alterations, change in use or increased area, with no additional spaces.

B. P-Suffix, M-P, and Other Required Site Plan Reviews.

1. Initial plan review.

2. Each additional review for compliance, including signs and tenant improvements.

C. Mobile home park and RV park plan review.

D. Landscape Plan Review.

1. Initial plan review.

2. Each plan revision review.

3. Request for modification requiring public notice.

E. Drainage and Circulation Review Fees.

1. Commercial drainage plan review.

2. Commercial traffic and circulation review.

a. On-site review only – no right-of-way improvements.

b. On-site and right-of-way improvements review.

c. Review for compliance with SEPA conditions.

3. Drainage plan only (agricultural).

4. Residential drainage requirement review – base fee.

a. Small site drainage review.

b. Targeted drainage reviews – per hour.

c. Full drainage review:

(1) Simple review.

(2) Complex review.

5. Revisions, resubmittals and research necessary for any site-specific requirements, after one.

F. Fire Protection Plan Review.

1.    a. Fire pump systems which are installed to meet provisions of Chapter 15.15 KMC.

b. Fee per hydrant.

2. Calculation of required fire flow or review or fire apparatus access roads for the following:

a. Commercial buildings.

b. Single-family residential buildings.

c. Short subdivisions – residential.

d. Short subdivisions – commercial.

e. Other development applications (including lot line adjustments).

3.    a. Review of water main extension.

b. Fee per hydrant.

4. Inspection of Residential Sprinkler Systems.

a. Per riser.

b. Plus per head.

5. Inspection of Commercial Fire Sprinkler Systems.

a. Per riser.

b. Plus per head. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.08.070).]


20.15.070 Site development – Construction inspection.

The following site development construction inspection fees shall be imposed by the City by resolution:

A. Construction inspection fee, per bond quantity worksheet amount.

B. Annual inspection, per hour.

C. Maintenance bond inspection.

D. Landscape installation inspection.

E. Landscape maintenance bond release inspection. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.08.080).]


20.15.080 Building permit general fees.

The following building permit general fees shall be imposed by the City by resolution:

A. Change in use or occupancy fee.

B. Mobile Homes.

1. Mobile home permit.

2. Temporary mobile home permit.

3. Temporary mobile home for hardship.

4. Noninsignia mobile home inspection.

C. Special review of oversized buildings.

D. Condominium Conversion Review Fee.

1. Project fee.

2. Per unit fee.

E. Special plan review, per hour.

F. Preinspection Fees.

1. Fire or flood damage.

2. Minimum housing or other code compliance.

3. Relocation of structures.

G. Demolition inspection fee.

H. Billboard alteration or relocation site review.

I. Supplemental Inspection Fee.

1. Hourly rate including travel time.

2. Plus rate per mile.

J. Reinspection Fee.

1. R-3 and M occupancy.

2. All other occupancies.

K. Certification of Permit Completion.

1. Temporary occupancy certificate, per building or tenant space.

2. Final occupancy certification when more than one building per permit, each additional building.

3. Final occupancy certification for individual condominiums or other portions of buildings, per unit.

4. Letter of completion for shell construction permits when more than one building per permit, each additional building.

L. Allowable residential and commercial discounts are granted for the permit categories listed below based on the whole permit amount calculated from the gross area and/or valuation tables.

1. Registered Plans and Basic Permits.

a. Registered plans for single-family, multifamily, and commercial plans.

b. Additional registered plans as variations to approved registered plans for single-family, multifamily and commercial plans.

c. Additional certified site copies, each.

d. Basic or repetitive residential or commercial permit.

2. Factory-built housing.

3. Relocated residence with minimum repairs.

4. Relocated residence with extensive repairs.

5. Commercial coaches, portable schools, and relocated commercial buildings.

M. Extension Fee.

1. Extensions for Final Inspection Only.

a. R-3 and M occupancy.

b. All other permits.

2. All Other Extensions.

a. R-3 and M occupancy.

b. Extension of temporary mobile home.

c. Extension of temporary hardship mobile home.

d. All other permits.

N. Section 309 Fee.

1. Base.

2. Hourly review and/or inspection.

O. Priority review by the special projects review unit.

P. Radon measurement devices and testing fee (per device). [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.08.090).]


20.15.090 Preapplication fees.

A preapplication fee shall be charged for all professional time spent by department personnel based on an applicant’s request for service, per hour, imposed by the city council by resolution. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 01-0127 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.08.100).]


Chapter 20.20 GRADING PERMIT

Sections:

20.20.010    Grading and clearing permit fees.

20.20.020    Preapplication fees.

20.20.030    Forest practice policy compliance fee.

20.20.040    Grading permit plan review fees.

20.20.050    Grading permit operation monitoring fees.

20.20.060    Grading permit general provisions.

20.20.070    Clearing fees.


20.20.010 Grading and clearing permit fees.

Fees shall be collected to compensate the department for preapplication review, the investigation, permit administration, plan review, and ongoing monitoring/inspection of grading, and clearing permit applications consistent with the provisions of Chapter 15.25 KMC. Grading and clearing permit fees shall be composed of three elements: preapplication review, plan review, and operation monitoring. 

A. Preapplication Fees. Preapplication fees shall compensate the department for preliminary review and evaluation of grading or clearing projects and for advising the permit applicant prior to the submittal of a formal application for a permit. Preapplication fees shall be collected at the time preapplication review services are rendered.

B. Plan Review Fees. Plan review fees shall compensate the department for the review of permit operating plans, including plans for drainage, erosion/sedimentation control, terrain alteration, traffic/circulation, clearing, and site rehabilitation. Plan review fees shall be based on the anticipated volume of materials and total area to be disturbed during the period of the permit. Initial plan review fees may be reduced for quarry/mining operations reviewed in conjunction with reclassification applications or unclassified use permits. Plan revision fees shall contain a base fee to cover the cost of file administration and an hourly fee to compensate for additional plan review and modification of permit approval conditions. Plan revisions may be initiated at any time during the period of the grading permit, either at the request of the applicant or as a result of operational modifications discovered during monitoring, but shall not alter the original approval period of the grading permit.

C. Operation Monitoring Fees. Operation monitoring fees shall be collected to cover the cost of inspecting active grading operations in order to determine compliance with permit approval conditions. “Active grading operations” include material deposition and removal areas, disturbed areas not yet rehabilitated, stockpiles, on-site processing areas, and other such working areas. Operation monitoring fees shall cover inspections for a 12-month period and shall be collected at permit issuance and at each subsequent anniversary date throughout the effective period of the grading permit.

Operation monitoring fees shall be based on the volume of materials anticipated to be deposited or removed during the 12-month monitoring period. Monitoring fees based on area shall also be collected for all disturbed areas no rehabilitated during the previous monitoring period. Special monitoring and inspection functions, such as bond release inspections or reinspection of non-bonded actions, shall be calculated as set forth in KMC 20.20.040.

Fees for the monitoring and inspection of clearing shall be charged at an hourly rate.

D. Fee Reductions. Grading permit fees (plan review and operation monitoring) for projects entirely completed within one year or for permits reviewed in conjunction with other departmental administered permits may be reduced to reflect cost savings associated with the reduced workload.

E. Work Without a Permit. Whenever any work for which a grading or clearing permit is required by Chapter 15.25 KMC has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, an investigation fee, in addition to the grading permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the grading permit fee required by this section and set forth by the city council by resolution.

F. Additional Review Fees. In addition to the grading and clearing permit fees set forth in this section, fees contained in Chapters 20.15 through 20.45 KMC may be applicable to individual grading permit applications. Such fees include, but are not limited to, shoreline management, SEPA or critical areas review fees.

G. Forest Practice Policy Compliance. Fees shall be collected for administration and processing of requests for relief from development restrictions imposed pursuant to KMC 15.25.130. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.12.010).]


20.20.020 Preapplication fees.

A preapplication fee shall be charged for all professional time spent by department personnel, per hour, imposed by the city council by resolution. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.12.012).]


20.20.030 Forest practice policy compliance fee.

A forest practice policy compliance fee shall be charged for all professional time spent by department personnel, per hour, imposed by the city council by resolution. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.12.014).]


20.20.040 Grading permit plan review fees.

The following grading permit plan review fees shall be imposed by the City by resolution:

A. The plan review fee, calculated by volume and disturbed area.

B. Plan revision fee, each occurrence, plus hourly rate. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.12.020).]


20.20.050 Grading permit operation monitoring fees.

The following grading permit operation monitoring fees shall be imposed by the City by resolution:

A. The operation monitoring fee, calculated by an amount for volume deposited or removed plus an amount per acre disturbed and not rehabilitated during the monitoring period.

B. Reclamation bond release inspection.

C. Reinspection of non-bonded actions. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.12.030).]


20.20.060 Grading permit general provisions.

The following grading permit general fees shall be imposed by the City by resolution:

A. Grading permit fee reduction for projects completed within one year.

B. Grading permit fee reduction for projects reviewed in conjunction with building permits, subdivisions, short subdivisions or planned unit developments.

C. Initial plan review fee reduction for projects reviewed within one year of unclassified use or Q-M reclassification approval.

D. Drainage plan review for a grading permit. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.12.040).]


20.20.070 Clearing fees.

The following clearing fees shall be imposed by the City by resolution:

A. Permit plan review.

B. Field inspections. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.12.050).]


Chapter 20.25 SHORELINE MANAGEMENT PERMITS

Sections:

20.25.010    Shoreline management permit fees.

20.25.020    Preapplication fees.

20.25.030    Shoreline fees.


20.25.010 Shoreline management permit fees.

Fees shall be collected to compensate the department for preapplication review and the review of shoreline management permits and approvals pursuant to the provisions of this code. Application fees shall compensate for intake and screening, field investigation, drainage review, development of administrative decision and conditions of approval, and administrative costs for file set-up and maintenance. Supplemental fees shall be collected to compensate for the additional review and file administration necessary for permit extensions, permit revisions and applications requiring public hearings. Supplemental inspection fees shall be collected for permit compliance inspections for approvals not subject to future building or grading permit issuance and inspection.

A. Preapplication Fees. Preapplication fees shall compensate the department for preliminary review and evaluation of all projects requiring shoreline management permits and for advising the permit applicant prior to the submittal of a formal application for a permit. Preapplication fees shall be collected at the time preapplication review services are rendered.

B. Shoreline Permit Fees. Substantial development permits, shoreline variances, shoreline conditional use permits, shoreline exemptions, and shoreline review of building permits or subdivision product permits shall either be a fixed fee or a variable fee based on the dollar value of proposed improvements. For joint use dock proposals, the substantial development and/or variance fees shall be limited to an amount equal to fees for two individual docks of combined equivalent area. Supplemental review fees for revisions, extensions and public hearings shall be based on a percentage of the original permit fee.

Shoreline redesignation fees shall be distinguished by the existing shoreline designation proposed for redesignation and shall consist of a fixed base, together with a variable amount based on the lineal frontage of shoreline proposed for redesignation.

C. Work Without a Permit. Whenever any work for which a shoreline permit is required by this code has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, and investigation fee, in addition to the shoreline permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the shoreline permit fee required by this title.

D. Additional Review Fees. In addition to fees set forth in this chapter, fees contained in Chapters 20.15 through 20.45 KMC may also be applicable to individual shoreline permits. Such fees include, but are not limited to, grading permits, building permits, SEPA review fees, or critical areas review fees. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.20.010).]


20.25.020 Preapplication fees.

A preapplication fee shall be charged for all professional time spent by department personnel based on an applicant’s request for services, per hour, imposed by the city council by resolution. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.20.015).]


20.25.030 Shoreline fees.

The following shoreline fees shall be imposed by the City by resolution:

A. Substantial Development Permit.

1. Fee based on total cost of proposed development.

2. Single-family joint-use dock.

B. Shoreline Conditional Use Permit.

1. Non-forest practices.

2. Forest practices.

C. Shoreline variances.

D. Shoreline redesignation, from natural, conservancy, urban or rural: base plus per shoreline lineal foot.

E. Shoreline review of other permits or approvals for conditions.

F. Shoreline exemption.

G. Supplemental Fees.

1. Request for an extension of a permit, calculated as a percent of the original permit.

2. Shoreline permit revision, calculated as a percent of the original permit.

3. Surcharge when public hearing required.

4. Permit Compliance Inspections.

a. Hourly rate (including travel time).

b. Plus per mile rate. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.20.020).]


Chapter 20.30 SPECIAL REVIEW

Sections:

20.30.010    Special review fees.

20.30.020    Preapplication fees.

20.30.030    Special review fees.


20.30.010 Special review fees.

Fees shall be collected to compensate the department for preapplication review, and special handling and review associated with any development permit set forth in this title. Special review fees include review pursuant to Chapter 19.35 KMC, Environmental Procedures; Chapter 18.55 KMC, Critical Areas; KMC 13.35.070, Engineering plans for the purposes of drainage review; fees to review any needed compliance monitoring; fees for written certification of code compliance or exemption; Endangered Species Act review and inspection fees; and processing fees for appeals to or from the zoning and subdivision examiner pursuant to Chapter 19.30 KMC.

A. Preapplication Fees. Preapplication fees shall compensate the department for preliminary review and evaluation of critical areas fees and for advising the permit applicant on environmental review prior to the submittal of a formal application for a permit. Preapplication review fees may be also be charged for review of permit applications required by other City agencies and for any requested services not associated with a permit application. Preapplication fees shall be hourly fees collected at the time preapplication review services are rendered.

B. City Environmental Procedures Fees. City environmental procedures (SEPA) fees shall be divided into two types:

1. Checklist fees to compensate for the copying, distributing, mailing and processing of the environmental checklist; and

2. Supplemental fees to compensate for review, processing, mailing and publication costs associated with the preparation of a determination of nonsignificance (DNS), a mitigated determination of nonsignificance (MDNS), a draft environmental impact statement (DEIS), a final environmental impact statement (FEIS), a supplemental environmental impact statement (SEIS) and any addenda associated with the above environmental documents.

The checklist fee shall be a base fee payable upon development permit application submittal, and an hourly fee. The hourly fee shall apply following six hours of staff review of the checklist. In no case, however, shall the checklist fee exceed the total fee for the underlying permit. Supplemental fees shall be based on an hourly charge for time spent by City employees in the review, preparation, supervision of preparation and distribution of a DNS, a MDNS, a DS, a DEIS, a FEIS or a SEIS. Supplemental fees shall be charged for the preparation of and consultation on staff reports, permit conditions and public hearing testimony after the publication of a DEIS, FEIS, SEIS, or MDNS on the underlying permit. No supplemental fees shall be charged for any review or work performed in response to an appeal of a threshold determination. Supplemental fees shall also include all costs, if any, for experts and consultants not employed by the county, and for texts, printing or other actual costs required for the preparation and distribution of the DNS, MDNS, DS, DEIS, FEIS or SEIS. In no case shall supplemental fees be charged for review of the completed DNS, MDNS, DS, DEIS, FEIS or SEIS by City officials part of the decision-making process or for existing studies or general information already in City files. Supplemental fees shall be collected at regular intervals as the preparation of the DNS, MDNS, DS, DEIS, FEIS or SEIS proceeds, provided a deposit shall be collected prior to commencement of DNS, MDNS, DEIS, FEIS or SEIS preparation to cover initial costs. Any unexpended balance shall be refunded.

C. Critical Area Fees. Critical area fees are distinguished by the type of development permit under review, and are differentiated by the complexity of the review involved. As such, critical area review fees for residential building permits, shoreline permits and individual short subdivision applications shall be distinguished from critical area review in conjunction with commercial building permits, grading permits, subdivisions, planned unit developments, reclassifications, variances, conditional use permits and right-of-way use permits.

1. Complex Critical Areas Review. Complex critical areas review involving site visits, comprehensive review of technical studies or the development of special conditions of approval shall be charged a higher review fee than projects requiring only basic critical areas review involving limited review of special studies, and the assignment of standard conditions of approval.

2. Basic Residential Permit Critical Areas Fees. Basic residential permit critical areas review fees may be reduced in those instances where multiple permit submittals can be reviewed during a single combined site visit. Residential building permit review fees shall be waived for permits filed subsequent to shoreline permits involving critical areas review.

3. Special Fees. Special fees may be charged for the department’s processing and review of critical areas variances, reasonable use exceptions, inspection and monitoring or utility exemptions.

4. Hourly Fees. Hourly fees may only be charged as noted in this section or if authorized by a section manager, and only after an applicant has been notified that hourly charges are being assessed.

D. All appeals to the zoning and subdivision examiner, or from decisions of the examiner, shall be charged a fixed fee to help defray the cost associated with appeal processing. Appeal fees shall be paid at the time of appeal submittal.

E. Departmental review of road vacation requests, road standard variances and drainage standard variances shall be charged a fixed fee to help defray the cost associated with these reviews. These review fees shall be paid at the time of submittal for the review. Hourly fees may be charged for those review types that vary in review time. These review fees shall be collected at the time services are rendered. If a deposit is required, any unexpended balance shall be refunded.

F. Master Drainage Plan Fees. Master drainage plan review fees shall be hourly, based on all staff time required at preplanning and scoping meetings and review and monitoring of the master drainage plans. Fees shall be collected at regular intervals as the review of the master drainage plan proceeds.

G. Compliance Review Fees. Review fees shall be based on an hourly fee to compensate for the review and analysis of monitoring results needed to determine compliance with approved plans and conditions and the implementation of a contingency plan or determination of additional mitigation, if necessary.

H. Endangered Species Act Review and Inspection Fees. Endangered Species Act (ESA) review and inspection fees shall be collected to cover the costs to the department of the enhanced processing, inspecting and reviewing of permit applications, plans and development activity that are necessary to better protect the salmonid species that is proposed to be listed under the ESA. The fees are assessed as a fixed rate, imposed by the city council by resolution. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.24.010).]


20.30.020 Preapplication fees.

A preapplication fee shall be charged for all professional time spent by department personnel based on an applicant’s request for services, per hour, imposed by the city council by resolution. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.24.015).]


20.30.030 Special review fees.

The following special review fees shall be imposed by the City by resolution:

A. SEPA Review.

1. Environmental checklist:

a. Base fee;

b. After six hours, per hour.

2. Supplemental DNS, MDNS, or DS review, per hour.

3. MDNS deposit.

4. EIS deposit – a percent of total estimated cost.

5. DEIS, FEIS, SEIS or addenda preparation and review costs – including scoping, writing, editing, publishing, mailing, distributing and contract administration:

a. All fixed and contract costs; and

b. Time costs – per hour.

6. Post MDNS, DEIS, FEIS or SEIS publication work preparing or consulting on staff reports, permit conditions or public hearing testimony per hour.

B. Critical Area Review.

1. Review of residential building permits, shoreline permits, individual short subdivision, boundary line adjustments, right-of-way use permits:

a. Basic review without site visit.

b. Basic review with site visit.

c. Complex review, minimum plus per hour.

2. Review of commercial building permits, grading permits, subdivisions, PUDs, reclassifications, variances, conditional use permits and unclassified use permits:

a. Basic review.

b. Complex review, minimum plus per hour.

3. Flood plain determination – certificate of     elevation, plus per hour.

4. Review of mitigation plan compliance – per hour

C. Appeals.

1. Appeals to the hearing examiner from decisions of the zoning adjustor or manager.

2. Appeals to the city council from recommendations of the hearing examiner.

D. Inspection and monitoring, per hour.

E. Departmental Review of Nondepartmental Permits.

1. Review of road vacation requests.

2. Review of road standard variances.

3. Review of drainage design adjustments:

a. Standard adjustment review, revisions and resubmittals, per hour.

b. Complex adjustment review, revisions and resubmittals, per hour.

c. Preapplication adjustment review, per hour, plus deposit.

d. Experimental design adjustment review, departmental portion only. 

e. Support of water and land resources division adjustment review and monitoring, per hour.

F. Review and monitoring of master drainage plans, per hour.

G. Preapplication review, per hour.

H. ESA Review and Inspections.

1. Commercial building permit, except schools, for each 3,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, of floor area.

2. Commercial nonbuilding permit, for each 3,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, of floor area.    

3. School building permit, for each 40,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, of total developed area including parking and play areas. 

4. Multifamily residential permit, for each building. 

5. Single-family residential permit, excluding mobile home, for each permit.

6. Final plat, for each lot.

7. Final short plat, for each lot.

8. Critical areas reasonable use or utility exception, pursuant to Chapter 18.55 KMC, for each permit.

9. Shoreline development permit, for each permit.

10. Clearing permit, for each permit.

11. Grading permit, for each acre or portion of acre disturbed or rehabilitated.

12. Time extension for clearing or grading permit, for each permit. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.24.020).]


Chapter 20.35 SUBDIVISION PERMIT

Sections:

20.35.010    Subdivision product permits.

20.35.020    Preapplication fees.

20.35.030    Subdivision – Preliminary application review fees.

20.35.040    Subdivision – Engineering plan review fees.

20.35.050    Subdivision – Construction permit fees.

20.35.060    Subdivision – Final approval fees.

20.35.070    Subdivision – Post final fees.


20.35.010 Subdivision product permits.

Fees shall be collected to compensate the department for reviewing subdivision, short subdivision, planned unit development, boundary line adjustments, and binding site plan applications (including commercial binding site plans) pursuant with the provisions of KMC Title 17. Such permit review fees shall be divided into six basic processing phases: preapplication review, preliminary application review, engineering plan review, construction inspection, final approval, and post-approval site maintenance.

A. Preapplication Fees. Preapplication fees shall compensate the department for preliminary review and evaluation of subdivisions or planned unit development projects and for advising the permit applicant prior to the submittal of a formal application for a permit. Preapplication fees shall be collected at the time preapplication review services are rendered.

B. Preliminary Application Review Fees. Preliminary application review fees shall compensate the division for application intake screening, field investigation, development of staff reports or conditions of approval, technical meeting and public hearing staffing, and administrative support for file set up/maintenance and public hearing notification. Preliminary application review fees generally cover review through preliminary decision and shall be collected at the time of application submittal. Supplemental fees include separate fees to compensate for re-evaluation of applications remanded prior to preliminary decision or for additional review required for critical areas or special drainage features. Additional fees shall also be charged for the review of revisions submitted after preliminary approval and not necessitating additional hearings, local service area boundary line adjustments, subdivision alterations and subdivision vacations.

Supplemental application review fees shall be paid upon notification and before further application processing. Failure to pay supplemental review fees by the payment deadline set forth in the supplemental fee notification will cause the application to be deemed cancelled. Revision, local service area boundary line adjustment, and subdivision alteration fees shall be paid at the time of submittal.

C. Engineering Plan Review. Engineering plan review includes engineering plan screening and intake; review of engineering plans for consistency with adopted design standards, guidelines, and conditions of preliminary approval; establishment of construction bond amounts; and administrative support for file updating and maintenance. Initial engineering plan review fees cover plan screening/intake and the first detailed engineering review of plans. Corrections and additions requiring additional engineering review shall be charged a resubmittal fee composed of a base handling fee and an hourly review fee. Post engineering approval revisions requiring plan resubmittal and additional engineering review shall be charged a resubmittal fee. Initial engineering review fees shall be collected upon plan submittal. The base handling portion of resubmittal fees shall be collected upon plan resubmittal. Hourly resubmittal fees shall be collected at the completion of engineering review and prior to engineering approval.

D. Construction Inspection Fees. Construction inspection fees shall compensate the department for the inspection of facilities required for final construction approval. Initial construction inspection fees shall cover inspections during the first 12 months from engineering plan approval and are payable upon engineering approval. Initial fees shall be based upon the City’s estimate of construction cost. Annual construction inspection fees shall be charged an hourly rate for the inspection of facilities required after the first 12 months from engineering plan approval and until final construction approval. Annual construction inspection fees shall be charged only where the delay in final construction approval is not attributable to unwarranted delay by the department. Supplemental inspection fees shall be charged for reinspection of facilities if the time period from construction approval to final facility acceptance exceeds 60 days. Supplemental inspection fees shall combine a base fee to cover file administration and hourly inspection fees, and shall be collected prior to facility acceptance. Supplemental construction inspection fees shall be charged only where the delay in final acceptance is not attributable to unwarranted delay by the department.

E. Final Approval Fees. Final approval fees compensate the department for engineering review of the final recording forms and for final application review to assure compliance with all conditions of approval, including construction or bonding of required improvements, dedications, and drainage or critical areas depictions. Separate review fees shall be charged for any alterations to final approvals authorized by KMC TItle 17.

F. Post-Approval Site Maintenance Fees. Post-approval site maintenance fees compensate the department for inspections necessary to assure that adequate post-approval maintenance of facilities has occurred and that facilities to be accepted for future county maintenance are free of defects. The maintenance/defect bond inspection fee shall consist of a base fee to cover file administration and updating, and a variable fee based on the bond amount to cover actual inspections.

G. Additional Review Fees. In addition to the subdivision products review fees set forth in this section, fees contained in Chapters 20.15 through 20.45 KMC may also be applicable to individual subdivision product applications. Such fees include, but are not limited to, shorelines management, SEPA, right-of-way use, grading, or critical areas review fees. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.28.010).]


20.35.020 Preapplication fees.

A preapplication fee shall be charged for all professional time spent by department personnel based on an applicant’s request for services, per hour, imposed by the city council by resolution. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.28.015).]


20.35.030 Subdivision – Preliminary application review fees.

The following preliminary application review fees shall be imposed by the City by resolution:

A. Preliminary Short Subdivisions.

1. Short subdivision, base, plus per lot.

2. Revision to approved preliminary.

3. Short subdivision alteration.

B. Preliminary Subdivisions.

1. Initial application:

a. Fifty lots or less, base fee, plus per lot fee.

b. More than 50 lots, base fee, plus per lot fee.

c. Surcharge for applications utilizing the lot clustering or flexible yard provisions of KMC Title 17 (percent of initial fee).

d. Major revision requiring new public hearing.

e. Minor revisions submitted after preliminary approval (not necessitating additional hearings).

2. Local service area boundary adjustments.

3. Subdivision alterations or subdivision vacations:

a. With public hearing.

b. Without public hearing.

4. Supplemental fee – a surcharge for applications involving significant critical areas (percent of total initial fee).

5. Supplemental fee – remanded applications (percent of total original application fee).

C. Preliminary Planned Unit Development (PUD).

1. Initial application:

a. Fifty units or less – base fee, plus per acre fee, plus per unit fee.

b. More than 50 units – base fee, plus per acre fee, plus per unit fee.

2. Local service area boundary adjustments.

3. Minor revisions submitted after preliminary approval (not necessitating additional hearings).

4. Supplemental fee – remanded applications, (percent of original total application fee).

5. Major revision requiring new public hearing.

D. Binding Site Plan (Including Commercial Binding Site Plans).

1. Planned unit development based plan.

2. Building permit based plan.

3. Conceptual plan.

4. Revision to a preliminary approved plan.

5. Revision to a final binding site plan.

E. Boundary line adjustment.

F. Boundary line correction. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.28.020).]


20.35.040 Subdivision – Engineering plan review fees.

The following engineering plan review fees shall be imposed by the City by resolution:

A. Short Subdivision.

1. Engineering plan review:

a. One or more applications for adjacent short plats on same plan – base, plus per lot.

b. Supplemental plan review for targeted drainage review #2.

c. Supplemental plan and profile fee for drainage facilities submitted under small site drainage review.

d. Supplemental plan and profile fee for drainage facilities submitted under full drainage review.

2. Revisions and resubmittals – each occurrence, plus per hour.

B. Subdivision.

1. Engineering plan review:

a. Thirty lots or less – base, plus per lot.

b. Thirty-one lots or more – base, plus per lot.

2. Revisions and resubmittals – each occurrence, plus per hour.

C. Planned Unit Development.

1. Engineering plan review:

a. Thirty units or less – base, plus per unit.

b. Thirty-one units or more – base, plus per unit.

2. Revision and resubmittals – each occurrence, plus per hour.

D. Conceptual Binding Site Plan (Including Conceptual Commercial Binding Site Plan).

1. Plan and profile – base.

2. Revisions and resubmittals – each occurrence, plus per hour. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.28.030).]


20.35.050 Subdivision – Construction permit fees.

The following construction permit fees shall be imposed by the City by resolution:

A. Construction inspection fee, per bond quantity worksheet amount.

B. Annual inspections, per hour.

C. Supplemental inspection, base, plus per hour rate.

D. Landscape installation inspection.

E. Landscape maintenance bond release inspection. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.28.040).]


20.35.060 Subdivision – Final approval fees.

The following final approval fees shall be imposed by the City by resolution:

A. Short Subdivision.

1. Final short plat.

2. Final short plat alteration.

3. Request for time extension.

B. Final Plat.

1. Thirty lots or less – base, plus per lot.

2. Thirty-one lots or more – base, plus per lot.

3. Subdivision alteration. 

4. Modification of a recorded building envelope.

5. Request for time extension.

6. Request for name change.

C. Final Planned Unit Development.

1. Request for time extension.

2. Request for name change.

D. Final binding site plan. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.28.050).]


20.35.070 Subdivision – Post final fees.

Maintenance bond inspection fees shall be imposed by the City by resolution. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.28.060).]


Chapter 20.40 UNIFORM FIRE CODE PERMIT

Sections:

20.40.010    Uniform Fire Code permits.

20.40.020    Uniform Fire Code permit fees.


20.40.010 Uniform Fire Code permits.

Fees shall be established to compensate the department for file establishment and ongoing inspection of activities, operations and locations subject to the provisions of the Uniform Fire Code as adopted by Chapter 15.10 KMC.

A. The initial fee shall compensate for the first inspection, file establishment and permit review. Initial fees shall be payable upon permit issuance.

B. Renewal fees are for subsequent annual inspections and permit file maintenance. Renewal fees are payable upon inspection. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.32.010).]


20.40.020 Uniform Fire Code permit fees.

The following Uniform Fire Code permit fees shall be imposed by the City by resolution:

A. A general use permit shall be required for any activity, operation or location not specifically described below which in the judgment of the city fire marshal is likely to produce conditions hazardous to life or property; provided, that no permit or fee shall be required for the use of candles in ceremonies by nonprofit organizations.

B. Aircraft hangar, used for service or repair.

C. Aircraft refuelers (each).

D. Automobile wrecking yards.

E. Bowling pin or alley refinishing (each occurrence).

F. Cellulose nitrate storage.

G. Combustible fiber storage, in excess of 100 cubic feet.

H. Combustible material storage more than 2,500 cubic feet.

I. Compressed gas, storage, use or handling as defined in Uniform Fire Code 4.108,c.6.

J. Cryogenic materials, as defined in Uniform Fire Code 4.108,c.7.

K. Dry Cleaning Plants.

1. Using flammable liquids.

2. Using noncombustible liquids.

L. Dust producing operations.

M. Explosives or Blasting.

1. Manufacture.

2. Storage or sale.

3. Use of (each location).

N. Fireworks.

1. Manufacture.

2. Storage (in excess of 20 pounds) – annual.

3. Annual inspection fees for temporary sales and public display of fireworks.

O. Flammable/combustible liquids – storage, use, handling - as defined in the Uniform Fire Code 4.108,f.

P. Oil or natural gas wells.

Q. Flammable or combustible liquid pipeline excavation and operation.

R. Fruit ripening.

S. Fumigation and thermal insecticidal fogging (business using flammable gases only) – each occurrence.

T. Garages, repair or servicing.

U. Hazardous chemicals – as defined in the Uniform Fire Code, 4.108,h.1.

V. High piled combustible storage.

W. Junk yards.

X. Liquefied Petroleum Gases.

1. One hundred twenty to 500 gallons.

2. Over 500 gallons.

3. Serving single-family residence.

Y. Lumber yards.

Z. Magnesium working.

AA. Matches – over 60 matchman’s gross.

BB. Nitrate film – storage, handling, or use.

CC. Open flame devices in marinas or on open piers, or for maintenance or repair of boats, slips or wharves (each).

DD. Organic coating.

EE. Ovens, industrial baking or drying (each unit).

FF. Parade floats.

GG. Places of Assembly.

1. Fifty persons or more.

2. Nonprofit.

3. Special events or single occurrence assemblies, including carnivals and fairs.

HH. Refrigeration equipment.

II. Spraying or dipping (flammable liquids) each booth, room or tank.

JJ. Tank vehicles (flammable liquids).

KK. Tents and air supported structures (each).

LL. Tire recapping.

MM. Waste material handling plant.

NN. Welding and cutting operations including open flame brazing and sweating.

OO. Medical Gas Systems.

1. Gaseous.

2. Liquefied.

PP. Hazardous Material Recycling System.

1. Capacity of 110 gallons or less, per day.

2. Capacity of more than 110 gallons, per day.

QQ. Fiberglassing operations.

RR. Liquefied petroleum gas – addition to existing.

SS. Above-ground hazardous materials storage tanks in excess of 660 gallons each.

TT. Use of open flame or candles in assembly rooms or areas, except for use for ceremonial purposes by churches or nonprofit organizations.

UU. Hazardous production materials.

VV. Use of covered malls for:

1. Placing or constructing temporary kiosks, display booths, concession equipment or the like in the mall.

2. Open flame/flame production devices.

3. Display liquid/gas fueled equipment.

4. Use liquefied petroleum gas, liquefied natural gas and compressed flammable gas.

WW. Rifle ranges.

XX. Woodworking plants.

YY. Aerosol products.

ZZ. Tire storage.

AAA. Pyrotechnic special effects materials.

BBB. Liquid or gas-fueled vehicles or equipment in assembly buildings.

CCC. Review of hazardous material management plan, per hour.

DDD. Review of hazardous material facility closure plan, per hour.

EEE. Reinspection fee for any permit required under KMC 20.35.070.

FFF. Certification training for fuel truck drivers (each).

GGG. Contractor’s permit for removal or abandonment of residential underground fuel tanks (annual). [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.32.020).]


Chapter 20.45 ZONING AND LAND USE PERMIT

Sections:

20.45.010    Zoning and land use permit fees.

20.45.020    Preapplication fees.

20.45.030    Zoning fees.

20.45.040    Site-specific land use map amendment fee.


20.45.010 Zoning and land use permit fees.

Fees shall be collected to compensate the department for preapplication review, to review zone reclassification, variance, agricultural land variances, local service area (LSA) adjustments, conditional use permit and unclassified use permit applications. Application fees shall compensate for intake and screening, field investigations, development of staff reports or administrative decisions, staff participation at public hearings, and the administrative costs of file set-up/maintenance and public notification.

A. Preapplication Fees. Preapplication fees shall compensate the department for preliminary review and evaluation of zoning and land use permits and for advising the permit applicant prior to the submittal of a formal application for a permit. Preapplication fees shall be collected at the time preapplication review services are rendered.

B. Zoning and Land Use Permit Fees. Zoning and land use permit fees compensate the department for permit processing through final approval. Separate fees are charged to compensate for the additional review necessary to process pre-effective condition time extensions.

C. Additional Review Fees. In addition to the fees set forth in this section, fees contained in Chapters 20.15 through 20.45 KMC may also be applicable to individual building permit applications. Such fees include, but are not limited to, shorelines management, SEPA, right-of-way use, grading, or critical areas review fees.

D. Code Conversion Rezones. Fees for zone reclassification requests to a zone authorized by KMC Title 18 shall be imposed by the City by resolution. Fees for urban planned development (UPDs) shall be based on the MPD fees in KMC 20.55.020. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.36.010).]


20.45.020 Preapplication fees.

A preapplication fee shall be charged for all professional time spent by department personnel based on an applicant’s request for services, per hour, imposed by the city council by resolution. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.36.015).]


20.45.030 Zoning fees.

The following zoning fees shall be imposed by the City by resolution:

A.    1. Requests for reclassifications.

2. Unclassified use permit.

B. Conditional Use Permits (CUP).

1. Administrative CUP.

2. CUP with public hearing.

3. CUP for daycare with 24 children or less.

4. Request for time extension.

C. Variances.

1. Application review.

2. Added fee when public hearing required.

3. Request for time extension.

D. Amend adopted P-suffix conditions.

E. Amend post-effective conditions.

F. Pre-effective condition time extension.

G. Reuse of closed public school facilities.

H. Land use inspections required by ordinance or zoning adjustor approval to monitor compliance with special conditions affixed to a P-suffix zoning approval, unclassified use permit, or conditional use permit.

I. Local Service Area Adjustment.

1. Base.

2. Added fee when public hearing required.

J. Special Critical Areas Service Fees Related to Any Development Permit.

1. Reasonable use exception.

2. Reasonable use exception – additional when combined with variance request.

3. Public agency and utility exception.

4. Agricultural land variance.

5. Critical areas variance for residential permits of two or fewer units only.

K. Transfer of development credit sending site certification applications, to qualify a proposed sending site and determine the number of credits available for transfer per application. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.36.020).]


20.45.040 Site-specific land use map amendment fee.

Applicant-generated site-specific land use map amendments shall be charged an application fee imposed by the City by resolution. The application fee for amendments is implemented as part of the comprehensive plan amendment process pursuant to KMC 19.20.070(F). [Ord. 06-0255 § 16; Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.36.030).]


Chapter 20.47 TRANSPORTATION, PARK AND SCHOOL IMPACT FEES

Sections:

Article I. General

20.47.010    Findings and authority.

20.47.020    Definitions.

20.47.030    Assessment of impact fees.

20.47.040    Exemptions.

20.47.050    Credits.

20.47.060    Tax adjustments.

20.47.070    Appeals.

20.47.080    Establishment of impact fee accounts.

20.47.090    Refunds.

20.47.100    Use of funds.

20.47.110    Review.

Article II. Rates

20.47.120    Transportation impact fee.

20.47.130    Park impact fee.

20.47.135    School impact fee.

20.47.140    Independent fee calculations.

Article III. Miscellaneous Provisions

20.47.150    Existing authority unimpaired.

20.47.155    Repealed.

Article I. General


20.47.010 Findings and authority.

The city council of the City of Kenmore (the “council”) hereby finds and determines that new growth and development, including but not limited to new residential, commercial, retail, office, and industrial development, in the City of Kenmore will create additional demand and need for public facilities serving the City of Kenmore, and the council finds that new growth and development should pay a proportionate share of the cost of new facilities needed to serve the new growth and development. The City of Kenmore prepared initial studies to support the adoption of these impact fees, and prepared supplemental studies to analyze necessary updates to these fees, all of which document the procedures for measuring the impact of new developments on public facilities. In conjunction with the Northshore School District, the City of Kenmore likewise reviews school impact fee analyses. The City of Kenmore hereby incorporates these studies, as amended, and their analyses into this chapter by reference. Therefore, pursuant to Chapter 82.02 RCW, the council adopts this chapter to assess impact fees for transportation, parks and schools. The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed in order to carry out the purposes of the council in establishing the impact fee program. [Ord. 19-0483 § 2 (Att. 1); Ord. 18-0463 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 16-0420 § 7 (Exh. 5).]


20.47.020 Definitions.

The following words and terms shall have the following meanings for the purposes of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Terms otherwise not defined herein shall be defined pursuant to RCW 82.02.090, or given their usual and customary meaning.

A. “Accessory dwelling unit” means a separate complete dwelling unit attached to or contained within the structure of the primary dwelling; or contained within a separate structure that is accessory to the primary dwelling unit on the premises.

B. “Building permit” means an official document or certification which is issued by the building official and which authorizes the construction, alteration, enlargement, conversion, reconstruction, remodeling, rehabilitation, erection, demolition, moving or repair of a building or structure.

C. “Capital facilities plan” means the capital facilities plan element of a comprehensive plan adopted by the City of Kenmore pursuant to Chapter 36.70A RCW, and such plan as amended.

D. “City manager” means the city manager or the city manager’s designee.

E. “Council” means the city council of the City of Kenmore.

F. “Development activity” means any construction, expansion, or change in the use of a building or structure that creates additional demand and need for public facilities.

G. “Development approval” means any written authorization from the City of Kenmore which authorizes the commencement of a development activity.

H. “Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms designed for occupancy by a person or family for living and sleeping purposes, containing kitchen facilities and rooms with internal accessibility, for use solely by the dwelling’s occupants. Microhousing dwelling units may share kitchen facilities with other dwelling units in place of providing kitchen facilities within each unit.

I. “Elderly” means a person aged 62 or older.

J. “Encumbered” means to reserve, set aside, or otherwise earmark the impact fees in order to pay for commitments, contractual obligations, or other liabilities incurred for public facilities.

K. “Feepayer” is a person, corporation, partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity, or department or bureau of any governmental entity or municipal corporation, commencing a land development activity which creates the demand for additional capital facilities, and which requires the issuance of a building permit. “Feepayer” includes an applicant for an impact fee credit.

L. “Gross floor area” means the total square footage of any building, structure, or use, including accessory uses.

M. “Hearing examiner” means the examiner who acts on behalf of the City in considering and applying land use regulatory codes as provided under this code. Where appropriate, “hearing examiner” also refers to the office of the hearing examiner.

N. “Impact fee” means a payment of money imposed by the City of Kenmore on development activity pursuant to this chapter as a condition of granting development approval in order to pay for the public facilities needed to serve new growth and development. “Impact fee” does not include a reasonable permit fee, an application fee, the administrative fee for collecting and handling impact fees, or the cost of reviewing independent fee calculations.

O. “Impact fee account” or “account” means the account(s) established for each type of public facility for which impact fees are collected. The accounts shall be established pursuant to KMC 20.47.080 and 20.47.090, and comply with the requirements of RCW 82.02.070.

P. “Independent fee calculation” means the transportation impact calculation, park impact calculation, school impact calculation, and/or economic documentation prepared by a feepayer to support the assessment of an impact fee other than by the use of the rates listed in Article II of this chapter, or the calculations prepared by the city manager where none of the fee categories or fee amounts in Article II of this chapter accurately describe or capture the impacts of the new development.

Q. “Interest” means the average interest rate earned in the last fiscal year by the City of Kenmore.

R. “Interlocal agreement” means the agreement between the Northshore School District and the City governing the operation of the school impact fee program and describing the relationship, duties and liabilities of the parties.

S. “ITE Land Use Code” means the classification code number assigned to a type of land use by the Institute of Transportation Engineers in the version of “Trip Generation” adopted by the City.

T. “Low-income housing” means housing with a monthly housing expense that is no greater than 30 percent of 80 percent of the median family income adjusted for family size in King County, as determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). In the event that HUD no longer publishes median income figures for King County, the County may use or determine such other method as it may choose to determine the King County median income, adjusted for household size.

U. “Mobility unit” means one p.m. peak hour person trip end. Each person trip has two trip ends, one each at the origin and destination.

V. “Open space” means for the purposes of this chapter undeveloped public land that is permanently protected from development (except for the development of trails or other passive public access or use).

W. “Owner” means the owner of record of real property, or a person with an unrestricted written option to purchase property; provided, that if the real property is being purchased under a recorded real estate contract, the purchaser shall be considered the owner of the real property.

X. “Parks” means parks, open space, and recreational facilities, including but not limited to ball fields, golf courses, athletic fields, soccer fields, swimming pools, tennis courts, volleyball courts, neighborhood parks, community parks, and open space.

Y. “Parks study” means the most recent report of the methodology and calculation of impact fees for park facilities kept on file with the city clerk.

Z. “Project improvements” means site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide service for a particular development or users of the project, and are not system improvements. No improvement or facility included in a capital facilities plan adopted by the council shall be considered a project improvement.

AA. “Public facilities” means the following capital facilities owned or operated by the City of Kenmore or other governmental entities: (1) public transportation facilities; (2) publicly owned parks, open space, and recreation facilities; and (3) public school facilities.

BB. “Transportation study” means the most recent report of the methodology and calculation of impact fees for transportation projects kept on file with the city clerk.

CC. “Residential” or “residential development” means all types of construction intended for human habitation. This shall include, but is not limited to, single-family, duplex, triplex, and other multifamily development.

DD. “School impact fee analysis” means the school impact fee analysis contained in the Northshore School District Capital Facilities Plan.

EE. “Square footage” means the square footage of the gross floor area of the development.

FF. “State” means the State of Washington.

GG. “System improvements” means public facilities that are included in the capital facilities plan of the City of Kenmore or the Northshore School District as adopted by reference in the City’s comprehensive plan and are designed to provide service to service areas within the community at large, in contrast to project improvements.

HH. “Transportation facility” means public easements or right-of-way that enables motor vehicles, transit vehicles, bicycles and/or pedestrians to travel between destinations.

II. “Trip generation” means the number of mobility units generated by a development activity. [Ord. 19-0483 § 2 (Att. 1); Ord. 18-0463 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 16-0420 § 7 (Exh. 5).]


20.47.030 Assessment of impact fees.

A. The City shall collect impact fees, based on the rates in Article II of this chapter, from any applicant seeking development approval from the City for any development activity within the City, where such development activity requires the issuance of a building permit. The City also may collect an application fee as established by the council by resolution to cover the City’s reasonable costs of administration of the impact fee program.

B. For mixed use developments, impact fees shall be imposed for the proportionate share of each land use based on the applicable measurement in the impact fee rates set forth in Article II of this chapter.

C. For purposes of school impact fees, townhouses, as defined in KMC 18.20.835, shall be considered multifamily development.

D. The payment of a parks impact fee, consistent with this chapter, shall be the preferred method of meeting park space requirements for all new development.

E. Impact fees shall be calculated at the time the complete application for a building permit is submitted using the impact fee rates then in effect. Except as provided in subsection H of this section, impact fees shall be paid at the time the permit is issued by the City.

F. Applicants that have been awarded credits pursuant to KMC 20.47.050 prior to the submittal of the complete building permit application shall submit, along with the complete building permit application, a copy of the letter or certificate prepared by the city manager pursuant to KMC 20.47.050 setting forth the dollar amount of the credit awarded. Except as provided in subsection H of this section, impact fees, as determined after the application of appropriate credits, shall be collected from the feepayer at the time the building permit is issued.

G. Except as provided in subsection H of this section, the city manager shall not issue the required permit unless and until the impact fees set forth in Article II of this chapter have been paid in the amount that exceeds exemptions or credits provided pursuant to KMC 20.47.040 or 20.47.050.

H. An applicant for a building permit for a single-family detached or attached residence may request a deferral of the full impact fee payment, deferring collection of the impact fee payment until issuance of a certificate of occupancy or equivalent certification and subject to this subsection H. The certificate of occupancy or equivalent certification shall not be issued until the impact fees have been paid in full. The amount of impact fees that may be deferred must be determined by the fees in effect at the time the permit application is deemed complete. The term of an impact fee deferral under this subsection may not exceed 18 months from the date of building permit issuance. An applicant seeking a deferral under this subsection must grant and record a deferred impact fee lien against the property in favor of the City in the amount of the deferred impact fee. The deferred impact fee lien, which must include the legal description, tax account number, and address of the property, must also be:

1. In a form approved by the City;

2. Signed and notarized by all owners of the property, with all signatures acknowledged as required for a deed, and recorded in the county where the property is located;

3. Binding on all successors in title after the recordation; and

4. Junior and subordinate to any mortgage or deed of trust for the purpose of construction upon the same real property granted by the person who applied for the deferral of impact fees.

If the deferred impact fees are not paid in accordance with a deferral authorized by this subsection, and in accordance with the term provisions established in this subsection, the City may institute foreclosure proceedings in accordance with Chapter 61.12 RCW. Upon receipt of final payment of all deferred impact fees for a property, the City must execute a release of deferred impact fee lien for the property. The property owner at the time of the release, at his or her expense, is responsible for recording the lien release. The extinguishment of a deferred impact fee lien by the foreclosure of a lien having priority does not affect the obligation to pay the impact fees as a condition of final inspection, certificate of occupancy, or equivalent certification. Each applicant for a single-family residential construction permit, in accordance with his or her contractor registration number or other unique identification number, is entitled to annually receive deferrals under this subsection for the first 20 single-family residential construction building permits per city. A nonrefundable fee, as set forth in a fee resolution adopted by the council, associated with implementing this subsection shall accompany the request. [Ord. 19-0478 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 18-0463 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 16-0420 § 7 (Exh. 5).]


20.47.040 Exemptions.

A. Except as provided for below, the following shall be exempted from the payment of all impact fees:

1. Alteration, expansion or replacement of an existing residential structure that does not add any dwelling units;

2. Miscellaneous improvements that do not increase the impacts of the development on the City’s public facilities, including, but not limited to, fences, walls, swimming pools, and signs;

3. Demolition or moving of a structure;

4. Expansion or replacement of an existing single-family residential structure that maintains its single-family character;

5. Replacement of a nonresidential structure with a new structure of the same size and use at the same site or lot when such replacement occurs within 12 months of the demolition or destruction of the prior structure. Replacement of a structure with a new structure of the same size shall be interpreted to include any structure for which the gross square footage of the building will not be increased by more than 100 square feet;

6. Pursuant to RCW 82.02.060, the council may provide exemptions for low-income housing and other development activities with broad public purposes. Exemptions for school impact fees under this subsection shall be approved by the Northshore School District;

7. Accessory dwelling units; provided, that impact fees shall be assessed if at any time the accessory dwelling unit is converted to another land use or dwelling unit, based on the impact fees in effect at the time of conversion.

B. Except as provided for below, the following shall be exempted from the payment of school impact fees:

1. Reconstruction, remodeling or construction of the following facilities, subject to the recording of a covenant or recorded declaration of restrictions precluding use of the property for other than the exempt purpose; provided, that if the property is used for a nonexempt purpose, the school impact fees then in effect shall be paid:

a. Shelters or dwelling units for temporary placement, which provide housing to persons on a temporary basis for not more than four weeks;

b. Construction or remodeling of transitional housing facilities or dwelling units that provide housing to persons on a temporary basis for not more than 24 months, in connection with job training, self-sufficiency training and human services counseling, the purpose of which is to help persons make the transition from homelessness to placement in permanent housing; and

c. Any form of housing for the elderly, including nursing homes, retirement centers, and any type of housing units for persons age 55 and over, which have recorded covenants or recorded declaration of restrictions precluding school-aged children as residents in those units.

2. Any development activity for which school impacts have been mitigated pursuant to a condition of plat approval to pay fees, dedicate land or construct or improve school facilities, unless the condition of the plat approval provides otherwise; provided, that the condition of the plat approval predates May 22, 2018.

3. Any development activity for which school impacts have been mitigated pursuant to a voluntary agreement entered into with the district to pay fees, dedicate land or construct or improve school facilities, unless the terms of the voluntary agreement provide otherwise; provided, that the agreement predates May 22, 2018.

4. Any building permit application that has been submitted to the City before closing time on the business day before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter imposing school impact fees and subsequently determined to be a complete application, based on the information on file as of the effective date of such imposition.

5. Subject to approval by the city manager, any building permit application submitted to the City after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter that imposes school impact fees that results from a pre-existing, unexpired approval of a zoning variance, shoreline substantial development permit, shoreline variance, site plan review for uses allowed by zone, or reasonable use exception under KMC 18.55.180. This exemption shall be limited to approvals directly related to the siting of the proposed building. [Ord. 18-0463 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 16-0420 § 7 (Exh. 5).]


20.47.050 Credits.

A. A feepayer can request that a credit or credits for impact fees be awarded to him/her for the total value of dedicated land, improvements, or construction provided by the feepayer. Credits will be given only if the land, improvements, and/or the facility constructed are:

1. Included within the capital facilities plan and identified on the list of impact fee projects in the transportation study, parks study or school impact fee analysis; and

2. At suitable sites and constructed at acceptable quality as determined by the City or Northshore School District; and

3. For parks:

a. Such park, recreation or open space land improvements or construction completed shall be adjacent to other publicly owned park, recreation or open space land; or

b. Be within an area of the City designated within the City comprehensive plan as in need of park, open space or recreation facility space; or

c. Would in some other way further the goals and objectives of the capital facilities plan or other City plans.

B. The city manager shall determine if a request for a credit or credits meets the criteria in subsection A of this section. When a feepayer requests a credit for school impact fees, the city manager shall receive input from the Northshore School District before making the decision.

C. For each request for a credit or credits the city manager shall select an appraiser or the feepayer may select an independent appraiser acceptable to the city manager.

D. The appraiser must possess an MAI or other equivalent certification and shall not have a fiduciary or personal interest in the property being appraised. A description of the appraiser’s certification shall be included with the appraisal, and the appraiser shall certify that he or she does not have a fiduciary or personal interest in the property being appraised.

E. The appraiser shall be directed to determine the total value of the dedicated land, improvements, and/or construction provided by the feepayer on a case-by-case basis.

F. The feepayer shall pay for the cost of the appraisal or request that the cost of the appraisal be deducted from the credit which the city manager may be providing to the feepayer, in the event that a credit is awarded.

G. After receiving the appraisal, the city manager shall provide the feepayer with a letter or certificate setting forth the dollar amount of the credit, the reason for the credit, the legal description of the site donated where applicable, and the legal description or other adequate description of the project or development to which the credit may be applied. The feepayer must sign and date a duplicate copy of such letter or certificate indicating his or her agreement to the terms of the letter or certificate, and return such signed document to the city manager before the impact fee credit will be awarded. The failure of the feepayer to sign, date, and return such document within 60 calendar days shall nullify the credit.

H. No credit shall be given for project improvements.

I. Any claim for credit must be made with the impact fee calculation submittal. The failure to timely file such a claim shall constitute a final bar to a later request for any such credit.

J. Determinations made by the city manager pursuant to this section shall be subject to the appeals procedures set forth in KMC 20.47.070. [Ord. 19-0483 § 2 (Att. 1); Ord. 18-0463 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 16-0420 § 7 (Exh. 5).]


20.47.060 Tax adjustments.

Pursuant to and consistent with the requirements of RCW 82.02.060, the rate study, the parks study and the school impact fee analysis have provided adjustments for future taxes to be paid by the new development which are earmarked or proratable to the same new public facilities which will serve the new development. The impact fee rates in Article II of this chapter have been reasonably adjusted for taxes and other revenue sources which are anticipated to be available to fund public improvements. [Ord. 18-0463 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 16-0420 § 7 (Exh. 5).]


20.47.070 Appeals.

A. Appeals of City decisions on transportation impact fees shall be conducted according to KMC 12.80.090.

B. Appeals of City decisions on park and school impact fees shall be conducted as follows:

1. Appeals may only be filed by the feepayer for the property where the development activity will occur.

2. The feepayer must first file a request for review by the city manager regarding the impact fees with the city clerk, as follows:

a. The request shall be in writing on the form provided by the City;

b. The request for review by the city manager shall be filed within 14 calendar days of the feepayer’s payment of the impact fees at issue; the failure to timely file such a request shall constitute a final bar to later seek such review;

c. No administrative fee will be imposed for the request for review by the city manager; and

d. The city manager shall issue his or her determination in writing.

3. Determinations of the city manager under subsection (B)(2) of this section with respect to the applicability of the impact fees to a given development activity, the availability or value of a credit, or the city manager’s decision concerning the independent fee calculation which is authorized in Article II of this chapter, or the fees imposed by the city manager pursuant to Article II of this chapter, or any other determination which the city manager is authorized to make pursuant to this chapter, can be appealed to the hearing examiner.

4. Appeals shall be taken within 14 calendar days of the city manager’s issuance of a written determination by filing a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, and depositing the necessary fee, which is set forth in the existing fee schedules for appeals of such decisions. The city manager shall transmit to the office of the hearing examiner all papers constituting the record for the determination, including, where appropriate, the independent fee calculation.

5. The hearing examiner shall fix a time for the hearing of the appeal, give notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same as provided in this code. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney.

6. The hearing examiner is authorized to make findings of fact regarding the applicability of the impact fees to a given development activity, the availability or amount of the credit, or the accuracy or applicability of an independent fee calculation. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be final, except as provided in this section.

7. The hearing examiner may, so long as such action is in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may modify the determinations of the city manager. [Ord. 18-0463 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 16-0420 § 7 (Exh. 5).]


20.47.080 Establishment of impact fee accounts.

A. Impact fee receipts shall be earmarked specifically and deposited in special interest-bearing accounts.

B. There are hereby established three separate impact fee accounts for the fees collected pursuant to this chapter: the transportation impact account, the parks impact account and the school impact account. The funds from the school impact account shall be transferred to the Northshore School District in accordance with the interlocal agreement described under subsection C of this section. Funds withdrawn from the transportation and parks impact accounts must be used in accordance with the provisions of KMC 20.47.100 and applicable State law. Interest earned on the fees shall be retained in each of the accounts and expended for the purposes for which the impact fees were collected.

C. As a condition of the City’s authorization and adoption of school impact fees, the City and Northshore School District shall enter into an interlocal agreement governing the operation of the school impact fee program, and describing the relationship and liabilities of the parties thereunder.

D. On an annual basis, the city manager shall provide a report to the council on each of the three impact fee accounts showing the source and amount of all monies collected, earned, or received, and the public improvements that were financed in whole or in part by impact fees.

E. Impact fees shall be expended or encumbered within 10 years of receipt, unless the council identifies in written findings an extraordinary and compelling reason or reasons for the impact fees to be held longer than 10 years. If the Northshore School District concludes that there is an extraordinary or compelling reason or reasons for holding school impact fees longer than 10 years, the District must submit to the City at least 60 days before the expiration of the 10-year period draft written findings regarding an extraordinary or compelling reason or reasons for holding school impact fees for longer than 10 years. Under such circumstances, the council shall establish the period of time within which the impact fees shall be expended or encumbered. [Ord. 18-0463 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 16-0420 § 7 (Exh. 5).]


20.47.090 Refunds.

The current owner of the property for which an impact fee has been paid may receive a refund of such fees if the City or Northshore School District fails to expend or encumber the impact fees within 10 years of when the fees were paid or such other period of time established by RCW 82.02.070(3) on public facilities intended to benefit the development activity for which the impact fees were paid. Refunds shall be subject to the provisions of RCW 82.02.080. The request for a transportation or park impact fee refund must be submitted to the city manager in writing. For school impact fee refunds, the request must be submitted in writing to the Northshore School District. [Ord. 18-0463 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 16-0420 § 7 (Exh. 5).]


20.47.100 Use of funds.

A. Pursuant to this chapter, impact fees shall:

1. Be used for public improvements that will reasonably benefit the new development; and

2. Not be imposed to make up for deficiencies in public facilities serving existing developments; and

3. Not be used for maintenance or operation.

B. Transportation impact fees may be spent for public improvements, including, but not limited to, planning, land acquisition, right-of-way acquisition, site improvements, necessary off-site improvements, construction, engineering, architectural, permitting, financing, and administrative expenses, applicable impact fees or mitigation costs, and any other expenses which can be capitalized.

C. Park impact fees may be spent for public improvements, including, but not limited to, planning for parks that will reasonably benefit the new development, land acquisition, site improvements, necessary off-site improvements, construction, engineering, architectural, permitting, financing, and administrative expenses, applicable impact fees or mitigation costs, and capital equipment pertaining to park facilities.

D. School impact fees may be spent for public improvements, including, but not limited to, school planning, land acquisition, site improvements, necessary off-site improvements, construction, engineering, architectural, permitting, financing, and administrative expenses, relocatable facilities (portables), capital equipment pertaining to educational facilities, and any other expenses which could be capitalized and which are consistent with the school impact fee analysis.

E. Impact fees may also be used to recoup public improvement costs previously incurred by the City or the Northshore School District to the extent that new growth and development will be served by the previously constructed improvements or incurred costs.

F. In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are or have been issued for the advanced provision of public improvements for which impact fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities or improvements provided are consistent with the requirements of this section and are used to serve the new development. [Ord. 18-0463 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 16-0420 § 7 (Exh. 5).]


20.47.110 Review.

The council may review and adjust the fee rates set forth in Article II of this chapter as it deems necessary and appropriate in conjunction with the annual update of the capital facilities plan element of the City’s comprehensive plan; provided, that the city manager may adjust transportation and park impact fees annually in accordance with a five-year rolling average of the Washington State Department of Transportation Construction Cost Index (“CCI”). [Ord. 19-0483 § 2 (Att. 1); Ord. 18-0463 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 16-0420 § 7 (Exh. 5).]

Article II. Rates


20.47.120 Transportation impact fee.

The transportation impact fee rates shall be determined by the formula for calculating impact fees set forth in the transportation study, which is incorporated herein by reference. Except as otherwise provided for independent fee calculations in KMC 20.47.140, exemptions in KMC 20.47.040, and credits in KMC 20.47.050, all new developments in the City will be charged the transportation impact fee in an amount applicable to the type of development, as established by the council by resolution. [Ord. 19-0483 § 2 (Att. 1); Ord. 18-0463 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 16-0420 § 7 (Exh. 5).]


20.47.130 Park impact fee.

The park impact fee rates shall be determined by the formula for calculating impact fees set forth in the parks study and the parks, recreation, and open space plan, which are incorporated herein by reference. Except as otherwise provided for independent fee calculations in KMC 20.47.140, exemptions in KMC 20.47.040, and credits in KMC 20.47.050, all new residential developments in the City will be charged the park impact fee in an amount applicable to the type of development, as established by the council by resolution. [Ord. 19-0483 § 2 (Att. 1); Ord. 18-0463 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 16-0420 § 7 (Exh. 5).]


20.47.135 School impact fee.

School impact fees per housing type and per unit shall consider the school impact fee analysis, but shall be established by council resolution. Residential housing subject to school impact fees shall be charged the applicable school impact fee, except as otherwise provided for independent fee calculations in KMC 20.47.140, exemptions in KMC 20.47.040, and credits in KMC 20.47.050. [Ord. 18-0463 § 2 (Exh. 1).]


20.47.140 Independent fee calculations.

A. If, in the judgment of the city manager, none of the fee categories or fee amounts set forth in KMC 20.47.120, 20.47.130 or 20.47.135 accurately describe or capture the impacts of a new development on transportation, parks or schools, an independent fee calculation may be performed and the city manager may impose alternative fees on a specific development based on those calculations. In cases where a feepayer requests an independent fee calculation for school impact fees, the city manager shall receive input from the Northshore School District before making the decision. The alternative fees and the calculations shall be set forth in writing and shall be mailed to the feepayer.

B. If a feepayer opts not to have the impact fees determined according to KMC 20.47.120, 20.47.130 or 20.47.135, then the feepayer shall prepare and submit to the city manager an independent fee calculation for the development activity for which a building permit is sought. The documentation submitted shall show the basis upon which the independent fee calculation was made.

C. Any feepayer submitting an independent fee calculation will be required to pay the City a fee to cover the cost of reviewing the independent fee calculation, in the amount established by the council by resolution, unless otherwise established by the city manager, and the fee shall be paid by the feepayer prior to initiation of review.

D. There is a presumption that the calculations set forth in the transportation study, parks study and school impact fee analysis are valid. The city manager shall consider the documentation submitted by the feepayer, but is not required to accept such documentation or analysis which the city manager reasonably deems to be inaccurate or not reliable, and may, in the alternative, require the feepayer to submit additional or different documentation for consideration. The city manager is authorized to adjust the impact fees on a case-by-case basis based on the independent fee calculation, the specific characteristics of the development, and/or principles of fairness. The fees or alternative fees and the calculations shall be set forth in writing and shall be mailed to the feepayer.

E. Determinations made by the city manager pursuant to this section may be appealed as set forth in KMC 20.47.070. [Ord. 19-0483 § 2 (Att. 1); Ord. 18-0463 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 16-0420 § 7 (Exh. 5).]

Article III. Miscellaneous Provisions


20.47.150 Existing authority unimpaired.

Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the City from requiring the feepayer or the proponent of a development activity to mitigate adverse environmental impacts of a specific development pursuant to the State Environmental Policy Act, Chapter 43.21C RCW, based on the environmental documents accompanying the underlying development approval process, and/or Chapter 58.17 RCW, governing plats and subdivisions; provided, that the exercise of this authority is consistent with the provisions of Chapters 43.21C and 82.02 RCW. [18-0463 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 16-0420 § 7 (Exh. 5).]


20.47.155 Park space in lieu of impact fee.

Repealed by Ord. 18-0463. [Ord. 16-0420 § 7 (Exh. 5).]


Chapter 20.50 SCHOOL IMPACT FEES

(Repealed by Ord. 18-0463)


Chapter 20.55 MASTER PLAN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT FEES

Sections:

20.55.010    Master plan development (MPD) fees.

20.55.020    Preapplication fees.


20.55.010 Master plan development (MPD) fees.

Fees shall be assessed and collected to compensate the City for the review and monitoring of all MPD permits and associated applications when combined in a single coordinated review, pursuant to the provisions of this code. Such fees compensate for preapplication review, application, and monitoring and compliance.

A. Preapplication Fees. Preapplication fees shall compensate the department for preliminary review and evaluation of MPD permits and for advising the permit applicant prior to the submittal of a formal application for a permit. Preapplication fees shall be collected at the time preapplication review services are rendered.

B. Master Plan Development (MPD) Permit Application Fees. Master plan development application fees shall be an hourly fee to cover the costs of application intake, development of a scope of work, and all work performed under the scope of work. A deposit shall be made at the time of application as a guarantee of work billed in arrears. The hourly fee shall be billed monthly. The scope of work shall include a complete description of the required reviews and products to be prepared by all affected City agencies, or contract agents for such agencies, specifying the amount and type of work task up to the final decision on the MPD permit by the council. The scope of work shall be agreed upon in writing by the applicant and the department prior to starting any review work on the MPD permit application.

C. Master Plan Development Monitoring and Compliance Fee. An hourly monitoring and compliance fee shall be collected to compensate the department for reviews, inspections, and project management activities associated with the approved MPD permit. The fee will be used for determining, ensuring, and enforcing compliance with conditions placed on the MPD or as required to maintain monitoring of specific conditions or compliance with other City code requirements. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.46.010).]


20.55.020 Preapplication fees.

The city council shall adopt the following fees by resolution:

A. A preapplication fee shall be charged for all professional time spent by department personnel based on an applicant’s request for services, per hour, imposed by the city council by resolution.

B. MPD Fees.

1. MPD permit application, deposit and hourly rate.

2. Monitoring and compliance, per hour. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.46.020).]


Chapter 20.60 DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES FEES

Sections:

20.60.010    Department of Natural Resources related, and current use fees.

20.60.020    Department of Natural Resources fees.


20.60.010 Department of Natural Resources related, and current use fees.

A. Department of Natural Resources Fees. All review of drainage design adjustments shall be charged a fixed fee, and review and monitoring support for department of community development services shall be charged an hourly fee to help defray the cost associated with these reviews. These review fees shall be paid at the time of submittal for the review, and are in addition to the critical areas review of nondepartmental permits.

B. Appeals to the Hearing Examiner. All appeals to hearing examiner, or from decisions of the examiner, shall be charged a fixed fee to help defray the cost associated with appeal processing. Appeal fees shall be paid at the time of appeal submittal.

C. Current Use Permit Fees. A fixed for the processing of current use permits shall be charged to help defray the cost of review. The review fee shall be paid at the time of the submittal for the review. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.48.010).]


20.60.020 Department of Natural Resources fees.

The city council shall adopt the following Department of Natural Resources fees by resolution:

A. Review of Drainage Design Requirements.

1. Experimental design review.

2. Water and land resources divisions support of DDES adjustment review and monitoring.

B. Master drainage plan review and monitoring support by surface water management division staff.

C. Appeals to the hearing examiner, from decisions regarding environmental significance by the director of the Department of Natural Resources.

D. Current Use Fees.

1. Applications for classification of land as farm and agricultural land.

2. Applications for classification of land as open space and timber land requiring a public hearing under 20 acres.

3. Application for classifications of land as open space requiring a public hearing equal to or greater than 20 acres. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27.48.020).]


Chapter 20.65 RIGHT-OF-WAY USE PERMITS*

Sections:

20.65.010    Fees – Extended.

20.65.020    Fees – Limited.

*See also Chapter 12.35 KMC, Rights-of-Way.


20.65.010 Fees – Extended.

No right-of-way permit shall be issued or renewed under this chapter without payment of the applicable fee. The fee for the initial application shall be imposed by the City by resolution, plus actual staff or consultant review time expended to process the application. The fee to renew any such permit shall be imposed by the City by resolution. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 00-0085 § 2.]


20.65.020 Fees – Limited.

The city council shall adopt the following right-of-way use permit fees by resolution:

A. Type A.

1. Application review fee (includes one inspection).

2. Engineer review, per hour.

3. Inspection fee, per hour (if additional inspections needed).

Plus disruption/surface cut fee.

B. Type B.

1. Application review fee.

2. Engineer review.

3. Inspection fee, per hour.

C. Type C.

1. Application review fee.

2. Engineer review, per hour.

3. Inspection fee, per hour. [Ord. 02-0139 § 1; Ord. 00-0088 (Exh. B).]


Title 21 FINANCIAL GUARANTEES

Chapters:

21.05    General

21.10    Definitions

21.15    Administration

21.20    Requirements


Chapter 21.05 GENERAL

Sections:

21.05.010    Title established.

21.05.020    Purpose.

21.05.030    Provisions.

21.05.040    Applicability.

21.05.050    Rules.

21.05.060    Severability.


21.05.010 Title established.

There is hereby created a new title in this code entitled “Financial Guarantees.” [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.10.005).]


21.05.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this title is to establish authority and procedures for accepting and enforcing financial guarantees, with the intent of assuring that development projects are completed and maintained in accordance with City approval conditions. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.10.010).]


21.05.030 Provisions.

This chapter sets forth provisions general to the administration of financial guarantees and includes: applicability, default, financial guarantee conditions, financial guarantees – form and amount, performance guarantee reductions, release of financial guarantees, scheduling of performance, maintenance and defects inspections, financial guarantee waivers, and status of current financial guarantees. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.10.020).]


21.05.040 Applicability.

The provisions of this title shall apply to permits and approvals granted pursuant to KMC Titles 12, 13, 15, 17, or 18 (or their successors). [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.10.030).]


21.05.050 Rules.

The department is authorized to adopt such rules as are deemed appropriate to implement this title. The director may prepare and require the use of such forms as are deemed appropriate for its administration. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.10.040).]


21.05.060 Severability.

Should any chapter, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this title be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this title. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.10.050).]


Chapter 21.10 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

21.10.010    Applicant.

21.10.020    Default.

21.10.030    Department.

21.10.040    Director.

21.10.050    Financial guarantee.

21.10.060    Guarantor.


21.10.010 Applicant.

“Applicant” means the person or entity who is required to post the financial guarantee. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.20.010).]


21.10.020 Default.

“Default” means the failure to:

A. Comply with financial guarantee conditions;

B. Complete, in the specified time, the required improvements in accordance with this code and with approved project plans and conditions; or

C. Maintain, for the specified period of time, the required improvements in accordance with this code and with approved project plans and conditions. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.20.020).]


21.10.030 Department.

“Department” means the City of Kenmore department of community development or its successor organization. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.20.030).]


21.10.040 Director.

“Director” means the director of the City of Kenmore department of community development or his or her designee. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.20.040).]


21.10.050 Financial guarantee.

“Financial guarantee” means a form of financial security posted to ensure timely and proper completion of improvements, to ensure compliance with this code, and/or to warranty materials, workmanship of improvements, and design. Financial guarantees include assignments of funds, cash deposits, surety bonds, and/or other forms of financial security acceptable to the director. For the purposes of this title, the terms “performance guarantee,” “maintenance guarantee” and “defect guarantee” are considered subcategories of financial guarantee. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.20.050).]


21.10.060 Guarantor.

“Guarantor” means a bank or other acceptable entity which issues the financial guarantee. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.20.060).]


Chapter 21.15 ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

21.15.010    Financial guarantee conditions.

21.15.020    Financial guarantees – Form and amount.

21.15.030    Performance guarantee reductions.

21.15.040    Release of financial guarantees.

21.15.050    Scheduling of final performance, maintenance, and defect inspections.

21.15.060    Financial guarantee waivers.

21.15.070    Status of current financial guarantees.

21.15.080    Performance guarantees authorized.

21.15.090    Maintenance and defect guarantees authorized.

21.15.100    Default.


21.15.010 Financial guarantee conditions.

A. Every financial guarantee shall obligate the applicant to comply with all of the provisions of this code and complete all conditions required by the permit or approval within the time limit specified.

B. The City may collect against the financial guarantee when work is not completed in a timely manner in accordance with conditions of the permit and/or approval granted pursuant to KMC Titles 12, 13, 15, 17, or 18 (or their successors). It is in the director’s sole reasonable discretion to determine whether the permit or approval conditions have been satisfied in a timely manner, and to determine whether the performance guarantee shall be collected to remedy the violation. The director shall notify the applicant in writing of any such determination. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.30.010).]


21.15.020 Financial guarantees – Form and amount.

Financial guarantees shall be in a form approved by the director, in consultation with the department of public works, the prosecuting attorney’s office, and other affected agencies. The amounts of the financial guarantees shall be based on the schedules appropriate to the required work which are updated on a periodic and frequent basis to ensure that the amount fully captures likely costs. Financial guarantees shall also require a contingency in an amount to be determined by the director. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.30.020).]


21.15.030 Performance guarantee reductions.

The director may allow reductions in performance guarantee amounts in accordance with the City’s cost estimate of the work remaining to be completed. No more than one reduction will be allowed except that two reductions may be allowed at the director’s discretion for phased subdivisions. The reduction shall not exceed 70 percent of the initial guarantee value including contingency. The request for reduction shall be in writing, accompanied by a schedule for completion of remaining work. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.30.030).]


21.15.040 Release of financial guarantees.

The department shall not release performance guarantees until all permit fees have been paid to date; maintenance guarantees and defect guarantees have been posted, if applicable; inspection of the development site has been performed; and the director has determined that the conditions and requirements of the permit/approval otherwise specified in the financial guarantee have been met and granted final construction approval if applicable. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.30.040).]


21.15.050 Scheduling of final performance, maintenance, and defect inspections.

The department shall be responsible for scheduling final performance, and maintenance and defects inspections. The department should schedule such inspections approximately 45 days prior to expiration of the performance or maintenance period. If necessary to determine completion of performance, additional inspections should also be made after the expiration of the performance period. Periodic inspections may also be made at the discretion of the director of the department of community development or the director of the department of public works. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.30.050).]


21.15.060 Financial guarantee waivers.

Consistent with Chapter 36.32 RCW, the City of Kenmore shall not require any State agency, unit of local government, or gas company or electrical company (as those terms are defined in RCW 80.04.010) to secure the performance of a permit requirement with a financial guarantee as a condition of issuing a permit or approval for a building construction project. The director, however, may require such State agency or unit of local government, gas company or electric company to sign an agreement to complete required improvements and protect the City’s rights and duty to remedy unsatisfactory performance. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.30.060).]


21.15.070 Status of current financial guarantees.

All financial guarantees required by the department and posted by the applicant prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall continue to be in force until released by the director following satisfactory compliance with financial guarantee conditions. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.30.070).]


21.15.080 Performance guarantees authorized.

A. The department is authorized to require all applicants constructing improvements pursuant to any permits and approvals granted pursuant to KMC Titles 12, 13, 15, 17, or 18 (or their successors) to post performance guarantees with the director to guarantee completion of required improvements and compliance with this code.

B. If more than one such guarantee is required, the applicant may, with the permission of the director, and to the extent allowable by law, combine guarantees; provided, that at no time shall the guaranteed amount be less than the total amount which would have been required in the form of separate financial guarantees; and provided further, that such guarantee shall on its face clearly delineate those separate additional financial guarantees which it is intended in lieu of.

C. Unless otherwise specifically indicated in this code, performance guarantees shall require actual construction and installation of required improvements within two years after recording for final subdivision, two years after recording for short subdivision, one year after right-of-way permit issuance or six months after temporary building occupancy issued for a building permit. The time limit for performance guarantee compliance may be extended by six months at the director’s discretion, if circumstances beyond the control of the applicant warrant an extension. The request for an extension shall be in writing, accompanied by a schedule for completion of remaining work. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.30.080).]


21.15.090 Maintenance and defect guarantees authorized.

A. The department is authorized to require all applicants to post a maintenance guarantee and/or defect guarantee warranting the successful operation and maintenance of improvements, and guaranteeing the workmanship, materials, and design used in construction of improvements required by the conditions of any permits or approvals issued pursuant to KMC Titles 12, 13, 15, 17, or 18 (or their successors) and assuring compliance with this code.

B. Unless otherwise specifically indicated in this code, all maintenance guarantees and defect guarantees shall guarantee successful operation, workmanship, materials, and design of required facilities for a period of two years following final inspection and approval of improvements.

C. Inspections of facilities required pursuant to KMC Titles 12, 13, 15, 17, or 18 (or their successors) should be scheduled by the appropriate department approximately 45 days prior to the end of the two-year maintenance and/or defect period. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.30.090).]


21.15.100 Default.

A. Determination of default shall be made by the department after an inspection has indicated that improvements need to be corrected or completed. In the event of failure to comply with any of the conditions and terms of the permits and/or approvals covered by this title, the director shall notify the applicant and guarantor in writing of the default. If satisfactory assurance is not received by the department within a time period determined by the director, that conditions will be appropriately corrected, the department may:

1. Order the applicant to perform all necessary corrective work; and/or

2. Demand payment on the financial guarantee(s). Nothing in this title shall limit the ability of the City of Kenmore to enforce or otherwise compel compliance with conditions of any City permit or approval in accordance with any enforcement provision set forth in Chapter 1.20 KMC.

B. The guarantor shall be responsible, up to the limits of the financial guarantee, for the payment of any and all necessary costs and expenses that have been or will be incurred or expended by the City of Kenmore in causing any and all such required work to be done. In the event that total costs associated with the required work exceed the guarantee amount, the applicant shall remain responsible to the City of Kenmore for the payment of any remaining amount.

C. In the event of default, the City of Kenmore may contract with a third party to complete work required pursuant to this title. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.30.100).]


Chapter 21.20 REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

21.20.010    General.

21.20.020    Drainage improvements.

21.20.030    Restoration and reclamation activities.

21.20.040    Rights-of-way.

21.20.050    Site development and restoration.

21.20.060    Subdivisions.

21.20.070    Landscaping.

21.20.080    Critical areas.

21.20.090    Section 309 financial guarantees.

21.20.100    Moved and temporary buildings.


21.20.010 General.

The following provisions set forth special financial guarantee requirements for certain improvements required pursuant to KMC Titles 12, 13, 15, 17 or 18 (or their successors). [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.40.010).]


21.20.020 Drainage improvements.

Financial guarantees for drainage improvements pursuant to KMC Title 13 shall be sufficient to cover the time and cost of any:

A. Monitoring required by approved plans and conditions;

B. Department review of monitoring results and reports; and

C. Corrective work on or off the project site which is necessary to provide drainage control consistent with approved plans and conditions, stabilize and restore disturbed areas and remove sources of any hazard associated with work which is in progress but is not completed. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.40.020).]


21.20.030 Restoration and reclamation activities.

A. Financial guarantees for restoration and reclamation activities required pursuant to KMC Titles 15 and 18 shall be sufficient to cover the cost of conformance with conditions of the permit, including corrective work necessary to provide drainage consistent with approved plans and conditions, to remove geologic hazards, and to protect water quality and the public health, safety, and welfare. The financial guarantee may be reduced proportionately for phased projects as work is complete and subsequent reclamation and/or restoration on each phase is completed. The request for reduction shall be in writing.

B. Financial guarantees may be waived on:

1. Projects of less than 1,000 cubic yards;

2. City of Kenmore department projects; and

3. Reclamation projects with financial guarantees posted with the State of Washington Department of Natural Resources or with the Federal Office of Surface Mining.

C. A cash guarantee shall accompany the operating permit and may be used after proper notice at the discretion of the director to correct deficiencies affecting public health, safety and welfare, including effects on water quality. The amount of the cash guarantee shall be determined by the director, and shall be maintained at the full value established by the director at all times during the life of the permit. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.40.030).]


21.20.040 Rights-of-way.

Financial guarantees for any right-of-way improvement required pursuant to KMC Title 12 shall be sufficient to cover the cost of restoring the right-of-way to original condition or complying with conditions of any permit or approval, including corrective work necessary to provide drainage consistent with approved plans and conditions, and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.40.040).]


21.20.050 Site development and restoration.

A. Financial guarantees for any improvement required pursuant to KMC Titles 15, 17, or 18 (or their successors) shall be sufficient to cover the cost of complying with conditions of the permit or approval, including corrective work necessary to provide drainage consistent with approved plans and conditions, to remove geologic hazards, and to protect water quality and the public health, safety, and welfare. Such financial guarantees shall include site restoration and stabilization requirements.

B. No temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued until:

1. Drainage facility improvements are functional;

2. Required parking is provided; and

3. Safe access is provided.

C. The director may allow a performance guarantee to be posted for some or all of the improvements required by subsection (B) of this section if no life safety hazard exists. The request shall be made in writing, accompanied by a schedule for completion of required improvements. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.40.050).]


21.20.060 Subdivisions.

A. Pursuant to RCW 58.17.130, an applicant may request recording of a subdivision prior to the completion of the construction of required improvements subject to the posting of a performance financial guarantee. Performance guarantees for subdivisions which record prior to completing all improvements shall be subject to the following requirements:

1. A performance guarantee shall be posted with the department in an amount equal to the director’s estimate for such improvements as assurance that the applicant will, within two years from the date of recording of the final subdivision, complete the improvements in accordance with the requirements and to the satisfaction of the development engineer (as defined in KMC Title 17 or its successor);

2. Requests for performance guarantees shall be in writing, shall be correlated with the original terms and conditions of preliminary approval, and shall be accompanied by a detailed schedule for completion of the improvements and conditions;

3. Performance guarantees for improvements required pursuant to KMC Title 17 (or its successor) shall be sufficient to cover the cost of conformance with conditions of the preliminary approval and approved construction plans, including corrective work necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare;

4. Maintenance guarantees and defect guarantee shall be posted with the director:

a. Prior to final construction approval and recording of the final plat when the applicant has constructed improvements in accordance with the approval of the director and the development engineer, or

b. Prior to final construction approval and the release of performance guarantees when the applicant has previously recorded the plat;

5. Maintenance guarantees and defect guarantees shall be released following a final maintenance and defect inspection and, if applicable, acceptance of the facilities for City maintenance. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.40.060).]


21.20.070 Landscaping.

A. Prior to receiving a temporary or permanent occupancy certificate for any building or structure for which KMC Title 18 requires landscaping, an applicant shall provide the required performance guarantee to secure the completion and improvement of required landscaping, in accordance with approved site plan, within three months following issuance of the building or buildings temporary or permanent occupancy certificate, whichever comes first.

B. Performance guarantees for landscaping required pursuant to Chapter 18.35 KMC shall be sufficient to cover the cost of conformance with conditions of the permit, and shall be required for a period of two years after the planting or transplanting of vegetation to insure proper installation, establishment and maintenance. This time period may be extended by one year by the director, if necessary to cover a planting and growing season.

C. The director may extend the time limit for compliance with the above landscaping requirement up to one year after issuance of the occupancy certificate if circumstances beyond the control of the applicant warrant an extension. The request for an extension shall be in writing, accompanied by a schedule for completion of remaining work. [Ord. 11-0329 § 15; Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.40.070).]


21.20.080 Critical areas.

A. Financial guarantees for mitigation required pursuant to Chapter 18.55 KMC shall be sufficient to guarantee that all required mitigation measures will be completed no later than the time established by the City of Kenmore in accordance with Chapter 18.55 KMC.

B. Performance and maintenance guarantees shall also be required for restoration of a critical area or buffer not performed as part of a mitigation or maintenance plan except that no financial guarantee shall be required for minor stream restoration carried out pursuant to Chapter 18.55 KMC.

C. For maintenance guarantees associated with mitigation, corrective work, restoration or enhancement, the financial guarantee shall be sufficient to cover the time and cost to guarantee satisfactory workmanship, materials and performance of structures and improvements required by Chapter 18.55 KMC and any monitoring of those structures and improvements required by approved plans and conditions.

D. Public development proposals shall be relieved from having to comply with the provisions of this section if public funds have previously been committed for mitigation, maintenance, monitoring or restoration. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.40.080).]


21.20.090 Section 309 financial guarantees.

Financial guarantees required pursuant to Section 309 of the King County modifications to the current Uniform Building Code shall be in the form of cash deposited with the director, assignment of funds approved by the director, or in an irrevocable escrow in an amount sufficient to restore the building and site, and to perform corrective work required by KMC Title 15. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.40.090).]


21.20.100 Moved and temporary buildings.

Financial guarantees required with respect to moved or temporary buildings pursuant to Section 104(e) of the King County modifications to the current Uniform Building Code shall be in the form of cash deposited with the director, assignment of funds approved by the director, or in an approved irrevocable escrow in a sufficient amount to be determined by the director. [Ord. 99-0058 § 1; Ord. 98-0020 § 1 (KCC 27A.40.100).]



-----------------------------

The Kenmore Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 20-508, passed June 22, 2020.

Disclaimer: The City Clerk’s office has the official version of the Kenmore Municipal Code. Users should contact the City Clerk’s office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: https://www.kenmorewa.gov City Telephone: (425) 398-8900

Code Publishing Company