Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:
1.04         Codification
1.08         Duty of Enforcement
1.12         City Holidays
1.16         City Hall Office Hours
1.20         City Logo and Seal
1.24         Public Disclosure
1.28         Indemnification
1.29         Initiative and Referendum
1.32         Code of Ethics
1.36         Hearing Examiner System
1.38         Procedures for Quasi-Judicial Hearings
1.40         City Manager Code Responsibilities
1.42         Contracting Requirements – Lawful Hiring Compliance
1.44         General Penalties
1.48         Classification of Infractions
1.51         Acceptance of Donations

Chapter 1.04 CODIFICATION

Sections:
1.04.010     Code adopted.
1.04.020     City Manager authority.
1.04.030     Codification authority.
1.04.040     Codes adopted by reference.
1.04.050     Title, citation and reference.
1.04.060     Reference applies to amendments.
1.04.070     Definitions.
1.04.080     Headings.
1.04.090     Reference to specific ordinances.
1.04.100     Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
1.04.110     Adoption of code not to affect ordinances relating to “reserved” subject matter.

1.04.010 Code adopted.
The Lakewood Municipal Code, as compiled with the ordinances of the City, and edited and published by or at the direction of the City Manager or designee is adopted as the official code of the City. [Ord. 34 § 1, 1996.]

1.04.020 City Manager authority.
The City Manager of the City or designee is authorized to provide for the codification and publication of the Lakewood Municipal Code, including authority to compile ordinances of the City and to devise an appropriate method for cataloging, indexing and formatting the Lakewood Municipal Code, and to take any and all steps in the discretion of the City Manager deemed to be advisable to edit and publish the Lakewood Municipal Code in terms consistent with the terms, provisions and intentions of the ordinances of the City. [Ord. 34 § 2, 1996.]

1.04.030 Codification authority.
This code consists of the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances codified pursuant to RCW 35A.21.130. The City Manager or designee or company or any successor appointed by the City as its code revisor shall have the following specific authority as to editing, rearranging, and/or grouping of ordinances:
A. Editing ordinances to the extent deemed necessary or desirable for the purpose of modernizing and clarifying the language of such ordinances, but without changing the meaning of any such ordinance;
B. Substituting for the term “this ordinance,” where necessary, the term “section,” “part,” “code,” “chapter,” “title,” or reference to specific section or chapter numbers, as the case may require;
C. Correcting manifest errors in reference to other ordinances, laws and statutes, and manifest spelling, clerical or typographical errors, additions, or omissions;
D. Dividing long sections into two or more sections and rearranging the order of sections to ensure a logical arrangement of subject matter;
E. Changing the wording of section captions, if any, and providing captions to new chapters and sections;
F. Striking provisions manifestly obsolete and eliminating conflicts and inconsistencies so as to give effect to the legislative intent. [Ord. 34 § 3, 1996.]

1.04.040 Codes adopted by reference.
All sections, provisions and portions of state, county, regional and federal codes and regulations adopted by reference and incorporated into the Lakewood Municipal Code shall be kept on file in the Office of the City Clerk, and shall be available for inspection by the public at reasonable times and under reasonable circumstances. All such copies shall be cataloged and entered in an indexed book kept for such purpose, with such entries authenticated by the City Clerk. [Ord. 34 § 4, 1996.]

1.04.050 Title, citation and reference.
This code shall be known as the “Lakewood Municipal Code,” and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the “Lakewood Municipal Code” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. A copy of the code shall be received without further proof as the ordinances of permanent and general effect of the City in all courts and administrative tribunals of the state of Washington. It shall also be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction of, or repeal of the Lakewood Municipal Code. Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the Lakewood Municipal Code, and such reference shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in that code. [Ord. 34 § 5, 1996.]

1.04.060 Reference applies to amendments.
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the “Lakewood Municipal Code” or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinances of the City, that reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now, or hereafter made. Any ordinances amending the codification shall set forth in full the section or sections, or subsection or subsections, of the codification being amended, as the case may be, and this shall constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement that no ordinance or section thereof shall be revised or amended unless the new ordinance sets forth the revised or amended ordinance or section in full. [Ord. 34 § 6, 1996.]

1.04.070 Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and phrases where used in the ordinances of the City shall have the meaning and construction given in this section:
“Across” includes along, in or upon.
“City” means the City of Lakewood.
“City Council” means the City Council of the City of Lakewood.
“Code” means the Lakewood Municipal Code.
“County” means the county of Pierce.
“Ex officio” means by virtue of office.
Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
“Goods” includes wares and merchandise.
Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular.
“Oath” includes affirmation.
“Operate” or “engage in” includes carry on, keep, conduct, maintain, or cause to be kept or maintained.
“Owner” when pertaining to a building or land includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, or joint tenant of the whole or part of such building or land.
“Person” means any natural person, firm, association, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, organization, club, company, corporation, business trust, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.
“Sale” includes any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale.
“Shall” is mandatory, “may” is permissive.
“State” means the state of Washington.
“Street” includes all streets, highways, public roads, county roads, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, sidewalks, parkways, or other public ways in the City which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state.
“Tenant” or “occupant” when pertaining to a building or land includes any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future tense includes the present tense.
Title of Office. The use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the City of Lakewood. [Ord. 34 § 7, 1996.]

1.04.080 Headings.
Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter, or section hereof. [Ord. 34 § 8, 1996.]

1.04.090 Reference to specific ordinances.
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect deposits or other matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within this code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. [Ord. 34 § 9, 1996.]

1.04.100 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment hereby of any ordinance or any part of any ordinance of the City shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. [Ord. 34 § 10, 1996.]

1.04.110 Adoption of code not to affect ordinances relating to “reserved” subject matter.
The adoption of this code shall not be construed to repeal, supersede or modify any existing ordinances of a penal or regulatory nature relating to subject matter for which titles and chapters of this code have been assigned and designated herein as “reserved.” [Ord. 34 § 11, 1996.]

Chapter 1.08 DUTY OF ENFORCEMENT

Sections:
1.08.010     Duty of enforcement.
1.08.020     General severability.

1.08.010 Duty of enforcement.
It is the intent of the City Council that any duty of enforcement of any codes, ordinances or regulations of the City, or any part thereof, be owed to the public at large, and not to any individual members of the public. The City Council, further, intends to make no assurances or promises of protection thereby or enforcement thereof to any individual, and that no special relationship regarding enforcement of any code, ordinance or regulation shall exist with any individual which would set such individual apart from the general public. [Ord. 36 § 1, 1996.]

1.08.020 General severability.
If any provision of this code or of any other code, ordinance or regulation adopted by the City Council of the City of Lakewood, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held to be invalid, the remainder of such code, ordinance or regulation or the application thereof to other person or circumstances shall not be affected. [Ord. 36 § 2, 1996.]

Chapter 1.12 CITY HOLIDAYS

Sections:
1.12.010     City holidays.
1.12.020     Employee holidays.
1.12.030     Holidays based on reasons of faith or conscience.

1.12.010 City holidays.
A. The following days shall be the official legal holidays of the City:
    1. January 1st, to be known as New Year’s Day;
    2. The third Monday of January, celebrated as the anniversary of the birth of Martin Luther King, Jr.;
    3. The third Monday in February, to be known as President’s Day and to be celebrated as the anniversary of the birthdays of Abraham Lincoln and George Washington;
    4. The last Monday of May, to be known as Memorial Day;
    5. July 4th, being the anniversary of the Declaration of Independence;
    6. The first Monday in September, to be known as Labor Day;
    7. November 11th, to be known as Veterans Day;
    8. The fourth Thursday in November, to be known as Thanksgiving Day;
    9. The day immediately following Thanksgiving Day;
    10. December 25th, to be known as Christmas Day.
B. City Hall shall be closed for regular business on the City Hall holidays listed above. [Ord. 3 § 1, 1995.]

1.12.020 Employee holidays.
In addition to the holidays listed in LMC 1.12.010, all full-time regular employees of the City shall be granted an additional paid “floating” holiday per year after completion of one year with the City, at a date to be approved by the employee’s department head or the City Manager, which holiday must be used within one year of the date granted. [Ord. 3 § 1, 1995.]

1.12.030 Holidays based on reasons of faith or conscience.
A. Employees are entitled to two unpaid holidays per calendar year for a reason of faith or conscience, or for an organized activity conducted under the auspices of a religious denomination, church or religious organization. A partial day off will count as a full day towards the yearly allotment of two days.
B. An employee’s request for leave under this section shall be in writing to the supervisor and department director. The request should be submitted at least two weeks in advance, and shall include the following information: (1) the employee’s name; (2) the dates for which leave is requested; (3) a sufficient description of reason for the leave to allow a determination that the leave is subject to this section; and (4) if the request is untimely, the reason why it was not possible to submit the request in a timely manner.
C. A leave request made under this section shall be approved unless the employee’s absence would impose an undue hardship upon the City or the employee is necessary to maintain public safety. [Ord. 586 § 1, 2014.]

Chapter 1.16 CITY HALL OFFICE HOURS

Sections:
1.16.010     City Hall hours of operation.

1.16.010 City Hall hours of operation.
The hours of operation of City offices will be from 8:30 a.m. through 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday; provided, that the City Manager may alter the hours of operation of City offices on a temporary basis as the City Manager deems necessary for the efficient operation of the City or to address particular needs of the City. [Ord. 271 § 1, 2001; Ord. 9 § 1, 1995.]

Chapter 1.20 CITY LOGO AND SEAL

Sections:
1.20.010     Policy.
1.20.020     Historic logo.
1.20.025     Adoption of logo.
1.20.030     Adoption of seal.
1.20.040     Use for official purposes.
1.20.050     Restrictions on use.
1.20.060     Violation.

1.20.010 Policy.
The City Council finds that the logos and seal of the City, as set forth herein below, are symbols of the authority and jurisdiction of the City, and as such are valuable assets of the City and its citizens. The City Council desires to ensure that only appropriate uses are made of the City’s logos and seal. [Ord. 547 § 1, 2012; Ord. 65 § 1, 1996.]

1.20.020 Historic logo.
The City hereby recognizes the symbol depicted below as the historic City logo for the City of Lakewood:
[IMAGE: <1.20.020_001.jpg>]
The historic City logo depicted above is a stylized portrayal of the City’s lakes and forests/trees, with Mt. Rainier depicted in the background. The words “City of Lakewood,” whether in the style set forth above or in another style, are integrated into the design.
The historic City logo is retired upon the effective date of LMC 1.20.025. [Ord. 547 § 1, 2012; Ord. 65 § 2, 1996.]

1.20.025 Adoption of logo.
A. Primary Logo. The City hereby adopts the symbol depicted below as the primary City logo for the City of Lakewood:
[IMAGE: <Seal.jpg>]
The primary City logo depicted above is a stylized portrayal of the City’s lakes and forests/trees, with Mt. Rainier depicted in the background. The words “City of Lakewood, WA,” and the year of incorporation, 1996, are integrated into the design.
B. Secondary Logo. The City hereby adopts the symbol depicted below as the secondary City logo for the City of Lakewood:
[IMAGE: <1.20.025_001.png>]
The secondary City logo depicted above is a stylized portrayal of the City’s lakes and forests/trees, with Mt. Rainier depicted in the background. The words “City of Lakewood” are integrated into the design.
C. Emblem Logo. The City hereby adopts the symbol depicted below as the City emblem logo for the City of Lakewood:
[IMAGE: <1.20.025_002.png>]
The emblem logo depicted above is a stylized portrayal of the City’s lakes and forests/trees, with Mt. Rainier depicted in the background. [Ord. 549 § 1, 2012; Ord. 547 § 1, 2012.]

1.20.030 Adoption of seal.
The City adopts the symbol depicted below as the City seal.
[IMAGE: <1.20.030_001.jpg>]
The City seal depicted above incorporates the image of the City’s logo, with the words “City of Lakewood, WA,” and the year of incorporation, 1996, integrated into the design. [Ord. 547 § 1, 2012; Ord. 65 § 3, 1996.]

1.20.040 Use for official purposes.
The City logos and seal shall be used for official purposes only, or as authorized by the City Council. [Ord. 547 § 1, 2012; Ord. 65 § 4, 1996.]

1.20.050 Restrictions on use.
Use of the City logos and seal shall be restricted as follows:
A. Except as authorized by the City or as otherwise provided by law, the City logos and seal shall not be used on or in connection with any advertisement or promotion for any product, business, organization, service or article, whether offered for sale, for profit or offered without charge.
B. No persons shall use a symbol that imitates the City logos or seal or that is deceptively similar in appearance to the City logos or seal. [Ord. 547 § 1, 2012; Ord. 65 § 5, 1996.]

1.20.060 Violation.
Any person who willfully violates this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and is subject to punishment as set forth in the City’s penalty provisions for such violations. The City’s right to prosecute under this section shall not affect its rights to pursue civil or injunctive relief under federal or state laws, or any other relief available under the law. [Ord. 65 § 6, 1996.]

Chapter 1.24 PUBLIC DISCLOSURE

Sections:
1.24.010     Relationship to Public Records Disclosure Act.
1.24.020     Disclosure of public records.
1.24.030     Definitions of public records and writing.
1.24.040     Copyright enforcement.
1.24.045     Public records officer.
1.24.050     Maintenance of records.
1.24.055     Index of public records – Findings.
1.24.060     Exemptions.
1.24.070     Procedure for inspection or copying.
1.24.080     Reimbursement for copying costs.
1.24.090     Decision on public records requests – Procedure for review of decision.
1.24.100     Disclosure prohibited by other statutes.
1.24.110     Model rules and administrative procedures.

1.24.010 Relationship to Public Records Disclosure Act.
This chapter constitutes the City’s rules and regulations to carry out and implement the Public Records Disclosure Act, Chapter 42.56 RCW. Except as provided in this chapter, Chapter 42.56 RCW shall apply to all City public records. [Ord. 422 § 1, 2006; Ord. 12 § 1, 1995.]

1.24.020 Disclosure of public records.
Unless exempt from disclosure under this chapter, public records shall be available for inspection and copying in accordance with this chapter. [Ord. 12 § 2, 1995.]

1.24.030 Definitions of public records and writing.
“Public record” means (1) any writing; (2) any computer data and databases and computer generated documents, maps and drawings; and (3) any software and special applications for software developed by City officers and employees in the scope of their employment, containing information relating to the conduct of government or the performance of any governmental or proprietary function prepared, owned, used, or retained by the City regardless of physical form or characteristics.
“Writing” means handwriting, typewriting, printing, photostatting, photographing, and every other means of recording any form of communication or representation, including, but not limited to, letters, words, pictures, sounds, or symbols, or combination thereof, and all papers, maps, magnetic or paper tapes, photographic films and prints, motion picture, film and video recordings, magnetic or punched cards, discs, drums, diskettes, sound recordings, and other documents including existing data compilations from which information may be obtained or translated. [Ord. 12 § 3, 1995.]

1.24.040 Copyright enforcement.
The City recognizes that any software and special applications for software developed by City officers and employees in the scope of their employment are owned by the City pursuant to the copyright laws, 17 U.S.C. Sections 101 and 201. The City will make available to all requesters a license to use such software so as to make use of all public data. [Ord. 12 § 4, 1995.]

1.24.045 Public records officer.
The City Clerk or designee shall serve as the City’s public records officer for whom members of the public may direct requests for disclosure of public records. [Ord. 422 § 1, 2006.]

1.24.050 Maintenance of records.
All substantive and procedural rules of general applicability, including but not limited to ordinances and resolutions of the City Council, minutes of the regular meetings of the City Council, and statements of general policy, and all public contracts, deeds, easements and leases shall be indexed and maintained in the Office of the City Clerk for the use of the City and of the general public. [Ord. 422 § 1, 2006; Ord. 12 § 5, 1995.]

1.24.055 Index of public records – Findings.
A. Chapter 42.56 RCW requires all cities and public agencies to maintain and make available a current index of all public records.
B. Chapter 42.56 RCW provides that if maintaining such an index would be unduly burdensome, or would interfere with agency operation, a City need not maintain such an index but it must issue and publish a formal order specifying the reasons why and the extent to which compliance would be unduly burdensome.
C. The City of Lakewood is comprised of numerous departments, their divisions and subdivisions, which maintain separate databases and/or record-keeping systems for the indexing of records and information.
D. Because the City has records which are diverse, complex and stored in multiple locations and in multiple computer systems, formats and/or databases, it is unduly burdensome, if not physically impossible, to maintain a current index of all records.
E. The City of Lakewood will make available for inspection and/or copying all public records, including any indexes that are maintained by the City pursuant to the Public Disclosure Act, Chapter 42.56 RCW and this chapter. [Ord. 422 § 1, 2006.]

1.24.060 Exemptions.
A. Any record which is exempt from disclosure under state law shall be exempt from public inspection and copying.
B. The exemptions from public disclosure shall be inapplicable to the extent that information, the disclosure of which would violate personal privacy or vital governmental interests, can be deleted from the specific records sought. No exemption shall be construed to permit the nondisclosure of statistical information not descriptive of any readily identifiable person or persons.
C. Inspection or copying of any specific exempt records may be permitted if the Pierce County Superior Court finds, after a hearing with notice thereof to every person interested and to the City, that the exemption of such records is clearly unnecessary to protect any individual’s right of privacy or any vital governmental function.
D. Nothing in this section shall affect a positive duty of the City to disclose or a positive duty to withhold information which duty to disclose or withhold is contained in any other law. [Ord. 422 § 1, 2006; Ord. 12 § 6, 1995.]

1.24.070 Procedure for inspection or copying.
A. Persons wishing to inspect or copy City records shall first make such request to the City Clerk or the department head of the City department which maintains the requested records. If the requestor does not know which department maintains the records, the request shall be made to the City Clerk. All assistance necessary to help the requestor locate the particular record shall be provided promptly either by the City Clerk or by the particular department maintaining the records. The provision of such assistance shall not unreasonably disrupt the normal operations of the City Clerk, the department, or the assisting employee.
B. The City Clerk or other City employee shall not distinguish among persons requesting records. Persons requesting records shall not be required to provide information as to the purpose for the request, except to establish whether the inspection or copying would violate Chapter 42.56 RCW or other statute or ordinance which exempts or prohibits disclosure of specific information or records to certain persons. [Ord. 422 § 1, 2006; Ord. 12 § 7, 1995.]

1.24.080 Reimbursement for copying costs.
A. Copies of written records, maps, photographs including slides, audio tape recordings, video tape recordings and diskettes shall be made and provided by the City upon request and payment of the actual cost of reproducing the same, which cost shall be established by City Council resolution.
B. Labor and mailing costs shall be included in the cost of reproduction. The costs include the actual cost of paper and per page cost for the use of copying equipment, costs directly incident to shipping including postage or delivery charges and the cost of any container or envelope and staff time to copy such public records pursuant to Chapter 42.56 RCW. The costs of reproduction provided for by resolution shall include, but not be limited to, the following records: street maps, zoning maps, zoning codes, ordinances, public meeting minutes, resolutions, verbatim transcripts, deeds, contracts, and other records of the character contemplated in LMC 1.24.010.
C. The City may, at its discretion, require the requestor to deposit a sum in an amount not to exceed 10 percent of the estimated cost of providing copies for a request. If the request is made available on a partial or installment basis, the City may charge for each part of the request as it is provided. If an installment of a records request is not claimed or reviewed, the City is not obligated to fulfill the balance of the request.
D. Failure to Pay Required Fees. In the event a requestor fails to pay a bill for fees incurred within 30 calendar days, the City shall require the requestor to pay in full the past due amount owed before it will begin processing a new request or a pending request from the delinquent requestor. In addition, the City may require advance payment for any future requests of the full amount of the estimated fee before the City begins to process a new request or a pending request from the requestor. If the City is unable to collect the duplication fees from the requestor, the City may, upon providing 30 calendar days’ prior written notice to the requestor, destroy the duplication set of records made available to the requestor in order to avoid storage concerns. Although the records are destroyed, the requestor shall still be made responsible for the costs the City incurred in duplicating the records originally requested by the requestor.
E. Where the request is for a certified copy, there shall be an additional charge in the amount established by City Council resolution to cover the additional expense and time required for certification.
F. The City Clerk or a department head may provide copies of City records at no charge to individuals or government agencies doing business with the City, if the City Clerk or department head determines such action is in the best interests of the City. [Ord. 422 § 1, 2006; Ord. 12 § 8, 1995.]

1.24.090 Decision on public records requests – Procedure for review of decision.
A. Upon receiving an oral or written request to inspect or copy a public record, the City Clerk or the department head shall grant the request unless the City Clerk or department head determines that the record requested is or may be exempt from disclosure in whole or in part, in which case the City Clerk or department head shall require that the requestor complete a written request for public records form.
B. A department head shall immediately deliver a completed written request for public records form to the City Clerk.
C. Upon receiving a completed written request for records form, the City Clerk shall determine whether the requested record is exempt by law from inspection and copying in whole or in part. Within five business days of the date of receipt by the City of the written request for a record, the City Clerk shall:
    1. Provide the record; or
    2. Acknowledge that the City has received the request and provide a reasonable estimate of the time the City will require to respond to the request; or
    3. Deny the public record request.
Additional time to respond to a request may be based upon the need to clarify the intent of the request, to locate and assemble the information requested, to notify third persons or agencies affected by the request, or to determine whether any of the information requested is exempt. If a public records request is unclear, the City Clerk may ask the requester to clarify what information the requester is requesting. If the requester fails to clarify the request, the City need not respond to the request.
D. If the City Clerk determines that the document is exempt in part but can be made available after deletion of exempt portions, or after deletion of portions which would violate personal privacy or vital governmental interests, the request shall be granted; provided, that such exempt portions shall first be deleted. If the City Clerk determines to deny the request, in whole or in part, a written statement of the specific reasons for the denial shall be provided to the requester.
E. A decision by the City Clerk denying inspection shall be reviewed by the City Attorney. Such review shall be deemed complete at the end of the second business day following the denial of inspection and shall constitute final City action for the purposes of judicial review. The requester shall be notified by mail of the decision to grant or deny the request. [Ord. 12 § 9, 1995.]

1.24.100 Disclosure prohibited by other statutes.
The City shall not be required by this chapter to permit public inspection and copying of any record to the extent public disclosure of the record is prohibited, restricted or limited by any state or federal statute or regulation including, but not limited to, Chapter 10.97 RCW, the Washington State Criminal Records Privacy Act, Chapter 13.50 RCW, relating to release of records by juvenile justice or care agencies, or Chapter 46.52 RCW, relating to accident reports and abandoned vehicles. [Ord. 12 § 10, 1995.]

1.24.110 Model rules and administrative procedures.
The City shall follow the Public Records Act Model Rules on file at the City Clerk’s Office for complying with the Public Records Act. The City Manager, upon recommendation of the City Clerk, may issue administrative procedures for the implementation of this chapter. [Ord. 422 § 1, 2006; Ord. 12 § 11, 1995.]

Chapter 1.28 INDEMNIFICATION

Sections:
1.28.010     Procedure for indemnification of officers and employees created.
1.28.020     Definitions.
1.28.030     Legal representation.
1.28.040     Exclusions.
1.28.050     Determination of exclusion.
1.28.060     Representation and payment of claims – Conditions.
1.28.070     Effect of compliance with conditions.
1.28.080     Failure to comply with conditions.
1.28.090     Reimbursement of incurred expenses.
1.28.100     Conflict with provisions of insurance policies.
1.28.110     Pending claims.
1.28.120     Modifications of chapter.

1.28.010 Procedure for indemnification of officers and employees created.
There is hereby created a procedure to provide for indemnification and for defense of claims of liability arising from acts or omissions of officers and employees of the City, including volunteers, while performed or in good faith purported to have been performed in the scope of the official duties of such officers or employees, including volunteers. [Ord. 692 § 1, 2018; Ord. 19 § 1, 1995.]

1.28.020 Definitions.
Unless the context indicates otherwise, the words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meaning:
“Employee” means any person who is or has been employed by the City, including volunteers.
“Official” means any person who is serving or has served as an elected City official, and any person who is serving or who has served as an appointed member of any City board, commission, committee or any other appointed position with the City. [Ord. 692 § 1, 2018; Ord. 19 § 2, 1995.]

1.28.030 Legal representation.
A. The City shall provide to an official or employee, subject to the conditions and requirements of this chapter, and notwithstanding the fact that such official or employee may have concluded service or employment with the City, such legal representation as may be reasonably necessary to defend a claim or lawsuit filed against such official or employee resulting from any conduct, act or omission of such official or employee performed or omitted on behalf of the City in his/her capacity as a City official or employee, which act or omission is within the scope of his/her service or employment with the City.
B. The legal services shall be provided by the Office of the City Attorney unless:
    1. Any provision of an applicable policy of insurance provides otherwise; or
    2. The City Attorney appoints alternate legal counsel to the case. [Ord. 692 § 1, 2018; Ord. 19 § 3, 1995.]

1.28.040 Exclusions.
A. Except as otherwise determined pursuant to LMC 1.28.050, in no event shall protection as provided by this chapter be offered by the City to or involving:
    1. Any dishonest, fraudulent, criminal, willful, intentional or malicious act or course of conduct of an official or an employee;
    2. Any act or course of conduct of an official or employee which is not performed on behalf of the City;
    3. Any act or course of conduct which is outside the scope of an official’s or employee’s service or employment with the City;
    4. Any lawsuit brought against an official or employee by or on behalf of the City; and/or
    5. Any action or omission contrary to or not in furtherance of any adopted City policy.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall have no force or effect with respect to any accident, occurrence or circumstance for which the City or the official or employee is insured from whatever source against loss or damage; provided, that the provisions of this chapter shall apply in the event the loss or damages fall within the deductible or exclusion(s) of the City’s applicable insurance policy. The provisions of this chapter are intended to be secondary to any contract or policy of insurance whether owned by or otherwise applicable to any official or employee. The City shall have the right to require an employee to fully utilize any such policy protection prior to requesting the protection afforded by this chapter. [Ord. 692 § 1, 2018; Ord. 19 § 4, 1995.]

1.28.050 Determination of exclusion.
A. The determination of whether an official or employee shall be afforded a defense by the City under the terms of this chapter shall be made by the City Council on the recommendation of the City Manager. The decision of the City Council shall be final as a legislative determination and shall be based upon a finding that an official or employee meets or does not meet the criteria of this chapter. Nothing herein shall preclude the City from undertaking an officer’s or employee’s defense under a reservation of rights. The determination as to whether a defense is to be furnished as provided under this chapter to a member or to members of the City Council shall be made without the vote of such member or members of the City Council unless the inclusion of such member or members is required for a quorum; provided, that if a claim or lawsuit affects a quorum or greater number of the members of the City Council, all such affected members shall retain their voting privileges under this section.
B. In cases which pose the potential for an award of punitive damages against City officials or employees acting in the course of employment, such as certain tort and civil rights actions, the City shall issue a reservation of rights, as referenced in subsection A of this section, to each individual employee who may be exposed to such individual liability. The City, as directed by the City Manager, shall further conduct an investigation, the findings of which shall be presented to the City Council for a determination as to whether any punitive damages awarded shall be paid by the City.
C. If any such action or proceeding results in any monetary judgment against such City official or employee, the City Council shall, by resolution, provide for the City’s payment in full of such judgment. Upon consideration of the particular facts of the case, as determined through the City Manager’s investigation, the City Council may also provide for the City’s payment of any punitive damages included in such judgment; provided, however, that this provision for payment by the City of punitive damages on behalf of a City official or employee under this chapter shall not be construed as a waiver of the City’s immunity to punitive damages. [Ord. 692 § 1, 2018; Ord. 19 § 5, 1995.]

1.28.060 Representation and payment of claims – Conditions.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply only when the following conditions are met:
A. In the event of any incident or course of conduct potentially giving rise to a claim for damages, or for the commencement of a lawsuit, the official or employee involved shall, as soon as practicable, give the City Manager written notice thereof; identifying the official or employee involved, all information known to the official or employee involved with respect to the date, time, place and circumstances surrounding the incident or conduct giving rise to the potential claim or lawsuit, as well as the names and addresses of all persons allegedly injured or otherwise damaged thereby, and the names and addresses of all witnesses;
B. Upon receipt thereof, the official or employee shall forthwith deliver any claim, demand, notice or summons or other process relating to any such incident or conduct to the City Manager, and shall cooperate with the City Attorney or, if the City Attorney authorizes or designates another attorney to handle the matter, with that attorney, and, upon request, shall assist in making settlement of any suit and enforcing any claim for any right of subrogation against any persons or organizations that may be liable to the City because of any damage or claim of loss arising from said incident or course of conduct, including, but not limited to, rights of recovery for costs and attorney’s fees arising out of state or federal statute upon a determination that the lawsuit brought was frivolous in nature;
C. Such official or employee shall attend interviews, depositions, hearings and trials and shall assist in securing and giving evidence and obtaining assistance of witnesses all without any additional compensation to the official or employee, and, in the event that an employee has left the employ of the City, no fee or compensation shall be provided; and
D. Such official or employee shall not accept or voluntarily make any payment, assume any obligation, or incur any expense related to said claim or lawsuit, other than for first aid to others at the time of any incident or course of conduct giving rise to any such claim, loss or damage. Nothing herein shall be deemed to preclude any official or employee from retaining an attorney to represent his/her interests relating to such claim or lawsuit; however, all costs and expenses incurred thereby shall be paid by the official or the employee. [Ord. 692 § 1, 2018; Ord. 19 § 6, 1995.]

1.28.070 Effect of compliance with conditions.
If legal representation of an official or employee is undertaken by the City, all of the conditions of representation are met, and a judgment is entered against the official or employee, or a settlement is made, the City shall pay such judgment or settlement; provided, that the City may at its discretion appeal as necessary any such judgment. [Ord. 692 § 1, 2018; Ord. 19 § 7, 1995.]

1.28.080 Failure to comply with conditions.
In the event that any official or employee fails or refuses to comply with any of the conditions set forth in LMC 1.28.060, or elects to provide his/her own representation with respect to any such claim or litigation, then all of the provisions of this chapter shall be inapplicable, and shall have no force or effect with respect to any such claim or litigation. [Ord. 692 § 1, 2018; Ord. 19 § 8, 1995.]

1.28.090 Reimbursement of incurred expenses.
A. If the City determines that an official or employee does not come within the provisions of this chapter, and a court of competent jurisdiction later determines that such claim does come within the provisions of this chapter, then the City shall pay any judgment rendered against the official or employee and reasonable attorney’s fees incurred in defending against the claim. The City shall pay any costs and reasonable attorney’s fees incurred in obtaining the determination that such claim is covered by the provisions of this chapter; provided, that if a court of competent jurisdiction determines that such claim does not come within the provisions of this chapter, then the official or employee shall pay the City’s costs and reasonable attorney’s fees incurred in obtaining the determination that such claim is not covered under the provisions of this chapter.
B. If the City determines that a claim against a City official or employee does come within the provisions of this chapter, and a court of competent jurisdiction later finds that such claim does not come within the provisions of this chapter, then the City shall be reimbursed by the official or employee for costs or expenses incurred in obtaining the determination that such claim is not covered by the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 692 § 1, 2018; Ord. 19 § 9, 1995.]

1.28.100 Conflict with provisions of insurance policies.
The indemnification provisions of this chapter do not constitute a policy of insurance, and nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to modify or amend any provisions of any policy of insurance where City official or employee thereof is the named insured. In the event of any conflict between this chapter and the provisions of any such policy of insurance, the policy provisions shall be controlling; provided, however, that nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to limit or restrict any employee’s or official’s right to full coverage pursuant to this chapter, it being the intent of this chapter to provide the coverage detailed in this chapter only outside and beyond insurance policies which may be in effect while not compromising the terms and conditions of such policies by any conflicting provisions contained in this chapter. [Ord. 692 § 1, 2018; Ord. 19 § 10, 1995.]

1.28.110 Pending claims.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any claims or lawsuits filed against any official or employee, and any such claims or lawsuits hereinafter filed, irrespective of the date of the events or circumstances which are the basis of such claim or lawsuit. [Ord. 692 § 1, 2018; Ord. 19 § 11, 1995.]

1.28.120 Modifications of chapter.
The provisions of this chapter shall be subject to amendment, modification and repeal, at the sole discretion of the City Council; provided, that any such amendment, modification or repeal shall apply prospectively only, and shall have no effect on the obligation of the City to indemnify and/or defend against any claim which is based, in whole or in part, upon any action or omission of an official occurring prior to the effective date of the amendment, modification or repeal. [Ord. 692 § 1, 2018; Ord. 19 § 12, 1995.]

Chapter 1.29 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

Sections:
1.29.010     Power of initiative and referendum adopted.
1.29.020     Time for submission of petitions in support of initiative and referendum.

1.29.010 Power of initiative and referendum adopted.
The City of Lakewood hereby adopts the powers of initiative and referendum for the qualified electors to the City as provided pursuant to RCW 35A.11.080 through 35A.11.100. Such powers are to be exercised as provided in the above referenced sections of the Revised Code of Washington as they now exist or may be amended from time to time and said sections are hereby incorporated in full by this reference. [Ord. 417 § 1, 2006.]

1.29.020 Time for submission of petitions in support of initiative and referendum.
Citizen petitions seeking to put on an election ballot any initiative or referendum must be submitted to the City of Lakewood no later than the close of business Tuesday no later than 60 days before the County Auditor’s resolution deadline in order to be included in the next scheduled election. Citizen petitions submitted later than this deadline may be submitted for inclusion in a subsequent election. [Ord. 490 § 1, 2009.]

Chapter 1.32 CODE OF ETHICS

Sections:
1.32.010     Policy.
1.32.020     Definitions.
1.32.030     Use of City property.
1.32.040     Personal gain or profit.
1.32.050     Conflict of interest.
1.32.060     Conflict of interest – Contracts.
1.32.070     Acceptance of gifts.
1.32.080     Campaign/political activities.
1.32.090     Disclosure of information records.
1.32.100     Consequences of violation.

1.32.010 Policy.
A. The purpose of this code is to acknowledge that all public officials and employees hold a public trust and are expected to adhere to a standard of behavior that does not violate, provide an opportunity to violate, or appear to violate that trust, and that shall not present apparent or actual conflicts of interest between the public trust and private interests. In addition, it is declared to be the policy of the City that no employee shall use his or her public employment for the private financial gain of that employee, or to secure special privileges for that public official or employee or any other person.
B. The City of Lakewood is committed to conducting its business in a fair, open, efficient and accountable manner. Public officials and employees shall conduct their public and private actions and financial dealings in a manner consistent with this policy. Each official and employee is assumed and expected to act in accordance with all laws and codes of ethics that may apply to his or her position, as well as striving to avoid even an appearance of impropriety in the conduct of his or her office or business. Each employee should be informed of this Code of Ethics and meet its requirements. [Ord. 27 § 1, 1996.]

1.32.020 Definitions.
Throughout this Code of Ethics, the following definitions shall apply:
Board Member. For the purposes hereof, “board member” shall include members of City boards, commissions, committees, or other multi-member bodies appointed by the City Council or by the City Manager.
City Council. For the purposes hereof, “City Council” or “Councilmember” shall include elected members of the City Council of the City of Lakewood, and members of the City Council appointed to fill unexpired terms of vacant positions on the City Council.
Employee. For the purposes hereof, the term “employee” of the City of Lakewood shall include all full-time, part-time, temporary and permanent employees of the City and all volunteers of the City. The term shall also include the City Manager except where the context indicates otherwise. For the purposes hereof, the terms “City employee” and “employee” are synonymous.
“Family” means spouse, parent, child, sibling, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, cousin, grandchild, grandparent or any parent-in-law, son- or daughter-in-law, or brother- or sister-in-law. For the purposes hereof, “immediate family” shall mean spouse and dependent children.
Financial Interest. For purposes of this Code of Ethics, “financial interest” means direct or indirect monetary or material benefit accruing to a Councilmember or employee as a result of a transaction or contract which is, or may be, the subject of an official act or action by or with the City, except for such transactions or contracts which confer similar benefits upon all other persons and/or property similarly situated. For purposes of this code, a Councilmember or employee shall be deemed to have a financial interest in the affairs of:
    1. Any close relative of the Councilmember or employee, or any person with whom the Councilmember or employee has a close or ongoing business relationship;
    2. Any business entity, company, corporation, partnership, or joint venture in which the Councilmember or employee is an officer, director, agent, consultant or employee;
    3. Any corporation in which the Councilmember or employee holds the legal, equitable or beneficial ownership of more than one percent of the outstanding stock, directly or indirectly;
    4. Any person or business entity with whom/which the Councilmember or employee has a contractual relationship; provided, that a contractual obligation of less than $500.00, a commercially reasonable loan made in the ordinary course of business, or a contract for a commercial retail sale shall not create an interest in violation of the Code of Ethics.
    5. Exceptions. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (5)(a) and (5)(b) of this definition, a financial interest shall not be deemed to exist in any component investment within any fund or plan where an owner of an interest in a mutual or other pooled investment fund or in any employee or retirement benefit plan (including without limitation, pension plans, profit sharing plans and deferred compensation plans):
        a. Has no right to control or influence the selection of component investments;
        b. Has not influenced the selection of component investments; and
        c. Has not created or used the fund or plan to subvert the intent of this code.
“Gift” means a rendering of money, property, services, discount, loan forgiveness, payment of indebtedness, reimbursements from or payments by persons, other than the City of Lakewood for travel or lodging or anything else of value in return for which legal consideration of equal or greater value is not given and received, excluding:
    1. Things of minimal value;
    2. Any contribution under Chapter 42.17 RCW (Disclosure – Campaign Finances – Lobbying – Records);
    3. Any informational material transferred for the purpose of informing the recipient about matters pertaining to official City business, and that is not intended to financially benefit that recipient;
    4. Any symbolic presentation not intended to financially benefit the recipient;
    5. Things of value not used and that, within 30 days after receipt, are returned to the donor or delivered to a charitable organization without being claimed as a charitable contribution for tax purposes;
    6. Things of value received in the normal course of private business or social interaction or from family that are not related to public policy decisions or City actions;
    7. The acceptance of a gift on behalf of the City pursuant to City Council rules regarding acceptance of gifts.
Manager. The “City Manager” shall mean the individual who has been appointed the City Manager of the City of Lakewood by the Lakewood City Council. For the purposes hereof, the terms “City Manager” and “Manager” are synonymous.
Public Official. For the purposes hereof, the term “public official” shall include, except where the context indicates otherwise, Councilmembers and board members.
Remote Interest. A remote interest may be deemed to exist where an individual is:
    1. An unpaid officer, board member, or other person who functions in a decision-making capacity which can influence policy or funding of a corporation, partnership, joint venture or other entity;
    2. A landlord or tenant of an entity contracting with the City of Lakewood; or
    3. A holder of less than one percent of the shares of, or ownership interest in, a business entity contracting with the City; provided, no interest shall be deemed to be remote where a Councilmember influences or attempts to influence any other Councilmember or employee to take any action which financially benefits the Councilmember by or through the interest. [Ord. 27 § 2, 1996.]

1.32.030 Use of City property.
No Councilmember, board member or employee shall request, or permit, the use of City vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal use, personal convenience or profit. The use of all City property shall be restricted to the authorized conduct of official business and to such services as are available to the public generally. Councilmembers, board members and employees shall take care to properly use, maintain and avoid damage of City property and shall be held accountable and responsible for all items of personal property assigned to them during the course of their employment. [Ord. 27 § 3, 1996.]

1.32.040 Personal gain or profit.
A. A Councilmember, board member or employee shall not knowingly use his or her office or position for personal or family gain or profit.
B. A Councilmember, board member or employee shall not use City-owned property or City services for personal or family gain or profit.
C. A Councilmember, board member or employee shall not use information acquired in confidence from the City customer, supplier, lessee or contractor for other than City purposes. [Ord. 27 § 4, 1996.]

1.32.050 Conflict of interest.
A. No Councilmember, board member or employee shall engage in any act which is in conflict with, or creates an appearance of conflict with, the performance of official duties. A Councilmember, board member or employee is deemed to have a conflict of interest if the Councilmember, board member or employee engages in any of, but not limited to, the following acts:
    1. Employs or uses any person, property, or money under the Councilmember’s, board member’s or employee’s official control, or in the Councilmember’s, board member’s or employee’s official custody, for the private benefit or gain of that Councilmember, board member or employee or any person or entity other than the City;
    2. Uses, or attempts to use, his or her official position to secure privileges or exemptions for that Councilmember, board member or employee or any other person or entity;
    3. Accepts, agrees to accept, or solicits any gift, favor, reward, gratuity, or anything of economic value based upon an implicit or explicit understanding that the official services of the Councilmember, board member or employee will be provided, or official actions of the Councilmember, board member or employee would be influenced, thereby;
    4. Influences the selection or nonselection of or the conduct of business between the City and any entity when the Councilmember, board member or employee has a financial interest;
    5. Solicits for himself or herself or for another, a gift or any other thing of value from the City or from any person or entity having dealings with the City; provided, however, that no conflict of interest for the Councilmember, board member or employee shall be deemed to exist with respect to solicitation for campaign contributions required to be reported under Chapter 42.17 RCW or for charitable contributions;
    6. Accepts any retainer, compensation, gift or other thing of value which is contingent upon a specific action or nonaction by the City Council, a board or commission of the City or any employee or employees of the City;
    7. Accepts a gift in any manner other than as provided in LMC 1.32.070 (Acceptance of gifts);
    8. Intentionally uses or discloses information not available to the general public and acquired by reason of his or her official position which financially benefits himself or herself, family, friends or others;
    9. Accepts, agrees to accept, or solicits any gift, favor, reward, gratuity, or anything of economic value from any person, corporation, or entity involved in a transaction or contract which is, or may be, the subject of official action by the City; provided, that the prohibition against such acceptance shall not apply to:
        a. Attendance at a hosted reception or meal when provided in conjunction with a meeting directly related to the conduct of City business or where official attendance by the Councilmember, board member or employee as a staff representative is appropriate;
        b. An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; or
        c. Any gift which would have been offered or given to the Councilmember, board member or employee;
    10. Accepts employment or engages in any business or professional activity which reasonably could conflict with performance of the Councilmember’s, board member’s or employee’s official responsibilities, or which reasonably could require the disclosure of confidential information acquired by reason of public employment;
    11. Engages in, accepts private employment from, or renders services for private interests when such employment or services are incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties, or would tend to impair independence of judgment or action in the performance of official duties.
B. A Councilmember or board member shall not take part in any Council or board action, as that term is defined in Chapter 42.30 RCW, concerning any contract, property, or other matter of any kind, in which the Councilmember or board member, or his or her immediate family, has a financial interest, or which otherwise creates a conflict of interest.
C. A Councilmember or board member shall disclose the fact and extent of a remote interest for the official minutes of the City Council or board or commission prior to taking any action related to the interest and, thereafter, all action taken by the City Council or board or commission related to such interest shall be by a vote sufficient for the purpose without counting the vote of the Councilmember or board member having the remote interest.
D. Restrictions after Leaving City. 
    1. For one year after leaving the City, a Councilmember, board member or employee may not hold or acquire a financial interest, direct or indirect, personally or through their family, in any contract made by, through, or under their supervision, or accept, directly or indirectly, any compensation, gratuity, or reward from any person interested in such a contract or transaction.
    2. For one year after leaving the City, a Councilmember, board member or employee may not (a) assist anyone in proceedings involving the City where such Councilmember, board member or employee worked on a matter in which they were officially involved in the course of their duties; (b) represent any private person as an advocate on a matter in which they were involved; or (c) compete for a City contract when they were involved in determining the scope of work or the selection process. A Councilmember, board member or employee may never disclose or use the City’s privileged or proprietary information except to perform official duties. [Ord. 27 § 5, 1996.]

1.32.060 Conflict of interest – Contracts.
No Councilmember, board member or employee shall be beneficially interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract, sale, lease, or purchase which may be made by, through or under the supervision of such officer, in whole or in part, or which may be made for the benefit of that Councilmember, board member or employee, and no Councilmember, board member or employee shall accept, directly or indirectly, any compensation, gratuity, or reward from any other person or entity beneficially interested therein, except as permitted by state law, RCW 42.23.030 and 42.23.040. [Ord. 27 § 6, 1996.]

1.32.070 Acceptance of gifts.
Except as provided in the definition of “gift” in LMC 1.32.020 and/or 1.32.050(A)(9)(a), (A)(9)(b) and (A)(9)(c), a Councilmember, board member or employee may not accept gifts of cash in any amount, nor any personal gifts. [Ord. 27 § 7, 1996.]

1.32.080 Campaign/political activities.
Councilmembers, board members and employees shall have the right to vote and to express their opinions on all political subjects and candidates and to hold any political office or participate in the management of a partisan, political campaign. Councilmembers, board members and employees shall further have the right to participate fully in campaigns relating to constitutional amendments, referendums, initiatives, and issues of a similar character, and for nonpartisan offices. However, the said rights shall be reasonably restricted as follows:
A. No Councilmember, board member or employee shall use, or authorize the use of, any public facilities for the purpose of assisting the campaign of a candidate or the promotion or opposition of a ballot proposition;
B. No employee who may reasonably be expected to come into contact with the public shall wear or display any campaign buttons or campaign literature during City business hours;
C. No employee shall, directly or indirectly, campaign or assist any campaign during City work hours;
D. Any Councilmember, board member or employee hosting or participating in fund raising activities, and other campaign activities, shall make clear that the Councilmember, board member or employee does not represent the City, and that the City does not endorse any particular candidate or position, unless the City has lawfully taken action of endorsement;
E. No Councilmember, board member or employee shall attempt to obtain political contributions from any employees by promise of, or threat of, disciplinary action, unusual treatment or preferential treatment.
Employees may participate in the political process only on their own time, and only outside of the workplace by working on campaigns for the elections of any person to any office, or for the promotion of or the opposition to any ballot proposition, and shall not use or authorize the use of the facilities of the City for such purposes except as may be authorized by law under the provisions of RCW 42.17.130. [Ord. 27 § 8, 1996.]

1.32.090 Disclosure of information records.
Councilmembers, board members, and employees shall not disclose to any unauthorized person any confidential City information. No Councilmember, board member or employee shall disclose or use confidential City information for direct or indirect personal gain or benefit. Although records and documents maintained by the City are generally public records available for public inspection and copying, the following are exempt from public inspection and copying and shall not be disclosed or provided by any Councilmember, board member or employee:
A. Personal information and any files maintained for prisoners;
B. Personal information in any files maintained for City employees, appointees or elected officials to the extent the disclosure would violate their right to privacy;
C. References or other information pertaining to the employment of former City employees, other than the fact of employment, job position and term of employment, unless the request for such reference or information be in writing and unless the former employee shall have filed a written consent with the City;
D. Information required of any taxpayer or City license holder in connection with the assessment or collection of any tax or license fee if the disclosure of the information to other persons would violate the taxpayer or licensee’s right to privacy or would result in unfair competitive disadvantage to such taxpayer or licensee;
E. Specific intelligence information and specific investigative files compiled by investigative, law enforcement, and penology agencies, and state agencies vested with the responsibility to discipline members of any profession, the nondisclosure of which is essential to effective law enforcement or for the protection of any person’s right to privacy;
F. Information revealing the identity of persons who file complaints with investigative, law enforcement, or penology agencies, if disclosure would endanger any person’s life, physical safety, or property, or if the complainant has indicated a desire for nondisclosure;
G. Test questions, scoring keys and other examination data used to administer license, employment or civil service examinations;
H. Except as provided by Chapter 8.25 RCW, the contents of any real estate appraisals made for or by an agency, including the City, relative to the acquisition of property by the City until the property is abandoned or until such time as all of the property has been acquired, but in no event shall disclosure be denied for more than three years after the date of the appraisal;
I. Valuable formulas, designs, drawings and research data obtained or produced by the City, its officers, public officials and employees and agents within five years of any request for disclosure thereof, when disclosure would produce private gain and public loss;
J. Preliminary drafts, notes, recommendations and intra-departmental memorandums in which opinions are expressed or policies formulated or recommended, except that a specific record shall not be exempt when publicly cited by the City in connection with any public action;
K. Records which are relevant to a controversy to which the City or any of its officers, Councilmembers or employees or agents is a party, but which records would not be available to another party under the rules of pretrial discovery for causes pending in the superior courts;
L. Lists of individuals requested for commercial purposes;
M. Any public record access which the Pierce County Superior Court has found would damage any person or vital governmental function;
N. Residence addresses and telephone numbers of Councilmember, board member or employee, utility customers, and any other person who has, in writing, requested nondisclosure by reason that such disclosure would endanger that person’s life, physical safety, or property;
O. Applications for employment, including the name of applicant, resume, and other related material submitted with respect to an applicant;
P. Any information which is exempt from the disclosure requirements of state law. [Ord. 27 § 9, 1996.]

1.32.100 Consequences of violation.
A. In the event that an employee, other than the City Manager, violates the terms of this chapter or engages in conduct inconsistent herewith, the City Manager may take appropriate steps to address the matter including instituting disciplinary proceeding in accordance with City policies and/or applicable legal principles. Such violations may, depending on the severity and circumstances of the violation(s), result in disciplinary action including but not limited to counseling, verbal reprimands, written reprimands, suspensions, demotions, terminations or other appropriate measures.
B. In the event that the City Manager violates the terms of this chapter or engages in conduct inconsistent herewith, the City Council may take appropriate steps to address the matter including instituting disciplinary proceeding in accordance with City policies and/or applicable legal principles.
C. In the event that a board member violates the terms of this chapter or engages in conduct inconsistent herewith, a majority of the whole City Council may, depending on the severity and circumstances of the violation(s), impose sanctions or consequences. The sanctions or consequences may include but are not limited to the following: private reprimand, public reprimand, censure, removal from the dais at a meeting or at meetings (during discussion or action on one or more topics or subjects of consideration), or removal from office.
D. In the event that a Councilmember violates the terms of this chapter or engages in conduct inconsistent herewith, a majority of the whole City Council may, depending on the severity and circumstances of the violation(s), impose sanctions or consequences. The sanctions or consequences may include but are not limited to the following: private reprimand, public reprimand, censure, removal from the dais at a meeting or at meetings (during discussion or action on one or more topics or subjects of consideration) or ejection from executive session, but shall not include removal of a Councilmember from office. [Ord. 27 § 10, 1996.]

Chapter 1.36 HEARING EXAMINER SYSTEM

Sections:
1.36.010     Purpose.
1.36.020     Office created.
1.36.021     Areas of jurisdiction.
1.36.030     Appointment and terms.
1.36.040     Removal.
1.36.050     Qualifications.
1.36.060     Examiner Pro Tem.
1.36.070     Conflict of interest and freedom from improper influence.
1.36.092     Hearing Examiner’s recommendation.
1.36.110     Decisions of the Examiner which are final.
1.36.115     Initiating appeals.
1.36.120     Hearing procedures.
1.36.123     Prehearing conference.
1.36.126     Independent and alternative Hearing Officer procedures for local improvement districts and utility local improvement districts.
1.36.127     Formation Hearing Officer procedures and requirements for local improvement districts and utility local improvement districts.
1.36.128     Final assessment roll Hearing Officer procedures and requirements.
1.36.130     Public hearing.
1.36.140     Procedural notice requirements.
1.36.150     Community Development Department report.
1.36.160     General criteria for Examiner decisions.
1.36.210     Examiner actions.
1.36.265     Decision on appeals.
1.36.271     Reconsideration.
1.36.280     Review of final decisions.
1.36.290     Applicability of chapter.

1.36.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a Hearing Examiner system under the provisions of Chapter 35A.63 RCW to hear and decide applications for land uses and other matters as specifically assigned by ordinance. [Ord. 264 § 3, 2001; Ord. 13 § 1, 1995.]

1.36.020 Office created.
The office of Hearing Examiner is hereby created to act on behalf of the City Council by considering and applying zoning and regulatory ordinances to the land as provided herein. The Examiner shall also be authorized to act in a decision-making role involving administrative matters and such other quasi-judicial matters as may be granted by ordinance or referred to the Hearing Examiner by the City Manager. [Ord. 13 § 2, 1995.]

1.36.021 Areas of jurisdiction.
The Examiner shall receive and examine relevant information, conduct public hearings, maintain a record thereof, and enter findings of fact, conclusions of law, and recommendations to the City Council or other order, as appropriate. [Ord. 585 § 1, 2014; Ord. 298 § 1, 2003.]

1.36.030 Appointment and terms.
The Examiner shall be appointed by the City Manager, subject to confirmation by the Council, to serve for a term of two years. [Ord. 13 § 3, 1995.]

1.36.040 Removal.
The Examiner may be removed from office at any time for just cause by the affirmative vote of a majority of the whole membership of the Council. [Ord. 13 § 4, 1995.]

1.36.050 Qualifications.
The Examiner shall be appointed solely on the basis of qualifications for the duties of the office with special reference to training, actual experience in, and knowledge of administrative or quasi-judicial hearings on zoning, subdivision and other land use regulatory enactments. [Ord. 13 § 5, 1995.]

1.36.060 Examiner Pro Tem.
In the event of the absence or the inability of the Examiner to act on an application, a Hearing Examiner Pro Tem may be appointed, in the manner specified in LMC 1.36.030, for such application or period of absence, and shall have all the duties and powers of the Examiner. [Ord. 13 § 6, 1995.]

1.36.070 Conflict of interest and freedom from improper influence.
The Examiner shall not conduct or participate in any hearing or decision in which the Examiner or any of the following persons has a direct or substantial financial interest: the Examiner’s spouse, sibling, child, parent, in-laws, partner; any business in which the Examiner is then serving or has served within the previous two years; or any business with which such Examiner is negotiating for, or has had arrangement or understanding concerning, possible partnership or employment. Any actual or potential interest shall be disclosed prior to such hearing.
Participants in the hearing process have the right, insofar as possible, to have the Examiner and the City Councilmembers free from personal interest or prehearing contacts on matters considered by them. It is recognized that there is a countervailing public right to free access to public officials on any matter. Therefore, the Examiner and City Councilmembers shall reveal any substantial interest or prehearing contact made with them concerning the proceeding, at the commencement of such proceeding. If such interest or contact impairs the Examiner’s or Councilmembers’ ability to act on the matter, such person shall so state and shall abstain therefrom to the end that the proceeding is fair and has the appearance of fairness.
Individual Councilmembers, City officials or any other persons shall not interfere or attempt to interfere with the performance of the Examiner’s designated duties. [Ord. 13 § 7, 1995.]

1.36.092 Hearing Examiner’s recommendation.
A. For actions requiring the Hearing Examiner’s recommendation, the Examiner’s recommendation shall be forwarded to the City Council within 10 calendar days of the Examiner’s decision. The recommendation shall be placed on the next agenda of the City Council. The City Council upon its review of the record may:
    1. Affirm the recommendation;
    2. Remand the recommendation to the Hearing Examiner;
    3. Schedule a closed record public hearing before the City Council.
B. Any aggrieved person may request the City Council to conduct its own closed record hearing. Upon its own closed record hearing the City Council may affirm, reject, modify the Hearing Examiner’s recommendation or take whatever action it deems appropriate pursuant to law. [Ord. 585 § 3, 2014.]

1.36.110 Decisions of the Examiner which are final.
Except as to those matters which are reviewed by the City Council, the Hearing Examiner shall be the final decision-making authority of the City of Lakewood for all administrative matters and such other quasi-judicial matters which are subject to this chapter. [Ord. 585 § 4, 2014; Ord. 276 § 1, 2002; Ord. 264 § 5, 2001; Ord. 77 § 1, 1996; Ord. 13 § 10, 1995.]

1.36.115 Initiating appeals.
A. Review Initiated by Notice. A party seeking review of a decision reviewable by the Hearing Examiner must file a notice of appeal.
B. Time for Filing Notice of Appeal. A notice of appeal must be filed with the City Clerk within 10 days after the entry of the decision that the party filing the notice wants reviewed.
C. Filing Fee. The first party to file a notice of appeal must, at the time the notice is filed, pay the filing fee, as set forth in the City of Lakewood fee schedule adopted pursuant to LMC 3.20.010, to the City Clerk. If the appellant asserts that the matter is one for which a fee is not required pursuant to the provisions of this code or other applicable law, the City Clerk shall receipt the notice of appeal without fee. The issue of whether a filing fee is required shall be promptly decided by the Hearing Examiner. If the Hearing Examiner determines that a filing fee is required, the appellant shall be required to tender the filing fee within 10 days of the date of such decision. Where a filing fee is required, but not paid, on motion, the appeal shall be dismissed.
D. Contents of Notice of Appeal. A notice of appeal must (1) be titled a notice of appeal; (2) specify the party or parties seeking the review; (3) designate the decision or part of decision which the party wants reviewed; (4) a brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants participating in the appeal; (5) a brief statement in concise language of the specific order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant; (6) a brief statement in concise language of the relief sought, and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action should be reversed, modified, or otherwise set aside; (7) the signatures of all parties named as appellants, and their official mailing addresses.
The party filing the notice of appeal should attach to the notice of appeal a copy of the signed decision from which the appeal is made. [Ord. 585 § 5, 2014.]

1.36.120 Hearing procedures.
The Examiner shall have the power to prescribe procedures for the conduct of hearings subject to confirmation of the Council; and also to issue summons and subpoena to compel the appearance of witnesses and production of documents and materials, to order discovery, to administer oaths, and to preserve order. [Ord. 13 § 12, 1995.]

1.36.123 Prehearing conference.
The Hearing Examiner, at his/her discretion, or at the request of a party, may conduct a prehearing conference. The purpose of the prehearing conference shall be: (A) to determine the feasibility of settlement of the matter; (B) to obtain agreement as to issues of fact or law and facts to be presented at hearing and the simplification of limitation thereof; (C) to determine the possibility of obtaining admissions of facts and authenticity of documents, which will avoid unnecessary proof at hearing; (D) to determine the admissibility of exhibits; (E) to obtain stipulation as to all or part of the facts in the case; (F) to determine the number of expert and lay witnesses to be called by the parties and their names, when possible; (G) to determine the approximate time necessary for the presentation of the evidence of the respective parties; (H) to establish a hearing schedule; and (9) to obtain all other information which may aid in the prompt disposition of the cases.
The Examiner, following the prehearing conference, shall issue a prehearing order, which shall, unless properly amended, control the further course of proceedings in the matter. [Ord. 585 § 6, 2014.]

1.36.126 Independent and alternative Hearing Officer procedures for local improvement districts and utility local improvement districts.
The procedures set forth in this section and LMC 1.36.127 and 1.36.128 are independent of and alternative to any other hearing or review processes heretofore or hereafter established by the City, and shall govern the conduct and review of LID and ULID formation and final assessment roll hearings conducted before Hearing Officers and related proceedings when authorized and directed by the City Council. [Ord. 414 § 1, 2006.]

1.36.127 Formation Hearing Officer procedures and requirements for local improvement districts and utility local improvement districts.
A. As authorized by RCW 35.43.140, the City Council hereby provides for delegating, whenever directed by majority vote of the City Council, the duty of conducting public hearings for the purpose of considering and making recommendations on the formation of LIDs and ULIDs to a Hearing Officer appointed under this section, and the Hearing Officer is directed to conduct such hearings in the manner provided by law and make those recommendations when thus authorized by the City Council.
B. The Hearing Officer shall conduct the formation hearing to be commenced at the time and place designated by the City Council, cause an adequate record to be made of the proceedings, and make written findings, conclusions and recommendations to the City Council following the completion of such hearing, which may be continued and recontinued as provided by law whenever deemed proper by the Hearing Officer.
C. The recommendations of the Hearing Officer shall be reported to the City Council and they also shall be filed with the City Clerk and be open to public inspection.
D. The City Council shall consider, adopt, modify or reject the recommendations of the Hearing Officer in whole or in part, in the discretion of the Council, at a public meeting and shall act by ordinance in forming any LID or ULID. Council consideration and action shall be based on the record made before the Hearing Officer and no further evidence or argument will be permitted.
E. Any appeal from a decision of the City Council regarding formation of an LID or ULID may be made to the Superior Court within the time and in the manner provided by law. [Ord. 414 § 2, 2006.]

1.36.128 Final assessment roll Hearing Officer procedures and requirements.
A. As authorized by RCW 35.44.070, the City Council hereby provides for delegating, whenever directed by majority vote of the City Council, the duty of conducting public hearings for the purpose of considering and making recommendations on final assessment rolls and the individual assessments upon property within LIDs and ULIDs to a Hearing Officer appointed under this section, and the Hearing Officer is directed to conduct such hearings in the manner provided by law and make those recommendations when thus authorized by the City Council.
B. All objections to the confirmation of the assessment roll shall be in writing and identify the property, be signed by the owners and clearly state the grounds of the objection. Objections not made within the time and in the manner prescribed and as required by law shall be conclusively presumed to have been waived.
C. The Hearing Officer shall conduct the final assessment roll hearing to be commenced at the time and place designated by the City Council, cause an adequate record to be made of the proceedings, and make written findings, conclusions and recommendations to the City Council following the completion of such hearing, which may be continued and recontinued as provided by law whenever deemed proper by the Hearing Officer.
D. The recommendations of the Hearing Officer shall be that the City Council correct, revise, lower, change or modify the roll or any part thereof, or set aside the roll in order for the assessment to be made de novo, or that the City Council adopt or correct the roll or take other action on the roll as appropriate, including confirmation of the roll without change. The recommendations of the Hearing Officer shall be filed with the City Clerk and be open to public inspection. All persons whose names appear on the assessment roll who timely filed written objections to their assessments shall receive mailed written notification of their assessments recommended by the Hearing Officer.
E. All persons who shall have timely filed written objections to their assessments may appeal the recommendations of the Hearing Officer regarding their properties to the City Council by filing written notice of such appeal with the City Clerk within 10 calendar days after the date of mailing of the Hearing Officer’s recommendations.
F. Such appeals shall be based exclusively upon the record made before the Hearing Officer and shall be considered by the City Council at a public meeting. No new evidence may be presented. Arguments on appeal shall be either oral or written as the City Council may order.
G. The City Council shall adopt, modify or reject the recommendations of the Hearing Officer in whole or in part, in the discretion of the Council, at a public meeting and shall act by ordinance in confirming the final assessment roll.
H. Any appeal from a decision of the City Council regarding any assessment may be made to the Superior Court within the time and in the manner provided by law. [Ord. 414 § 3, 2006.]

1.36.130 Public hearing.
A. Before rendering a decision on any application or appeal, the Examiner shall hold at least one public hearing thereon.
B. Whenever a project requires more than one permit or approval, the Examiner may order a consolidation of and conduct the required public hearings to avoid unnecessary costs or delays. Decisions of the Examiner to order and conduct consolidated hearings shall be final in all cases. [Ord. 264 § 6, 2001; Ord. 13 § 13, 1995.]

1.36.140 Procedural notice requirements.
Public hearings may be continued or reopened by the Examiner with written notice to all persons of record at least 14 calendar days prior to the rescheduled hearing. Public hearings may be continued by the Examiner without additional written notice provided the continuance is made during open session to a specific date, time, and location. [Ord. 264 § 7, 2001; Ord. 13 § 14, 1995.]

1.36.150 Community Development Department report.
When an application or appeal has been set for public hearing, the Community Development Department shall coordinate and assemble the reviews of other departments and governmental agencies having an interest in the subject application or appeal and shall prepare a report summarizing the factors involved and the department findings and recommendation or decision. At least five working days prior to the date of the scheduled hearing, the report, and in the case of appeals any written appeal arguments submitted to the City, shall be filed with the Examiner and copies thereof shall be mailed to all persons of record who have not previously received said materials. [Ord. 264 § 8, 2001; Ord. 77 § 1, 1996; Ord. 13 § 15, 1995.]

1.36.160 General criteria for Examiner decisions.
A. Each decision of the Examiner shall be in writing and shall include findings and conclusions, based on the record, to support the decision.
B. The Examiner’s findings and conclusions shall set forth and demonstrate the manner in which the decision is consistent with, carries out and helps implement applicable state laws, the policies, objectives and goals of the comprehensive plan, the approval criteria, development standards and regulations of the land use and development code and the subdivision code, and other official laws, policies and objectives of the City.
C. The Examiner shall accord substantial weight to the recommendation of the Community Development Department. [Ord. 264 § 9, 2001; Ord. 13 § 16, 1995.]

1.36.210 Examiner actions.
Within 10 days of the conclusion of a hearing or rehearing, the Examiner shall render a written recommendation or decision and shall transmit a copy thereof to the City of Lakewood and to all persons of record.
A. The Examiner’s decision may be to grant or deny the application or appeal, or the Examiner may grant the application or appeal with such conditions, modifications and restrictions as the Examiner finds necessary to make the application or appeal compatible with the environment and carry out applicable state laws and regulations, the policies, objectives and goals of the comprehensive plan, the approval criteria, development standard and regulations of the land use and development code and the subdivision code, and other ordinances, policies and objectives of the City.
B. A cash guarantee, letter of credit or an equivalent measure approved by the City may be required to insure compliance with the conditions, modifications and restrictions. [Ord. 264 § 10, 2001; Ord. 77 § 1, 1996; Ord. 13 § 21, 1995.]

1.36.265 Decision on appeals.
A. In considering appeals, the Hearing Examiner shall do one of the following:
    1. Affirm the decision;
    2. Reverse the decision;
    3. Affirm the decision with modifications; or
    4. Remand the decision to the appropriate department director for further consideration. The Hearing Examiner shall include in the order the issues to be reviewed on remand.
B. Conditions. The Hearing Examiner may include conditions as part of a decision granting, or granting with modifications, an appeal to ensure conformance with this code, the City’s comprehensive plan or any other applicable laws or regulations.
C. Written Decision. Within 10 working days after completion of the public hearing, unless the parties and the Hearing Examiner have agreed to an extension of time, the Hearing Examiner should issue a written decision on the appeal which contains the following:
    1. The decision of the Hearing Examiner granting or denying the appeal in whole or in part;
    2. Any conditions included as part of the decision on the appeal;
    3. Findings of facts upon which the decision, including any conditions, is based and the conclusions of law derived from those facts; and
    4. A statement of the right of a person with standing to appeal the decision.
    If the Examiner is unable to issue a written decision within 10 working days, the Examiner shall inform the applicant, appellant, and the Community Development Department that additional time will be required and shall provide an estimated date for issuance of a decision on the appeal.
D. Distribution. The Hearing Examiner or designee shall mail a copy of the written decision to the applicant, the appellant, the applicable department director, and any person requesting the written decision or who submitted substantive comments on the application prior to the decision. [Ord. 585 § 7, 2014.]

1.36.271 Reconsideration.
Any party of record feeling that a decision of the Examiner is based upon erroneous procedures, errors of law or of fact, error in judgment, or has discovered new evidence which could not be reasonably available at the open record public hearing, may make a written request to the Examiner, filed with the City Clerk, together with any fee that may be set forth in the City’s fee schedule pursuant to LMC 3.20.010, for reconsideration by the Examiner within eight business days of the date the decision is rendered. The City Clerk shall forward the request for reconsideration to the Examiner within three business days. The request shall set forth the specific errors or new information relied upon by such appellant, and the Examiner, after review of the request(s) and the record, may:
A. Affirm in writing the previous decision;
B. Reopen the record and public hearing process;
C. Take further action as he/she deems proper.
The filing of a request for reconsideration by the Hearing Examiner shall effectively stay the appeal period until the Examiner takes further action. Such action shall occur within 10 business days of the date of filing a request for reconsideration. [Ord. 575 § 8, 2013.]

1.36.280 Review of final decisions.
A. The decision of all matters decided hereunder, except site-specific rezones, shall be final and conclusive unless, within 21 days from the date of the final decision, an applicant or an aggrieved party makes an application to court of competent jurisdiction or competent administrative agency for review.
B. If a statute provides that an application for judicial review must be filed within a time period other than set forth in this code, the application for judicial review, and the finality of the decision, shall be governed by the time period established by the statute.
C. Rezones. For site-specific rezones, the Examiner’s decision is final unless an aggrieved party of record files a written notice of appeal and pays an appeal fee in accordance with Chapter 1.38 LMC to the Planning Department within 10 working days from the date of the postmark mailing of the Examiner’s final written decision; provided, if the Examiner was requested to reconsider a decision, then the appeal must be filed within 10 working days from the mailing of the Examiner’s decision on reconsideration. The notice of appeal shall concisely specify each error and/or issue the Council is asked to consider. Upon the timely filing of an appeal, the Planning Department shall forward the original recording containing a verbatim record of the proceedings before the Examiner and 10 copies of the Examiner’s official record to the Clerk of the Council. The procedures contained in Chapter 1.38 LMC shall govern appeals to the Council filed under this subsection. [Ord. 704 § 2, 2019; Ord. 585 § 9, 2014; Ord. 264 § 14, 2001; Ord. 13 § 28, 1995.]

1.36.290 Applicability of chapter.
A. To What Proceedings Applicable. Except where inconsistent with those rules, statutes or provisions of the code, this chapter shall govern all matters before the Hearing Examiner. Where such rules, statutes or provisions of the code relating to proceedings provide for procedure before the Hearing Examiner, the procedure shall be governed by those rules, statutes or provisions of the code.
B. Conflicting Statutes and Rules. Subject to the provisions of subsection A of this section, this chapter supersedes all procedural codes and other rules that may be in conflict. [Ord. 585 § 10, 2014; Ord. 264 § 15, 2001; Ord. 77 § 1, 1996.]

Chapter 1.38 PROCEDURES FOR QUASI-JUDICIAL HEARINGS

Sections:
1.38.010     Application of provisions.
1.38.020     Definitions.
1.38.030     Standing – Notice – Continuance.
1.38.040     Grounds for appeal.
1.38.050     Quorum – Decision.
1.38.060     Submission of documents.
1.38.070     Requests to testify.
1.38.080     Presentations at hearing.
1.38.090     Decision on appeal.
1.38.100     Hearing on remand.
1.38.110     Reconsideration.
1.38.120     Appeal.

1.38.010 Application of provisions.
The procedures for quasi-judicial hearings, as set forth in this chapter, shall supersede any conflicting references to procedures for quasi-judicial hearings in the City Code. [Ord. 704 § 2, 2019.]

1.38.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
A. “Aggrieved” means adversely affected by proceedings before or decisions of the Examiner, Council, or any City department.
B. “Council” means the City Council.
C. “County” means Pierce County, together with any of its subdivisions, departments, or agencies.
D. “Examiner” means the Office of the City Hearing Examiner or Deputy Examiner.
E. “May” means optional and permissive, and does not impose a requirement.
F. “New evidence” means any and all evidence that is submitted or received after the date the Examiner closes the official record.
G. “Newspaper of general circulation” means a newspaper which is regularly distributed in (1) one of the four geographic areas identified by the Planning Department and (2) the area where the subject of the application has been proposed.
H. “Official record” means the written and oral information, exhibits, reports, testimony and other evidence submitted in a timely manner and accepted by the Examiner.
I. “Parties of record” means those persons or entities who:
    1. Testified before the Examiner; or
    2. Listed their names on a sign-up sheet, which shall be available during the Examiner’s hearings; or
    3. Specifically advised the Planning Department or Examiner by individual written letter of their desire to become a party of record; or
    4. The applicant or appellant and any of applicant’s or appellant’s agents.
J. “Person” means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, City department, or public or private organization.
K. “Community Development Department” means the City’s Community and Economic Development Department, its Director, or the Director’s designee.
L. “Shall” means mandatory and imposes a requirement. [Ord. 704 § 2, 2019.]

1.38.030 Standing – Notice – Continuance.
Quasi-judicial hearings shall be held at the request of an aggrieved person who is a party of record to a decision by the Examiner. The hearing date shall not be scheduled until after the Clerk of the Council receives the notice of appeal and official record. The Clerk shall cause notice of the hearing date to be mailed to the parties of record listed in the Examiner’s decision at least 24 days prior to the initially scheduled hearing date. A request for continuance of the hearing by a party of record may be granted by the Council upon a showing of good cause. [Ord. 704 § 2, 2019.]

1.38.040 Grounds for appeal.
An aggrieved party of record may appeal a final decision of the Examiner to the Council based upon the following grounds:
A. The Examiner’s findings of fact are not supported by substantial evidence in the record; or
B. The Examiner failed to apply the law correctly. [Ord. 704 § 2, 2019.]

1.38.050 Quorum – Decision.
The presence of four Councilmembers, a quorum, shall be required to dispose of any matter. A majority of the quorum must concur to change or overturn the decision of the Hearing Examiner. The decision of the Examiner shall be sustained if a majority of the quorum is unable to concur. [Ord. 704 § 2, 2019.]

1.38.060 Submission of documents.
Parties of record may submit documents to the Council in support of their position on appeal. Parties submitting documents must provide the Clerk with the original and eight copies of such documents at least 10 days prior to the scheduled date for Council action. Documents that contain information not contained in the record of the prior proceeding shall not be admitted. [Ord. 704 § 2, 2019.]

1.38.070 Requests to testify.
The party filing a notice of appeal is deemed the appellant for the purposes of these rules. Other parties of record who wish to provide testimony in opposition to or in support of the appellant must submit a written request to the Legal Clerk at least 10 days prior to the scheduled hearing date. [Ord. 704 § 2, 2019.]

1.38.080 Presentations at hearing.
The presiding officer shall determine the proper order of presentation for the hearing. The procedure may be as follows:
A. The Community Development Department shall present an opening statement briefly stating the established facts, disputes and issues on appeal.
B. The appellant may then present oral argument and may reserve a portion of her/his time for rebuttal. The appellant is entitled to open and close oral argument.
C. Following appellant, the opposing parties of record may present oral argument.
D. Following argument by the parties, the Council may request such further clarification from the Examiner, City staff, or the parties as it deems necessary to fully consider the case; provided, however, that if the answer to such questions requires knowledge of factual evidence which is not contained in the record, such questions shall be stricken.
E. Appellants are allowed 15 minutes for oral argument. This time may be increased up to 30 minutes if the Chair and/or Council deems additional time is warranted. Requests for additional time must be submitted in writing to the Legal Clerk at least 10 days prior to the hearing and will be considered as the first issue of the hearing. Parties of record in opposition to the appellant are allowed an amount of time equal to the amount of time granted to the appellant. In the event there is more than one appellant or opposing party of record, the parties on each side will share the time granted equally, unless the parties agree to some other allocation. The Legal Clerk will act as timekeeper.
F. The Council will hear argument on behalf of appellant or parties who properly request to speak and who appear at the time of oral argument. If none of the parties appear for oral argument, the Council may order argument at a later time or may decide the matter on the record and written memoranda submitted. [Ord. 704 § 2, 2019.]

1.38.090 Decision on appeal.
A. Following the presentation of argument and questions by the Council, a Councilmember may state in motion form a proposed decision on the appeal. A second to the motion is not necessary.
B. If the Council determines that the Examiner’s findings are supported by substantial evidence in the record and if the Examiner applied the law correctly, then the Council shall uphold the Examiner’s decision.
C. If the Council determines that the Examiner’s findings are not supported by substantial evidence in the record, then the Council shall reverse the Examiner’s decision.
D. If the Council determines that the Examiner failed to apply the law correctly, then the Council shall reverse or remand the Examiner’s decision. The decision of the Examiner on remand shall be final and subject to appeal according to the procedures set forth in this chapter. [Ord. 704 § 2, 2019.]

1.38.100 Hearing on remand.
If a matter is remanded to the Examiner, a new hearing may be scheduled. [Ord. 704 § 2, 2019.]

1.38.110 Reconsideration.
Any aggrieved party or person affected by the action may, within seven working days of the Council’s oral decision, file with the Legal Clerk a written request for reconsideration based on any one of the following grounds materially affecting the substantial rights of said party or person:
A. Errors of procedure or misinterpretation of fact, material to the party seeking the request for reconsideration.
B. Irregularity in the proceedings before the Council by which such party was prevented from having a fair hearing.
C. Clerical mistakes in the official file or record transmitted to the Council, including errors arising from inadvertence, oversight, or omission, which may have materially affected the Council’s decision on the matter.
Upon receipt of a request for reconsideration, the Council shall review said request and take such further action as the Council deems proper, including, but not limited to, the right to deny said request for reconsideration without oral argument, or the right to rehear and render a revised decision on the matter if deemed appropriate by the Council. Only one request for reconsideration may be filed by any one person or party, even if the Council reverses or modifies its original decision or changes the language in the decision originally rendered. [Ord. 704 § 2, 2019.]

1.38.120 Appeal.
Any aggrieved party or person affected by the action may file an appeal of the Council’s decision with a court of competent jurisdiction within the time period required. [Ord. 704 § 2, 2019.]

Chapter 1.40 CITY MANAGER CODE RESPONSIBILITIES

Sections:
1.40.010     City Manager code discretion.

1.40.010 City Manager code discretion.
A. As an alternative to the variance procedures identified in LMC 18A.10.300, a person may request that the City Manager or designee vary the requirements of the City Code under the following conditions:
    1. The requested requirement change does not exceed 10 percent of the distance, area or other physical measure of the requirement of the City Code;
    2. The requested requirement change does not reasonably involve a life/safety issue nor does it reasonably involve damage to or loss of property of any person or entity; and
    3. The person or entity requesting the requirement change shall agree to waive his/her/its right to pursue a variance or other process to seek an alternative to the requirements of the City Code; provided, that if no change in the requirements of the City Code is granted to such person or entity, the person or entity would be entitled to pursue a variance or other available procedure, in the normal course.
B. The City Manager or the City Manager’s designee is vested with and authorized to exercise the discretion to decide all such requests for changes in the requirements of the City Code pursuant to the provisions of subsection A of this section, and in keeping with the criteria identified in LMC 18A.10.300.
C. The fee for an application for a variance provided under this chapter shall be $90.00. [Ord. 75 § 1, 1996.]

Chapter 1.42 CONTRACTING REQUIREMENTS – LAWFUL HIRING COMPLIANCE

Sections:
1.42.010     Reference.
1.42.020     Definitions.
1.42.030     Application of requirements.
1.42.040     Enforcement of contract terms.

1.42.010 Reference.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City of Lakewood Lawful Hiring Compliance Ordinance.” [Ord. 492 § 1, 2009.]

1.42.020 Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein, and shall be construed so as to be consistent with state and federal law, including federal immigration law:
“Business entity” means any person or group of persons performing or engaging in any activity, enterprise, profession, or occupation for gain, benefit, advantage, or livelihood, whether for profit or not for profit with the City. The term business entity shall include, but not be limited to, self-employed individuals, partnerships, corporations, contractors, and subcontractors doing business with the City.
“City” means the City of Lakewood, Washington.
“Commercially available off-the-shelf (COTS) item” means any item of supply that is sold in substantial quantities in the commercial marketplace and offered to the City without modification.
“Contract” shall mean all types of agreements including, but not limited to, state grants; orders for purchase or disposal of supplies, services, construction, or any other item; awards; contracts of a fixed-price, cost, or incentive type; contracts providing for the issuance of job or task orders; letter contracts; master price agreements; agency price agreements; and construction management contracts.
“Contractor” means a person, employer, or business entity that enters into a contract or an agreement with the City to perform any service or work or to provide a certain product in exchange for valuable consideration. This definition shall include, but not be limited to, a subcontractor, contract employee, or a recruiting or staffing entity. No governmental agency shall be considered to be a contractor for purposes of this chapter.
“E-Verify” shall mean the electronic verification of work authorization program of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigration Responsibility Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-208, Division C, Title IV, s. 403(a), as amended, and operated by the United States Department of Homeland Security, or a successor electronic verification of work authorization program designated by the United States Department of Homeland Security or other federal agency authorized to verify the work authorization status of newly hired employees pursuant to the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986, Pub. L. No. 99-603.
“Unauthorized alien” means a person who is unauthorized to be lawfully employed in the United States, pursuant to 8 U.S.C. Section 1324a(h)(3). The City shall not conclude that a person is an unauthorized alien unless and until an authorized representative of the City has verified with the federal government, pursuant to 8 U.S.C. Section 1373(c), that the person is an unauthorized alien.
“Work” means any job, task, employment, labor, personal services, or any other activity for which compensation is provided, expected, or due, including provided to City all activities conducted by business entities and contractors. [Ord. 492 § 1, 2009.]

1.42.030 Application of requirements.
A. The City shall enroll and participate in E-Verify, as defined. The City Manager or designee shall oversee the City’s participation in this program and shall ensure that it is applied to all persons to be hired by the City as City employees.
B. As a condition for the award of any City contract, gift, contribution or grant to a business entity or contractor after July 1, 2009, the business entity or contractor shall enroll in E-Verify and thereafter shall provide the City documentation affirming its enrollment and participation in the program. The business entity or contractor shall be required to continue its participation in the program throughout the course of its business relationship with the City.
C. As a condition for the award or renewal of any City franchise or contract made after July 1, 2009, the business entity shall provide documentation affirming its enrollment and participation in the E-Verify program prior to the award of said franchise. The business entity or contractor shall continue its participation in E-Verify throughout the term of its business relationship with the City.
D. If a business entity or contractor described in subsection B of this section uses a subcontractor in connection with the performance of the contract, the subcontractor shall, as a condition of contract, certify to the contractor in a manner that does not violate federal law that the subcontractor has registered and is participating in the E-Verify program and will not knowingly employ or contract with an unauthorized alien. This certification shall be supplied to the City within three working days of the date the business procured the services of the subcontractor.
E. The City shall include specific written notice in all requests for bids that business entities and any subcontractors are required to enroll in the E-Verify program pursuant to subsection B of this section. Business entities are exempt from subsection B of this section if they received requests for bids not containing such notice.
F. Exception. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, this chapter shall not apply to the purchase by the City of any commercially available off-the-shelf (COTS) item where no labor or service is supplied as an element of the contract or purchase of those items. [Ord. 492 § 1, 2009.]

1.42.040 Enforcement of contract terms.
A. The City Manager or designee shall implement procedures necessary to implement and enforce the requirements of this chapter into all contracts into which the City has entered with business entities or contractors. These procedures shall ensure that no business engages in discrimination based on national origin, ethnicity, race or any other classification deemed suspect by the City or any agency or court.
B. The City shall suspend a contract with any business entity or contractor that the United States Attorney General or the Secretary of Homeland Security has found to have been in violation of 8 U.S.C. Section 1324a.
C. The City may suspend a contract with any business entity or contractor that fails to correct a violation of 8 U.S.C. Section 1324a within 30 business days after notification of the violation by the United States Attorney General or Secretary of Homeland Security.
D. The City shall not suspend the contract of any business entity or contractor if, prior to the date of the violation, the business entity or contractor had verified the work authorization of the alleged unlawful workers using the E-Verify program and demonstrated the same to the City.
E. Every contract entered into by the City shall provide that the suspension for noncompliance with this chapter shall terminate one business day after a legal representative of the business entity or contractor submits, at a City office designated by the City Manager, a declaration signed under penalty of perjury of the laws of the state, in the form provided by the City, stating that the violation of federal law has ended. [Ord. 492 § 1, 2009.]

Chapter 1.44 GENERAL PENALTIES

Sections:
1.44.010     General civil penalty.
1.44.020     General criminal penalty.
1.44.030     Failure to respond to a civil infraction.
1.44.040     Public nuisances.

1.44.010 General civil penalty.
Unless specific penalties other than as set forth in this section are established in an ordinance of the City for a violation of that ordinance, a violation of a City ordinance is punishable by a fine of up to $500.00 for each day that a violation occurs. In any court or administrative hearing to determine whether a violation has occurred the City shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation occurred. This section does not preempt the specific penalties set forth in ordinances of the City setting forth other penalties for violations of those ordinances. [Ord. 25 § 1, 1995.]

1.44.020 General criminal penalty.
For all ordinances of the City which set forth that a violation of the ordinance shall constitute a misdemeanor, upon conviction an offender shall be punished by imprisonment in the County or City Jail for a period up to 90 days and a fine of up to $1,000, or by both such fine and imprisonment. For all ordinances of the City which set forth that a violation of the ordinance shall constitute a gross misdemeanor, upon conviction an offender shall be punished by imprisonment in the County or City Jail for a period up to one year and a fine of up to $5,000, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition, a defendant may be assessed court costs, jury fees and such other fees or costs as may be authorized in statute or Court Rules. In any court proceeding to enforce this section, the City shall have the burden of proving by evidence beyond a reasonable doubt that a violation occurred. In a proceeding under this section a defendant shall be accorded each and every right protected under the Constitutions of the United States of America and the state of Washington, all applicable federal, state and local laws, and applicable Court Rules promulgated by the Washington Supreme Court and the inferior courts under the authority of the Washington Supreme Court. [Ord. 25 § 2, 1995.]

1.44.030 Failure to respond to a civil infraction.
It shall be a misdemeanor to fail to respond to a notice of civil infraction issued by a police officer or such other officers of the City as may be authorized to issue civil infractions. In any court proceeding to enforce this section, the City shall have the burden of proving beyond a reasonable doubt both that the violator was personally served with the notice of civil infraction and that the violator willfully failed to respond to the infraction by either appearing in court as directed or by paying the fine for the infraction. [Ord. 25 § 3, 1995.]

1.44.040 Public nuisances.
A. Any condition which constitutes a public nuisance, as defined by the statutes of the state of Washington, or which has been declared a public nuisance or a health and/or safety hazard under any section of the LMC, may be abated by the City, as provided in Chapter 7.48 RCW.
B. Any person who causes, maintains, or allows the continuation of any nuisance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 9.66 RCW. [Ord. 264 § 2, 2001.]

Chapter 1.48 CLASSIFICATION OF INFRACTIONS

Sections:
1.48.010     Classes of infractions.

1.48.010 Classes of infractions.
Unless otherwise specifically provided in connection with certain sections, chapters or titles of the City Code, violations of the City Code may be identified as Class 1 civil infractions and Class 2 civil infractions. In connection therewith, Class 1 civil infractions shall carry a maximum penalty of $250.00 and Class 2 civil infractions shall carry a maximum penalty of $500.00. Each day, location, violator and incident shall constitute a separate civil infraction. [Ord. 64 § 1, 1996.]

Chapter 1.51 ACCEPTANCE OF DONATIONS

Sections:
1.51.010     Definitions.
1.51.020     Acceptance of donations.
1.51.030     Procedure for acceptance of donation.
1.51.040     Funds and accounting.

1.51.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the term “donation” refers to any money or property, real or personal, donated, devised or bequeathed, with or without restriction, to the City of Lakewood. As used in this chapter, the term “donation” does not refer to any money or property, real or personal, that may be reasonably classified as a grant. [Ord. 657 § 2, 2017.]

1.51.020 Acceptance of donations.
A. Limitation on Acceptance of Donations. The City may accept and use donations only for purposes related to those powers granted to the City by law. Any donation to the City that is accompanied with any contingency, term, or condition on the use by the City of such donation that is inconsistent with this chapter or contrary to law shall be declined by the City. The City may decline to accept any donation that is inconsistent with the policies, plans, goals, or any other ordinance of the City.
    1. Monetary Donations under $5,000. The City Manager or designee is authorized to accept any monetary donation under $5,000 to the City, and to carry out the terms or conditions of the donation if such terms and conditions are within the powers granted to the City by law and this chapter. If no terms or conditions are attached to the donation, or such terms or conditions cannot be fulfilled or performed by the City, the City may expend or use the same for any public purpose consistent with this chapter.
    2. Monetary Donations of $5,000 or Greater. Any monetary donation of $5,000 or greater shall be approved by the City Council before acceptance. Upon such approval by the City Council, the City Manager or designee is authorized to accept such monetary donation to the City, and to carry out the terms or conditions of the donation if such terms and conditions are within the powers granted to the City by law and this chapter. If no terms or conditions are attached to the donation, or such terms or conditions cannot be fulfilled or performed by the City, the City may expend or use the same for any public purpose consistent with this chapter.
    3. Nonmonetary Donations Directly Supporting City Events or Community Activities. The City Manager or designee is authorized to accept nonmonetary donations that support specific City events and other community activities.
    4. Other Nonmonetary Donations. The City Manager will assess the utility to the City and value of nonmonetary donations offered to the City (other than in subsection (A)(3) of this section).
        a. If the estimated value of the donation is less than $10,000, the City Manager or designee is authorized to accept such donations.
        b. If the estimated value of the donation is $10,000 or greater, the City Manager or designee is authorized to accept such nonmonetary donation upon approval by the City Council. [Ord. 657 § 3, 2017.]

1.51.030 Procedure for acceptance of donation.
All donations shall be offered in writing to the City and directed to the City Manager or designee. If a donation is not approved or accepted by the City, such donation shall be immediately returned to the private citizen, business group, or private organization attempting to make such donation in a manner that properly documents the return of such donation by the City. [Ord. 657 § 4, 2017.]

1.51.040 Funds and accounting.
The Assistant City Manager/Administrative Services is directed to establish accounting procedures as may be necessary to carry out the terms of this chapter, in accordance with all applicable laws of the state of Washington and requirements of the Office of the State Auditor. [Ord. 657 § 5, 2017.]

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL

Chapters:
2.08         City Manager
2.10         Civil Service Commission
2.11         Independent Salary Commission
2.14         Lakewood Police Department
2.16         Municipal Court
2.22         Public Safety Advisory Committee
2.26         Community Services Advisory Board
2.32         Work Crew Program
2.36         Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
2.38         Lakewood’s Promise Advisory Board
2.48         Protection and Preservation of Landmarks
2.66         Lakewood Arts Commission
2.67         Ad Hoc Committees
2.68         Annual Work Plans for Community Boards, Commissions and Ad Hoc Committees
2.90         Planning Commission
2.100        Lakewood Family-Wage Jobs Credit Program

Chapter 2.08 CITY MANAGER

Sections:
2.08.010     Office of the City Manager established – Appointment.
2.08.020     Duties of City Manager.
2.08.030     Creation of departments, offices and positions.

2.08.010 Office of the City Manager established – Appointment.
Pursuant to the provisions of RCW 35A.13.010 and 35A.13.090, there is hereby established for the City of Lakewood the office of City Manager. Such office shall be appointive and all appointments to such office shall be made by the City Council. [Ord. 11 § 1, 1995.]

2.08.020 Duties of City Manager.
The City Manager shall be the chief executive officer and head of the administrative branch of the City government. The City Manager shall be responsible to the Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the City. The City Manager shall be eligible to attend all meetings of the City Council, regular and executive. The City Manager shall be the chief purchasing agent, and shall have purchasing and contracting authority on individual purchases or contracts as provided by the City’s purchasing policy. The City Manager shall have all of the powers, and shall perform each and all of the duties specified by Chapter 35A.13 RCW, together with any other duties or authority which may be conferred upon such office by the City Council or by the laws of the state of Washington pertaining to city managers, or the ordinances or resolutions of the City, as they now exist or may hereafter be amended. [Ord. 662 § 1, 2017; Ord. 11 § 2, 1995.]

2.08.030 Creation of departments, offices and positions.
The City Manager is authorized to create, eliminate, consolidate and modify such departments, offices and positions as the City Manager may find necessary or advisable for the efficient operations of the City and to determine the powers and duties of each department, office and position. The City Manager may delegate to any officer or position any duties required or authorized to be performed by the City Manager. The City Manager shall designate an Acting City Manager to be responsible during extended absences of the City Manager from the City. [Ord. 11 § 1, 1995.]

Chapter 2.10 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION

Sections:
2.10.010     Definitions.
2.10.020     Creation – Appointment.
2.10.030     Eligibility.
2.10.040     Terms.
2.10.050     Removal.
2.10.070     General powers and duties.
2.10.080     Secretary-Chief Examiner.
2.10.090     Rules and regulations.

2.10.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall be given the following definitions:
“Appointment” includes all means of selecting, appointing, or employing any person to hold the office of Civil Service Commissioner.
“City” means the City of Lakewood, a Washington municipal corporation.
“Commission” means the Civil Service Commission herein created and “Commissioner” means any one of the three Commissioners appointed to the Commission. “Alternate Commissioner” means any one of the two alternate Commissioners appointed to the Commission.
“Elector” means a registered voter.
“Resident” means a person whose primary dwelling place is located in the City. [Ord. 674 § 1, 2017; Ord. 328 § 1, 2003.]

2.10.020 Creation – Appointment.
There is hereby created a Police Civil Service Commission, consisting of three members who shall be appointed by the City Manager to exercise the powers and perform the duties established by this chapter and by state law as set forth in Chapter 41.12 RCW in connection with the selection, appointment, promotion, demotion and employment of police officers commissioned pursuant to RCW 43.101.200, unless exempt pursuant to RCW 41.06.070. The rank of Police Chief, Director of Police Services, assistant or deputy to such Chief or Director, and Commander shall be excluded from civil service pursuant to RCW 41.12.050 in recognition of the management authority delegated to such positions. The Commissioners shall serve without compensation; provided, however, that they may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in service as a Commissioner. [Ord. 674 § 1, 2017; Ord. 328 § 1, 2003.]

2.10.030 Eligibility.
No person shall be appointed a Commissioner or alternate Commissioner unless that person is a citizen of the United States, a resident of the City for at least three years immediately preceding such appointment, and an elector of the county in which the Commissioner resides. [Ord. 674 § 1, 2017; Ord. 328 § 1, 2003.]

2.10.040 Terms.
The term of office of the Commissioners shall be for six years, except that the first three Commissioners shall be appointed for different terms, as follows: one to serve for a period of two years, one to serve for a period of four years, one to serve for a period of six years. [Ord. 674 § 1, 2017; Ord. 328 § 1, 2003.]

2.10.050 Removal.
Any Commissioner or alternate Commissioner may be removed from office for incompetency, incompatibility, dereliction of duty, malfeasance in office, or other good cause; provided, however, that no Commissioner or alternate Commissioner shall be removed until (A) charges have been filed, in writing; (B) the Commissioner or alternate Commissioner has been personally served with a written notice of charges against him or her and with a notice of hearing; and (C) after a full hearing has been convened before the Lakewood City Council. The charging party in all such actions shall be the City Manager. Should any Commissioner or alternate Commissioner resign from or be removed from office, then the City Manager shall appoint a successor to that position for the remainder of the unexpired term. [Ord. 674 § 1, 2017; Ord. 328 § 1, 2003.]

2.10.070 General powers and duties.
The Commission shall have the powers and duties as set forth in Chapter 41.12 RCW, except as provided herein. The Commissioners shall devote due time and attention to the performance of their specified duties. [Ord. 674 § 1, 2017; Ord. 328 § 1, 2003.]

2.10.080 Secretary-Chief Examiner.
The Secretary-Chief Examiner authorized by RCW 41.12.040 shall be appointed by the Commission from among qualified City employees selected and recommended by the City Manager. [Ord. 674 § 1, 2017; Ord. 328 § 1, 2003.]

2.10.090 Rules and regulations.
The Commission shall have power to make and adopt such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter and Chapter 41.12 RCW. The Commission shall also have the power to make rules and regulations governing the Commission in the conduct of its meetings and any other matter over which it has authority. [Ord. 674 § 1, 2017; Ord. 328 § 1, 2003.]

Chapter 2.11 INDEPENDENT SALARY COMMISSION

Sections:
2.11.010     Membership.
2.11.020     Term.
2.11.030     Duties.
2.11.040     Support as appointed by the City Manager.
2.11.050     Vacancies.
2.11.060     Removal.

2.11.010 Membership.
A. The Independent Salary Commission shall consist of five voting members appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council.
B. The Independent Salary Commission shall serve without compensation. [Ord. 605 § 2, 2015.]

2.11.020 Term.
A. The term of a Salary Commission member shall be for one salary review. The term shall commence upon City Council confirmation and shall terminate upon filing of the statement of salaries with the City Clerk.
B. For each salary review, conducted in 2015 and every fourth year subsequent, the Mayor shall appoint and the City Council shall confirm a Salary Commission.
C. A member of the Salary Commission shall not be an officer, official or employee of the City or an immediate family member of an officer, official or employee of the City. For purposes of this section, “immediate family member” means parents, spouse, siblings, children or dependent relatives of an officer, official or employee of the City, whether not living in the household of the officer, official or employee. [Ord. 605 § 3, 2015.]

2.11.030 Duties.
A. The Salary Commission shall convene and determine the salaries paid to the Mayor and the City Council within 45 days of confirmation by the City Council. The 45-day review and determination time may be extended upon request of the Salary Commission and approval by the City Council.
B. All meetings of the Salary Commission shall be subject to the Open Meetings Act and shall be open to the public. The meetings shall be held in the same location as City Council regular meetings. The Salary Commission shall provide an opportunity for citizens of the City to comment on the salaries of the Mayor and City Council prior to taking a final vote on such salaries.
C. After determining the salaries of the Mayor and the City Council, the Salary Commission shall file a statement of the salaries with the City Clerk. A salary increase shall be effective on the next payday for City employees. A salary decrease shall be effective at the commencement of the next subsequent term of office.
D. Any increase or decrease in salary shall become effective without further action of the City Council, and shall supersede any salary set forth in a City ordinance related to the budget or the salaries of the Mayor and City Councilmembers. [Ord. 605 § 4, 2015.]

2.11.040 Support as appointed by the City Manager.
The City Manager shall ensure staffing necessary to support the Salary Commission in performing its duties by designation of employees as necessary. [Ord. 605 § 5, 2015.]

2.11.050 Vacancies.
In the event of a vacancy in the office of Salary Commissioner, the Mayor shall appoint, subject to approval of the City Council, a person to serve the unexpired portion of the term. [Ord. 605 § 6, 2015.]

2.11.060 Removal.
The City Council may remove a member of the Salary Commission from office for cause of incapacity, incompetence, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. [Ord. 605 § 7, 2015.]

Chapter 2.14 LAKEWOOD POLICE DEPARTMENT

Sections:
2.14.010     Establishment.
2.14.020     Chief – Appointment.
2.14.030     Police Chief’s civil service exclusion.
2.14.040     Oath.
2.14.050     Members’ appointment and commissions.
2.14.060     Police powers.
2.14.070     Police Department staffing.
2.14.080     Community Service Officers.
2.14.090     Additional powers.
2.14.100     Forfeited items.
2.14.110     Commissions.
2.14.120     Scope of limited commission.
2.14.130     Reserve Officers.

2.14.010 Establishment.
There is established and created a Police Department to be operated under the direction and control of the City’s chief law enforcement officer, the Chief of Police, subject to the supervision of the City Manager. [Ord. 471 § 1, 2008; Ord. 327 § 2, 2003.]

2.14.020 Chief – Appointment.
The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the City Manager, and may be removed by the City Manager. Removal shall be in accordance with law and the policies of the City of Lakewood. [Ord. 471 § 1, 2008; Ord. 327 § 2, 2003.]

2.14.030 Police Chief’s civil service exclusion.
Pursuant to RCW 41.12.050, the position of Police Chief is excluded from civil service for city police. [Ord. 471 § 1, 2008; Ord. 327 § 2, 2003.]

2.14.040 Oath.
The Chief shall take an oath to uphold the laws of the City of Lakewood, hereinafter referred to as the City. [Ord. 327 § 2, 2003.]

2.14.050 Members’ appointment and commissions.
All personnel below the rank of Chief shall be appointed and commissioned by the Chief in accordance with the applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to civil service except as exempted in accordance with RCW 41.12.050 and may be removed by the City Manager or Chief subject to any applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation then in force and effect. No police commission, regular, temporary or honorary, shall be issued to any person until such person has been certified for a regular or provisional appointment to fill an authorized personnel vacancy by the Civil Service Commission in accordance with such rules and regulations relating to civil service then in force and effect. [Ord. 471 § 1, 2008; Ord. 327 § 2, 2003.]

2.14.060 Police powers.
The Chief of Police and all commissioned police personnel shall have the powers granted to them by state and local law and shall be responsible for those duties imposed by the laws of the state relating to Chief of Police and law enforcement personnel for code cities. The Chief and all law enforcement personnel shall have the power and duty to enforce the ordinances of the City and to perform such other services as the laws of the state or the ordinances of the City may now or hereafter require including acts authorized pursuant to the Inter-Local Cooperation Act, the Mutual Aid Peace Officers Powers Act, and pursuant to Chapter 10.93 RCW. [Ord. 471 § 1, 2008; Ord. 327 § 2, 2003.]

2.14.070 Police Department staffing.
The Police Department shall be staffed by regular commissioned personnel in such numbers as shall be deemed necessary by the City Council pursuant to its adopted budget.
The Department may be supplemented by such support personnel as would be required to aid in the everyday operations of a Police Department. Such support personnel, also known as clerical staff, shall not be commissioned officers. Only full-time employees may be a part of the civil service system. The positions of Administrative Secretary and Administrative Supervisor are exempt from the civil service system. [Ord. 369 § 1, 2005; Ord. 327 § 2, 2003.]

2.14.080 Community Service Officers.
Community Service Officers, whether paid or volunteer, part-time or full-time, shall have limited powers and shall not be considered commissioned officers. Only full-time Community Service Officers are a part of the civil service system. [Ord. 471 § 1, 2008; Ord. 369 § 2, 2005; Ord. 338 § 1, 2004; Ord. 327 § 1, 2003.]

2.14.090 Additional powers.
The Chief of Police is authorized to engage in forfeiture hearings and proceedings according to Chapter 69.50 RCW, RCW 10.105.010 and any other applicable state law, and to appoint a designee to act as a Hearing Examiner for those proceedings. [Ord. 471 § 1, 2008; Ord. 369 § 3, 2005; Ord. 327 § 2, 2003.]

2.14.100 Forfeited items.
Real or personal property forfeited to the Lakewood Police Department pursuant to Chapter 69.50 RCW, any other state statutes, or pursuant to a court order may be sold, auctioned, converted or otherwise disposed of pursuant to the provisions of the statutory authority or court order authorizing forfeiture. However, firearms shall not be retained by the Department but shall be sold at auction or destroyed, whichever is most appropriate. [Ord. 471 § 1, 2008; Ord. 327 § 2, 2003.]

2.14.110 Commissions.
The Lakewood Police Department, as a general authority Washington law enforcement agency, does hereby provide a limited special commission to qualifying employees of the City, specifically those employees responsible for code enforcement, animal control, and to Building Officials who are authorized to enforce certain civil and criminal laws, as well as those holding the positions of Court Compliance Officer and Community Service Officer. [Ord. 471 § 1, 2008; Ord. 339 § 2, 2004.]

2.14.120 Scope of limited commission.
The scope of the commission granted to Court Compliance Officers shall be different from that granted to other employees with the same level of commission. Court Compliance Officers shall be authorized to carry and use firearms, tasers or other weapons issued by the Lakewood Police Department to perform the duties of the position after successful completion of training in the deployment of the weapons and successful completion of the State Correctional Officer Academy. This commission is only effective while the Court Compliance Officer is on duty for the City. Nothing in this section shall extend more authority beyond that necessary to accomplish the duties of Court Compliance Officer.
For all other employees with special limited commissions, the commission granted shall not grant any power of arrest, nor shall it grant any authority to carry firearms or tasers except as otherwise authorized in this section. Code Enforcement Officers, Building Officials, Community Service Officers and Animal Control Officers are authorized to carry oleoresin capsicum (o.c.) spray issued by the Lakewood Police Department and may only use the o.c. spray for defensive purposes after successful completion of training in the deployment of the spray. In addition, Animal Control Officers may also carry and use tranquilizer darts or other weapons designed for use on animals in conjunction with animal control functions and are authorized to carry and use tasers and collapsible batons for defensive purposes only. No one commissioned pursuant to this section shall have any authority beyond that necessary to issue notices of infraction and criminal citations for violations of City code provisions as a condition of employment with the City as related to the previously adopted code provisions. [Ord. 520 § 1, 2010; Ord. 471 § 1, 2008; Ord. 339 § 3, 2004.]

2.14.130 Reserve Officers.
Reserve Officers shall be considered commissioned officers entitled to participate in the Volunteer Firefighters and Reserve Officer Relief and Pension Program and shall serve without pay for the period as determined by the Chief. The Reserve Officer’s commission shall be valid only when on official duty as a part of an assigned shift or detail. The Police Chief will ensure reserves have received proper background screening, training and certifications consistent with standards established under Washington law, City ordinance and Civil Service directive. The Chief will also establish standards for continued eligibility for reserve assignment that will ensure reserve officers remain current with training and certifications, as well as familiar and compliant with ordinances of the City and policies of the Police Department.
A. Reserve Officers shall be deemed to be agents or employees of the City of Lakewood while on official duty and shall have the right to use the Lakewood Police Department’s equipment, vehicles and uniforms as deemed necessary and authorized by the Chief. [Ord. 471 § 1, 2008; Ord. 349 § 1, 2004.]

Chapter 2.16 MUNICIPAL COURT

Sections:
2.16.010     Creation of a Traffic Violations Bureau.
2.16.020     Processing of citations.
2.16.030     Forfeited moneys to the general fund.
2.16.040     Administration of the Traffic Violations Bureau.
2.16.050     Municipal Court established.
2.16.060     Court seal.
2.16.070     Jurisdiction.
2.16.080     Judges – Appointments – Qualifications.
2.16.090     Salaries – Costs.
2.16.100     Removal of Judge.
2.16.110     Municipal Court employees.
2.16.120     Judges Pro Tem – Court Commissioners.
2.16.130     Judicial vacancy.
2.16.140     Municipal Court hours.
2.16.150     Revenue deposits.
2.16.160     Rules of pleading, practice and procedure.
2.16.170     Public defender – Appointment.
2.16.180     Public defender – Statement for services.
2.16.190     Public defender – Payment.
2.16.200     Use of credit cards.
2.16.210     Use of collection agencies and attorneys.

2.16.010 Creation of a Traffic Violations Bureau.
There is hereby created and established a City Traffic Violations Bureau which shall be located at the City Hall offices. [Ord. 15 § 1, 1995.]

2.16.020 Processing of citations.
The Traffic Violations Bureau shall initially receive all citations charging violations of City ordinances. The Traffic Violations Bureau shall receive and post bail and penalties and shall issue receipts therefor. Forfeitures of bail and penalties on forfeitable misdemeanor charges and traffic infractions shall be accepted by the Traffic Violations Bureau. [Ord. 15 § 2, 1995.]

2.16.030 Forfeited moneys to the general fund.
All moneys paid as bail or penalties and forfeited to the Traffic Violations Bureau for violations of ordinances of the City shall be placed in the general fund of the City. [Ord. 15 § 3, 1995.]

2.16.040 Administration of the Traffic Violations Bureau.
The Traffic Violations Bureau shall be administered by the City’s Court Administrator. [Ord. 15 § 4, 1995.]

2.16.050 Municipal Court established.
There is established a “Municipal Court of the City of Lakewood,” hereinafter referred to as the “Municipal Court,” which court shall have jurisdiction and shall exercise all powers enumerated herein and in Chapter 3.50 RCW, together with all such other powers and jurisdiction as are generally conferred upon courts of limited jurisdiction in the state of Washington either by common law, the general law, or by express statute. [Ord. 252 § 1, 2000; Ord. 15 § 5, 1995.]

2.16.060 Court seal.
The Municipal Court shall have a seal which shall be the vignette of George Washington, with the words “Seal of the Municipal Court of Lakewood, State of Washington,” surrounding the vignette. [Ord. 15 § 6, 1995.]

2.16.070 Jurisdiction.
The Municipal Court shall have exclusive original jurisdiction over traffic infractions arising under City ordinances and exclusive original criminal jurisdiction of all violations of City ordinances duly adopted by the City. The Municipal Court shall have original jurisdiction of all other actions brought to enforce or recover license penalties or forfeitures declared or given by such ordinances or by state statutes. The Municipal Court is empowered to forfeit cash bail or bail bonds and issue execution thereon; and in general to hear and determine all causes, including traffic infractions, arising under such ordinances and to pronounce judgment in accordance therewith. [Ord. 15 § 7, 1995.]

2.16.080 Judges – Appointments – Qualifications.
A. One or more Municipal Judge(s) shall be appointed for a term of office expiring January 1st of any fourth year after 1994. The terms of any subsequent reappointments or successors shall commence on said January 1st, and on January 1st of each fourth year thereafter, pursuant to appointment or election as provided in this chapter, and RCW  3.50.040  et seq.
B. The Municipal Judge or Judges shall be appointed by the City Manager, subject to confirmation by the City Council for terms as provided above. Subsequent appointments or reappointments shall be made on or before December 1st of the year next preceding the year in which the term is to commence.
C. Notwithstanding the above, if the position (or positions) of the Municipal Judge constitute(s) at least one full-time equivalent judicial position, pursuant to RCW 3.50.055, and as provided herein below, such position(s) shall be filled by election in accordance with RCW 3.50.055.
D. Any person or persons appointed or elected as Municipal Judge shall be a citizen of the United States of America and of the state of Washington, and an attorney admitted to practice law before the courts of record of the state of Washington, and shall be a resident of Pierce County. [Ord. 252 § 1, 2000; Ord. 98 § 1, 1996; Ord. 15 § 8, 1995.]

2.16.090 Salaries – Costs.
Compensation of the Lakewood Municipal Judge shall be established by contract.
All costs of operation of the Municipal Court, including but not limited to salaries of judges and court employees, dockets, books of records, forms, furnishings and supplies shall be paid wholly out of the funds of the City. Jurors shall be paid a fee of $10.00 per day and mileage allowance pursuant to RCW 43.03.060. The City shall provide a suitable place for holding court and pay all expenses of maintaining it. [Ord. 574 § 1, 2013; Ord. 269 § 1, 2001; Ord. 252 § 1, 2000; Ord. 104 § 1, 1996; Ord. 98 § 1, 1996; Ord. 15 § 9, 1995.]

2.16.100 Removal of Judge.
A Municipal Judge shall be removed by a majority of the City Council only upon conviction of misconduct or malfeasance in office, or because of physical or mental disability rendering the judge incapable of performing the duties of the office, or by operation of law. For the purposes hereof, conviction of misconduct or malfeasance in office shall include (A) conviction of any criminal offense by the Municipal Judge during the term of office of the Municipal Judge, (B) a determination by the Washington State Judicial Conduct Commission that a code or standard of judicial conduct has been violated, or (C) a finding by the City Council, after notice and a hearing and reasonable opportunity to be heard, that conduct has occurred, not limited to criminal convictions, which interferes with or prevents the Municipal Judge from being able to adequately administer or handle judicial functions of the Municipal Court, or which indicates that the Judge cannot act in a fair and/or impartial manner. It is provided, however, that if the Washington State Judicial Conduct Commission, or the Washington State Supreme Court or other court with the jurisdiction to make such decisions, decides that the Municipal Judge is to be removed from office or that the Municipal Judge is not qualified or able to serve as a Municipal Judge, then no further or separate action by the City Council is required to effect such removal. [Ord. 252 § 1, 2000; Ord. 15 § 10, 1995.]

2.16.110 Municipal Court employees.
All employees of the Municipal Court shall be employees of the City and all applicable personnel practices and procedures and/or agreements with respect to hiring and termination, and personnel administration shall be followed; provided, that the Municipal Court Judge shall have the responsibility for and authority over judicial functions and duties occurring in court or directly stemming from court action. Clerical support and administration for the Court shall be provided by the City Manager or designee. [Ord. 71 § 1, 1996; Ord. 15 § 11, 1995.]

2.16.120 Judges Pro Tem – Court Commissioners.
A. The Municipal Court Judge, or a majority of Municipal Court Judges, if there is more than one Municipal Judge, shall, in writing, appoint Judges Pro Tem who shall act in the absence or disability of the regular Judge of the Municipal Court or in the case of overlapping schedules or subsequent to the filing of an affidavit of prejudice. In any case where the Municipal Judges are unable to reach a majority in making a decision regarding such an appointment, the presiding judge of the Pierce County District Court No. 1 shall be afforded a vote to break the tie and make the decision; provided, that if the presiding judge of the Pierce County District Court No. 1 is unwilling or unable to participate in such decision, then the toss of a coin shall be used, unless another tie-breaking mechanism is agreed to by the Municipal Judges, to break the tie and make the decision. The Judge Pro Tem shall be qualified to hold the position of Judge of the Municipal Court as provided herein. The Judge Pro Tem shall receive compensation computed on an hourly basis at the rate of $50.00 per hour, or as otherwise fixed by resolution or ordinance. The term of the appointment shall be specified in writing but in any event shall not extend beyond the term of the appointing Municipal Court Judge or Judges.
B. The Municipal Judge, or a majority of Municipal Court Judges, if there is more than one Municipal Judge, may appoint one or more Municipal Court Commissioners, who shall hold office during the pleasure of the Municipal Judge, to preside over specific calendars. In any case where the Municipal Judges are unable to reach a majority in making a decision regarding such an appointment, the presiding judge of the Pierce County District Court No. 1 shall be afforded a vote to break the tie and make the decision; provided, that if the presiding judge of the Pierce County District Court No. 1 is unwilling or unable to participate in such decision, then the toss of a coin shall be used, unless another tie-breaking mechanism is agreed to by the Municipal Judges, to break the tie and make the decision. Each Municipal Court Commissioner shall have such power, authority and jurisdiction in civil and criminal matters as the Municipal Judge shall prescribe by court order. The Court Commissioners shall receive compensation computed on an hourly basis at the rate of $40.00 per hour, or as otherwise fixed by resolution or ordinance.
C. The compensation of Judges Pro Tem and Court Commissioners shall be paid out of the amount from which payment is made to the Municipal Judge or Judges as provided for in LMC 2.16.090.
D. The scheduling of Court Commissioners and Judges Pro Tem shall be on a “one-half day” calendar basis. In the case of an overlapping or simultaneous calendar, if the Municipal Judge completes the calendar over which the Municipal Judge was presiding, and the other calendar which would have been presided over by the Court Commissioner or Judge Pro Tem has not yet started, the Municipal Judge shall have the right to preside over such calendar. The Municipal Judge, or the assigned Municipal Judge, if there is more than one Municipal Judge, shall have the right to preside over any calendars not yet started that the Municipal Judge is in a position to preside over. In the case where a Court Commissioner or Judge Pro Tem has been called and scheduled to preside over an overlapping or simultaneous calendar, but where the Municipal Judge, or the assigned Municipal Judge, if there is more than one Municipal Judge, is available to preside over the calendar, thereby making the services of the Court Commissioner or Judge Pro Tem no longer needed, such Court Commissioner or Judge Pro Tem shall be compensated for at least one hour at the appropriate hourly rate, assuming that the Court Commissioner or Judge Pro Tem was present, ready and able to preside over the scheduled calendar. [Ord. 252 § 1, 2000; Ord. 165 § 1, 1998; Ord. 98 §1, 1996; Ord. 71 § 2, 1996; Ord. 15 § 12, 1995.]

2.16.130 Judicial vacancy.
Any vacancy in the Municipal Court due to a death, disability, removal or resignation of a Municipal Judge shall be filled by the City Manager, subject to confirmation by the City Council, for the remainder of the unexpired term. The appointed Municipal Judge shall be qualified to hold the position of Judge of the Municipal Court as provided in this chapter. [Ord. 15 § 13, 1995.]

2.16.140 Municipal Court hours.
The Municipal Court offices shall be open during all regular business days and hours as the other offices of the City shall be open, but the dates and times of open court shall be as set as needed by the City Manager or designee in consultation with the Municipal Judge, or Judges; provided, that the sessions of the open court shall not be on nonjudicial days. [Ord. 252 § 1, 2000; Ord. 71 § 3, 1996; Ord. 15 § 14, 1995.]

2.16.150 Revenue deposits.
All fees, costs, fines, forfeitures and other moneys imposed or collected by the Municipal Court for the violation of any City ordinance, together with any other revenue received by the Municipal Court, shall be deposited with the City Finance Department as part of the general fund of the City. [Ord. 71 § 4, 1996; Ord. 15 § 15, 1995.]

2.16.160 Rules of pleading, practice and procedure.
The rules of pleading, practice and procedure before the Municipal Court shall be in accordance with the Rules for Courts of Limited Jurisdiction, as published by the Washington Supreme Court, as currently in effect, as may be subsequently amended. [Ord. 15 § 16, 1995.]

2.16.170 Public defender – Appointment.
The Municipal Judge is authorized to appoint, on a case-to-case basis, as may be required, an attorney licensed to practice before the courts of the state of Washington, to act as public defender in representing indigent persons as defined by state law who are charged with offenses filed in the Municipal Court and for which the person could receive jail time as a result of conviction therefor, and cases appealed therefrom. [Ord. 71 § 5, 1996; Ord. 15 § 17, 1995.]

2.16.180 Public defender – Statement for services.
The attorney appointed to act as public defender shall present his statement for services to the City, and the same shall be paid in the same manner as the other obligations of the City. [Ord. 15 § 18, 1995.]

2.16.190 Public defender – Payment.
The charges submitted by the public defender and approved by the City Council shall be paid from the general fund of the City. [Ord. 15 § 19, 1995.]

2.16.200 Use of credit cards.
The Municipal Court may permit the use of credit cards for purposes of billing and collecting unpaid penalties, fines, costs, assessments, and forfeitures imposed. The Municipal Court may enter into agreements with one or more financial institutions for the purpose of such collections. The said agreements may specify conditions, remuneration for services, and other charges deemed appropriate, upon confirmation by the City Council. [Ord. 15 § 20, 1995.]

2.16.210 Use of collection agencies and attorneys.
A. The Municipal Court may use collection agencies as defined by Chapter 19.16 RCW for purposes of collecting unpaid penalties on infractions, criminal fines, costs, assessments, civil judgments, or forfeitures that have been imposed by the Court. The Municipal Court may enter into agreements with one or more attorneys or collection agencies for collection of outstanding penalties, fines, costs, assessments, and forfeitures. These agreements may specify the scope of work, remuneration for services, and other charges deemed appropriate.
B. Servicing of delinquencies by collection agencies or by collecting attorneys in which the Municipal Court retains control of its delinquencies shall not constitute assignment of debt.
C. The term “debt” shall include penalties, fines, costs, assessments, or forfeitures imposed by the Municipal Court.
D. The Municipal Court may assess, as court costs, the moneys paid for remuneration for services or charges paid to collecting attorneys, to collection agencies, or, in the case of credit cards, to financial institutions. [Ord. 252 § 1, 2000; Ord. 15 § 21, 1995.]

Chapter 2.22 PUBLIC SAFETY ADVISORY COMMITTEE

Sections:
2.22.010     Establishment of Public Safety Advisory Committee as City advisory committee.
2.22.020     Membership.
2.22.030     Appointment.
2.22.040     Terms and vacancies.
2.22.050     Officers – Meetings.
2.22.060     Role of the Public Safety Advisory Committee.
2.22.070     Compensation.
2.22.080     Annual reports of progress.

2.22.010 Establishment of Public Safety Advisory Committee as City advisory committee.
The “Public Safety Advisory Committee” is hereby established and created as an advisory committee to the City of Lakewood. [Ord. 413 § 1, 2006.]

2.22.020 Membership.
There shall be no less than seven nor more than 15 members of the Public Safety Advisory Committee who shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council and who shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. The members shall be residents of the City unless the Council finds that appointment of a nonresident, by virtue of business involvement or expertise, will benefit the Committee and ultimately the City. In addition to the members as provided above, the Chief of Police or designee shall serve as an ex officio member of the Advisory Committee. [Ord. 439 § 1, 2007; Ord. 413 § 1, 2006.]

2.22.030 Appointment.
The members of the Public Safety Advisory Committee shall be appointed from among members of the public to include, to the extent reasonably possible, representation from people involved with or interested in public safety issues in the City of Lakewood. [Ord. 413 § 1, 2006.]

2.22.040 Terms and vacancies.
Subject to the provisions of LMC 2.22.020 and the pleasure of the City Council, members of the Public Safety Advisory Committee shall serve for a term of three years or until appointment of a successor member, whichever is later, unless otherwise replaced. It is provided, however, that for the initial appointment, at least three members shall be initially appointed for three-year terms, or until appointment of a successor member, whichever is later, unless otherwise replaced; at least three members shall be initially appointed for two-year terms, or until appointment of a successor member, whichever is later, unless otherwise replaced; and at least one member shall be initially appointed for a one-year term, or until appointment of a successor member, whichever is later, unless otherwise replaced. In case of any vacancies on the Advisory Committee, vacancies shall be filled consistent with the procedures set forth in LMC 2.22.020, for the unexpired terms for which such vacancies are filled. [Ord. 413 § 1, 2006.]

2.22.050 Officers – Meetings.
A. At its first meeting of each year, the Public Safety Advisory Committee members shall elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson from among the members of the Public Safety Advisory Committee. The Public Safety Advisory Committee shall meet as needed to perform the duties of the Public Safety Advisory Committee and to fulfill the role of being an advisory body to the City Council.
B. It shall be the duty of the chairperson to preside over all meetings of the Public Safety Advisory Committee. The vice chairperson shall preside at all meetings where the chairperson is absent. Minutes shall be kept and meeting agendas prepared in coordination between members of the Committee and staff members. A majority of the members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and a majority vote of those present shall be necessary to carry any recommended action. [Ord. 413 § 1, 2006.]

2.22.060 Role of the Public Safety Advisory Committee.
The Public Safety Advisory Committee is created to provide citizen input and advice to the City Council in developing and monitoring public safety policies.
The Committee will report to the Council and will also assist the Council in assessing that department resources allow for compliance with City and department policies. [Ord. 413 § 1, 2006.]

2.22.070 Compensation.
The members of the Public Safety Advisory Committee shall serve without compensation. [Ord. 413 § 1, 2006.]

2.22.080 Annual reports of progress.
The Public Safety Advisory Committee shall annually provide to the City Council a report on progress made in carrying out the Committee’s responsibilities. Additional reports may be submitted when deemed appropriate by the Public Safety Advisory Committee and/or the City Council. [Ord. 413 § 1, 2006.]

Chapter 2.26 COMMUNITY SERVICES ADVISORY BOARD

Sections:
2.26.010     Advisory board created.
2.26.020     Membership.
2.26.030     Appointment.
2.26.040     Terms and vacancies.
2.26.050     Role of the Advisory Board.
2.26.060     Compensation.

2.26.010 Advisory board created.
There is created an advisory board to be known as the “Community Services Advisory Board of the City of Lakewood.” [Ord. 602 § 2, 2014; Ord. 594 § 6, 2014.]

2.26.020 Membership.
There shall be up to nine members of the Board who shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council, and who shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. The members shall be residents of the City unless the Council finds that appointment of a nonresident, by virtue of business involvement or expertise, will benefit the Board and ultimately the City. [Ord. 594 § 6, 2014.]

2.26.030 Appointment.
The members of the Advisory Board shall be appointed from among members of the public to include, to the extent reasonably possible, representation from people involved with or interested in the various opportunities and projects to enhance the provision of CDBG investments and human services in the City. [Ord. 594 § 6, 2014.]

2.26.040 Terms and vacancies.
The members of the Advisory Board shall serve for a term of four years. It is provided, however, that the first five members to be appointed shall be initially appointed for four-year terms and the second four members to be appointed shall be initially appointed for two-year terms. [Ord. 594 § 6, 2014.]

2.26.050 Role of the Advisory Board.
The Advisory Board is created to assist the City Council in the following areas:
A. Conduct Public Hearings. 
    1. To receive public comments to identify community and housing needs and development of proposed activities; and
    2. To review allocation of human services funds and programs.
B. Recommend to the City Council. 
    1. Programs for funding out of CDBG funds;
    2. CDBG and HOME funding allocations, including development of housing program strategies;
    3. Suggestions for the Consolidated Plan and other related documents;
    4. Funding for human services.
C. Perform such other duties and functions related to CDBG, HOME and human services funding as assigned by the City Council and in furtherance of the goals and objectives of the CDBG and HOME programs as well as LMC Title 8.
The Advisory Board shall work in accordance with a work plan as detailed in Chapter 2.68LMC. [Ord. 594 § 6, 2014.]

2.26.060 Compensation.
The members of the Advisory Board shall serve without compensation. [Ord. 594 § 6, 2014.]

Chapter 2.32 WORK CREW PROGRAM

Sections:
2.32.010     Purpose.
2.32.020     Types of work.
2.32.030     Work crew program.
2.32.040     Criteria for work crew participation.

2.32.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the program and its parameters by which offenders who would otherwise be incarcerated or obligated financially to the City of Lakewood pursuant to order of the Municipal Court could perform routine work in and around the City, providing a value to the City and saving on the incarceration and other costs that would otherwise be incurred. [Ord. 303 § 1, 2003; Ord. 216 § 1, 1999.]

2.32.020 Types of work.
The work that the work crew shall be assigned to provide shall include those types of maintenance and upkeep tasks involving City facilities and infrastructure, including but not limited to painting buildings, performing ground maintenance and landscaping such as weeding, planting, raking, watering and such, cleaning up and removing trash and debris along roadways, cleaning public rights-of-way, providing maintenance and beautification at parks and recreation facilities, painting buildings and City facilities, providing landscaping services on City property, and any other similar labor-based activities that do not require much experience or training and that lend themselves to supervision through this type of program, and that do not impose risk of harm or injury to the citizens of the City of Lakewood. [Ord. 303 § 1, 2003; Ord. 216 § 1, 1999.]

2.32.030 Work crew program.
The work crew program shall include the following:
A. Facilities, equipment and personnel to transport the assigned offenders to and from designated assignment locations in a vehicle owned and operated by the City.
B. The work crew vehicle shall be clearly marked, identifying it as a work crew vehicle so that the vehicle is visible and identifiable to the public.
C. The work crew work day shall consist of eight hours per day, four days per week, Wednesday through Saturday, unless other days are agreed by the parties, to accommodate for holidays or other circumstances as may arise.
D. The work crew shall be used for work sites and projects located in the City of Lakewood, with a priority of providing work services in the City of Lakewood to the fullest extent reasonably possible.
E. The work crew staff shall provide adequate supervision of the participating offenders at all times to ensure the safety of others.
F. The participating offenders shall be screened to ensure that they meet the criteria identified in LMC 2.32.040.
G. The Work Crew Coordinator or other designated person shall provide monthly reports of all work done during the prior month, including detailing work sites, numbers of offender hours worked and Lakewood offender hours worked, and any other information reasonably related to the purposes of this program.
H. Whenever a participating offender who has been assigned to the work crew program fails to show up for the work crew as assigned or otherwise fails to comply with the requirements of the work crew, or any reasonable requests of the work crew staff, the City and its appropriate departments shall be notified as soon as reasonably possible, but in any case not later than 24 hours after the failure to show up or comply. [Ord. 303 § 1, 2003; Ord. 216 § 1, 1999.]

2.32.040 Criteria for work crew participation.
In order to be eligible to participate in the City’s work crew program, an offender shall have been initially screened and referred to the Work Crew Supervisor for final eligibility screening by the Municipal Court at the time of entry of stipulated order of continuance (SOC), sentencing or sentencing review, and shall meet the following criteria:
A. The work crew offender must be a low-risk offender.
B. The work crew offender shall not have been convicted of, or have a history of, multiple arrests for any of the following:
    1. Crimes against children;
    2. Sex offenses;
    3. Arson;
    4. Criminal activity or conduct that indicates that an offender would not be appropriate for the work crew.
C. The work crew offender may be rejected from this work crew program or any similar program for violation of work crew requirements or any inappropriate conduct. [Ord. 670 § 1, 2017; Ord. 303 § 1, 2003; Ord. 216 § 1, 1999.]

Chapter 2.36 PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD

Sections:
2.36.010     Parks and Recreation Advisory Board created.
2.36.020     Membership.
2.36.030     Appointment.
2.36.040     Terms and vacancies.
2.36.050     Officers – Meetings.
2.36.060     Role of the Advisory Board.
2.36.070     Compensation.
2.36.080     Annual reports of progress.
2.36.090     Severability.

2.36.010 Parks and Recreation Advisory Board created.
There is created an advisory board to be known as “The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board of the City of Lakewood.” [Ord. 240 § 1, 2000.]

2.36.020 Membership.
There shall be seven members of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board who shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council, and who shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. The members shall be residents of the City unless the Council finds that appointment of a nonresident, by virtue of business involvement or expertise, will benefit the Board and ultimately the City. [Ord. 441 § 1, 2007; Ord. 240 § 1, 2000.]

2.36.030 Appointment.
The members of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall be appointed from among members of the public to include, to the extent reasonably possible, representation from people involved with or interested in the various and diverse aspects of parks and/or recreation programs, functions and activities of the community. [Ord. 240 § 1, 2000.]

2.36.040 Terms and vacancies.
Subject to the provisions of LMC 2.36.020 and the pleasure of the City Council, members of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall serve for a term of three years or until appointment of a successor member, whichever is later, unless otherwise replaced. It is provided, however, that for the initial appointment, three members shall be initially appointed for three-year terms, or until appointment of a successor member, whichever is later, unless otherwise replaced; two members shall be initially appointed for two-year terms, or until appointment of a successor member, whichever is later, unless otherwise replaced; and two members shall be initially appointed for one-year terms, or until appointment of a successor member, whichever is later, unless otherwise replaced. In case of any vacancies on the commission, vacancies shall be filled consistent with the procedures set forth in LMC 2.36.020, for the unexpired terms for which such vacancies are filled. [Ord. 240 § 1, 2000.]

2.36.050 Officers – Meetings.
A. At its first meeting of each year, the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board members shall elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson from among the members of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board. The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall meet as needed to perform the duties of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board and to fulfill the role of being an advisory body to the City Council.
B. It shall be the duty of the chairperson to preside over all meetings of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board. The vice chairperson shall preside at all meetings where the chairperson is absent. Minutes shall be kept and meeting agendas prepared in coordination between members of the Board and staff members. A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and a majority vote of those present shall be necessary to carry any recommended action.
C. The City Manager or designee shall provide staff support for the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board and shall constitute a nonvoting ex officio member of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board. [Ord. 240 § 1, 2000.]

2.36.060 Role of the Advisory Board.
The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board is created to assist the City Council in the following areas:
A. The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall advise the Mayor, the City Council and City staff or officials administering parks, regarding the general operation and development of all parks and recreational facilities and programs of Lakewood. The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall advise and make recommendations regarding: the development of park and/or recreation facilities, programs, long range park planning, needs assessment, program evaluation, acquisition, construction, development, concessions or privileges in parks and/or playgrounds, sports fields, recreation grounds, and/or other municipally owned recreational facilities, including community buildings, and improvements to the same. The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall also work with neighborhood groups and ad-hoc committees to formulate recommendations to the City Council.
B. The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall recommend rules and regulations for the government, management, operation, supervision, and control of City parks and recreational facilities and programs.
C. The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall advise the City Council in connection with parks and recreation issues as may be referred to the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board by the City Council which may include, but is not limited to, the following:
    1. Facilitate cooperation and coordination with City staff, citizens’ groups and other entities, agencies and organizations on parks and recreation issues;
    2. Recommend to the City Council strategies to enhance awareness of, and interest in, Parks and Recreation facilities and programs of the City, which may be in cooperation with any appropriate private, civic or public agency of the City, county, state or of the federal government;
    3. Recommend ways and means of obtaining private, local, county, state or federal funds for the promotion of parks and recreation programs and projects within the City;
    4. Advise the City Council on acquisition of parks and recreation facilities and properties; and
    5. Represent the community and the City of Lakewood as requested by the City Council to address parks and recreation related issues. [Ord. 240 § 1, 2000.]

2.36.070 Compensation.
The members of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall serve without compensation. [Ord. 240 § 1, 2000.]

2.36.080 Annual reports of progress.
The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall annually provide to the City Council a report on progress made in carrying out the Board’s responsibilities. Additional reports may be submitted when deemed appropriate by the Board or when requested by the City Council. [Ord. 240 § 1, 2000.]

2.36.090 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. [Ord. 240 § 1, 2000.]

Chapter 2.38 LAKEWOOD’S PROMISE ADVISORY BOARD

Sections:
2.38.010     Lakewood’s Promise Advisory Board created.
2.38.020     Membership.
2.38.030     Appointment.
2.38.040     Terms and vacancies.
2.38.050     Officers – Meetings.
2.38.060     Role of the Advisory Board.
2.38.070     Compensation.
2.38.080     Annual reports of progress.

2.38.010 Lakewood’s Promise Advisory Board created.
There is created an advisory board to be known as “The Lakewood’s Promise Advisory Board.” [Ord. 546 § 1, 2012.]

2.38.020 Membership.
There shall be up to 11 members of the Lakewood’s Promise Advisory Board who shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council, and who shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. The members shall be residents of the City, or by the nature of their work with youth, determined an asset to the Board. Four members of the Board shall be comprised of representatives of the Clover Park School District, Pierce College, Clover Park Technical College, and City of Lakewood. Official representatives may assign a delegate or proxy to attend meetings and act on their behalf. One Board member shall be a representative from the Youth Council. The remaining six positions may be filled as deemed appropriate and necessary to the work of the Board. [Ord. 619 § 1, 2015; Ord. 594 § 5, 2014; Ord. 546 § 1, 2012.]

2.38.030 Appointment.
The members of the Lakewood’s Promise Advisory Board shall be appointed from among members of the public to include, to the extent reasonably possible, representation from people involved with or interested in the availability and delivery of the five promises. [Ord. 546 § 1, 2012.]

2.38.040 Terms and vacancies.
Subject to the provisions of LMC 2.38.020 and the pleasure of the City Council, members of the Lakewood’s Promise Advisory Board shall serve for a term of three years or until appointment of a successor member, whichever is later, unless otherwise replaced, except that the representatives of the Clover Park School District, Pierce College, Clover Park Technical College and the City of Lakewood shall not be subject to term limits and that the Youth Council member shall serve a term of one year. In case of any vacancies on the commission, vacancies shall be filled consistent with the procedures set forth in LMC 2.38.020, for the unexpired terms for which such vacancies are filled. [Ord. 619 § 2, 2015; Ord. 546 § 1, 2012.]

2.38.050 Officers – Meetings.
A. At its first meeting of each year, the Lakewood’s Promise Advisory Board members shall elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson from among the members of the Lakewood’s Promise Advisory Board. The Lakewood’s Promise Advisory Board shall meet as needed to perform the duties of the Lakewood’s Promise Advisory Board and to fulfill the role of being an advisory body to the City Council.
B. It shall be the duty of the chairperson to preside over all meetings of the Lakewood’s Promise Advisory Board. The vice chairperson shall preside at all meetings where the chairperson is absent. Minutes shall be kept and meeting agendas prepared in coordination between members of the Board and staff members. A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and a majority vote of those present shall be necessary to carry any recommended action. [Ord. 619 § 3, 2015; Ord. 546 § 1, 2012.]

2.38.060 Role of the Advisory Board.
The Lakewood’s Promise Advisory Board is created to assist the City Council in the following areas:
A. The Lakewood’s Promise Advisory Board shall advise the Mayor, the City Council and City staff regarding the availability and delivery of the five promises within the City.
B. The Lakewood’s Promise Advisory Board shall look for ways to develop ongoing relationships among Lakewood citizens and businesses to better deliver Promise activities to youth. To do this, the Lakewood’s Promise Advisory Board will recommend individuals to serve on task forces pertaining to each of the five promises.
C. The Lakewood’s Promise Advisory Board shall advise the City Council in connection with Lakewood’s Promise issues as may be referred to the Lakewood’s Promise Advisory Board by the City Council which may include, but is not limited to, the following:
    1. Facilitate cooperation and coordination with the City, citizens’ groups and other entities, agencies and organizations on Lakewood’s Promise issues;
    2. Recommend to the City Council strategies to enhance awareness of, and interest in, Lakewood’s Promise which may be in cooperation with any appropriate private, civic or public agency of the City, county, state or of the federal government;
    3. Recommend ways and means of obtaining private, local, county, state or federal funds for the promotion of Lakewood’s Promise programs and projects within the City; and
    4. Represent the community and the City of Lakewood as requested by the City Council to address Lakewood’s Promise related issues. [Ord. 619 § 4, 2015; Ord. 546 § 1, 2012.]

2.38.070 Compensation.
The members of the Lakewood’s Promise Advisory Board shall serve without compensation. [Ord. 546 § 1, 2012.]

2.38.080 Annual reports of progress.
The Lakewood’s Promise Advisory Board shall annually provide to the City Council a report on progress made in carrying out the Board’s responsibilities. Additional reports may be submitted when deemed appropriate by the Board or when requested by the City Council. [Ord. 546 § 1, 2012.]

Chapter 2.48 PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION OF LANDMARKS

Sections:
2.48.010     Purpose.
2.48.020     Definitions.
2.48.030     Landmarks and Heritage Advisory Board created.
2.48.035     Powers of Lakewood Landmarks and Heritage Advisory Board.
2.48.040     Designation criteria.
2.48.050     Nomination procedure.
2.48.060     Designation procedure.
2.48.070     Certificate of appropriateness procedure.
2.48.080     Evaluation of economic impact.
2.48.090     Appeal procedure.
2.48.110     Penalties for violating this chapter.
2.48.120     Special valuation for historic properties.
2.48.130     Severability.
2.48.140     Retroactive approval of acts.

2.48.010 Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are to:
A. Designate, preserve, protect, enhance, and perpetuate those sites, buildings, districts, structures and objects which reflect significant elements of the City’s, county’s, state’s and nation’s cultural, aesthetic, social, economic, political, architectural, ethnic, archaeological, engineering, historic and other heritage;
B. Foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past;
C. Stabilize and improve the economic values and vitality of landmarks;
D. Protect and enhance the City’s tourist industry by promoting heritage-related tourism;
E. Promote the continued use, exhibition and interpretation of significant sites, districts, buildings, structures, objects, artifacts, materials and records for the education, inspiration and welfare of the people of Lakewood;
F. Promote and continue incentives for ownership and utilization of landmarks;
G. Assist, encourage and provide incentives to public and private owners for preservation, restoration, rehabilitation and use of landmark buildings, sites, districts, structures and objects;
H. Assist, encourage, and provide technical assistance to public agencies, public and private museums, archives and historic preservation associations and other organizations involved in the preservation, exhibition, protection and interpretation of Lakewood’s heritage;
I. Work cooperatively to identify, evaluate and protect historic resources in furtherance of the purposes of this chapter. [Ord. 251 § 1, 2000.]

2.48.020 Definitions.
The following words and terms shall, when used in this chapter, be defined as follows unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
“Alteration” means any construction, demolition, removal, modification, excavation, restoration or remodeling of a landmark.
“Board” means the Landmarks and Heritage Advisory Board.
“Building” means a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel, or similar structure. Building may refer to a historically related complex, such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn.
“Certificate of appropriateness” means written authorization issued by the Board or its designee permitting an alteration to a significant feature of a designated landmark.
“Community landmark” means a historic resource which has been designated pursuant to this chapter but which may be altered or changed without application for or approval of a certificate of appropriateness.
“Council” means the Lakewood City Council.
“Designation” means the act of the Board determining that a historic resource meets the criteria established by this chapter.
“Designation report” means a report issued by the Board after a public hearing setting forth its determination to designate a landmark and specifying the significant feature or features thereof.
“District” means a geographically definable area, urban or rural, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history.
“Heritage” means a discipline relating to history, ethnic history, traditional cultures, folklore, archaeology and historic preservation.
“Historic Preservation Officer” means the Lakewood Historic Preservation Officer or his or her designee, as provided in LMC 2.48.030(F) or its successor provision.
“Historic resource” means a district, site, building, structure or object significant in American and/or local history, architecture, archaeology and/or culture.
“Incentives” means such compensation, rights or privileges or combination thereof, which the Council or other local, state or federal public body or agency, by virtue of applicable present or future legislation, may be authorized to grant to or obtain for the owner(s) of designated landmarks. Examples of economic incentives include but are not limited to tax relief, conditional use permits, rezoning, street, vacation, planned unit development, transfer of development rights, facade easements, gifts, preferential leasing policies, private or public grants-in-aid, beneficial placement of public improvements or amenities, or the like.
“Interested person of record” means any individual, corporation, partnership or association which notifies the Board or the Council in writing of his/her/its interest in any matter before the Board.
“Landmark” means a historic resource designated as a landmark pursuant to this chapter.
“Nomination” means a proposal that a historic resource be designated a landmark.
“Object” means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical, or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment.
“Owner’ is a person having a fee simple interest, a substantial beneficial interest of record or a substantial beneficial interest known to the Board in a historic resource. Where the owner is a public agency or government, that agency shall specify the person or persons to receive notices hereunder.
“Person” means any individual, partnership, corporation, group or association.
“Person in charge” means the person or persons in possession of a landmark, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee, or vendee in possession, an assignee of rents, a receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, tenant, agent, or any other person directly or indirectly in control of the landmark.
“Preliminary determination” means a decision of the Board determining that a historic resource which has been nominated for designation is of significant value and is likely to satisfy the criteria for designation.
“Significant feature” means any element of a landmark which the Board has designated pursuant to this chapter as important to the historic, architectural or archaeological value of the landmark.
“Site” means the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains a historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structures.
“Structure” means any functional construction in addition to that which is described as a “building” hereinabove. [Ord. 578 § 1, 2014; Ord. 251 § 1, 2000.]

2.48.030 Landmarks and Heritage Advisory Board created.
A. There hereby is created a Lakewood Landmarks and Heritage Advisory Board. It shall consist of no more than nine members selected as follows:
    1. At least three shall be professionals who have experience in identification, evaluation, and protection of historic resources and have been selected from among the fields of history, architecture, architectural history, historic preservation, planning, cultural anthropology, archaeology, cultural geography, landscape architecture, American studies, law or other historic preservation-related disciplines.
    2. The members of the Board shall be appointed by the Lakewood Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council. All regular members shall have a demonstrated interest in historic preservation.
B. Appointments of Board members shall be made for a three-year term. Each regular member shall serve until his or her successor is duly appointed and confirmed. Appointments shall be effective on January 1st of each year. In the event of a vacancy, an appointment shall be made to fill the vacancy in the same manner and with the same qualifications as if at the beginning of the term, and the person appointed to fill the vacancy shall hold the position for the remainder of the unexpired term. Any members may be reappointed regardless of the number of terms previously served. The members of the Board shall serve without compensation.
C. The chair shall be a member of the Board and shall be elected annually by the regular Board members. The Board shall adopt rules and regulations, including procedures consistent with this chapter. The Board shall not conduct any public hearing required under this chapter until rules and regulations have been filed with the City Clerk.
D. A majority of the Advisory Board members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. All official actions of the Board shall require a majority vote of the members present and eligible to vote on the action voted upon. No member shall be eligible to vote upon any matter which requires a hearing unless that member has attended the hearing or familiarized him or herself with the record. Members must be present to vote; no absentee ballots are allowed.
E. The Board may from time to time establish one or more committees to further the policies of the Board, each with such powers as may be lawfully delegated to it by the Board.
F. The Director of the City of Lakewood Community Development Department shall provide staff support to the Board, and shall serve as a “Historic Preservation Officer” for the City, or supervise a person functioning in that capacity, as authorized by the City Manager. The Historic Preservation Officer shall further perform such tasks and provide such other services as are consistent with the City Manager’s direction, including, as applies, use of employment resources, act as custodian of the Board’s records, and other duties as assigned.
G. At all hearings before and meetings of the Board, all oral proceedings shall be electronically recorded. Such proceedings may also be recorded stenographically by a court reporter if any interested persons at his or her expense shall provide a court reporter for that purpose. A tape recorded copy of the electronic record of any hearing or part thereof shall be furnished to any person upon request and payment of the reasonable expense thereof.
H. The Board is authorized, subject to the availability of funds budgeted for that purpose and approval of the expenditure by the City Council, to expend moneys to compensate experts, in whole or in part, to provide technical assistance to property owners in connection with requests for certificates of appropriateness upon a showing by the property owner that the need for such technical assistance imposes an unreasonable financial hardship on such property owner.
I. In order to avoid looting or depravation of any such sites, Advisory Board records, maps, or other information identifying the location or archaeological sites and potential sites shall be exempt from public access as provided in RCW 42.56.300. [Ord. 578 § 1, 2014; Ord. 512 § 1, 2010; Ord. 368 § 1, 2004; Ord. 251 § 1, 2000.]

2.48.035 Powers of Lakewood Landmarks and Heritage Advisory Board.
A. The primary duty of the Board is to identify and actively encourage the conservation of the City’s historic resources by establishing and maintaining a register of historic landmarks, landmark sites, historic special review districts, and conservation districts; reviewing proposed changes to register properties; raising community awareness of the City’s history and historic resources; and serving as the City’s primary resource in matters of history, historic planning, and preservation, as provided for in this chapter.
B. In carrying out these responsibilities, the Landmarks and Heritage Advisory Board shall engage in the following:
    1. Serve as liaison to the City Council on matters of historic preservation policy.
    2. Review proposals to construct, change, alter, modify, remodel, move, demolish, or significantly affect properties as set forth in this chapter, and adopt standards and design guidelines to be used to guide this review and the issuance of a certificate of approval.
    3. Actively encourage the conservation of historic materials and make recommendations regarding mitigation measures for projects adversely affecting historic resources.
    4. Review, advise, and comment to the Planning Advisory Board and City Council on land use, housing and redevelopment, municipal improvements and other types of planning and programs undertaken by any agency of the City, other neighboring communities, the county, and state or federal governments, as they relate to historic resources within the City.
    5. Review nominations to the State and National Registers of Historic Places for historic properties within the City.
    6. Make recommendations to the City Council on the use of various federal, state, local, or private funding sources available for preservation purposes within the City.
    7. Officially recognize excellence in the rehabilitation of historic buildings, structures, sites, districts, and new construction in historic areas; and encourage appropriate measures for such recognition.
    8. Provide information to the public on methods of maintaining and rehabilitating historic properties, incentives for the rehabilitation of historic properties, and the regulations concerning such properties. This may take the form of pamphlets, newsletters, workshops, or similar activities.
    9. Adopt and maintain architectural standards and design guidelines for historic special review districts and historic properties.
    10. The Board may, at the request of the Historic Preservation Officer or the City Manager, review proposals submitted to the City for funds made available for grants to be made to the City through the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section  5301  et seq., the State and Local Fiscal Assistance Act of 1971, 31 U.S.C. Section  1221  et seq., the Museum Assistance Program and other applicable local, state, federal and private foundations funding programs. Upon review of such grant proposals, the Board shall make recommendations to the Council concerning which proposals should be funded, the amount of the grants that should be awarded, the conditions that should be placed on the grant, and such other matters that the Board deems appropriate. The Historic Preservation Officer shall keep the Board apprised of the status of grant proposals, deadlines for submission of proposals and the recipients of grant funds.
    11. The Board may, at the request of the Historic Preservation Officer or the City Manager, make and administrate funding grants received by the City from both private and public sources for the purposes which promote the goals of this chapter.
    12. The Board shall have such further powers and duties as may, from time to time, be delegated to it by the City Council.
C. The Board shall meet at least once each quarter for the purpose of considering and holding public hearings on nominations for designation and applications for certificates of appropriateness. Where no business is scheduled to come before the Board seven days before the scheduled meeting, the chair of the Board may cancel the meeting. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the action of the Advisory Board upon each question, and shall keep records of all official actions taken by it, all of which shall be filed in the Office of the Historical Preservation Officer and shall be public records. [Ord. 578 § 1, 2014.]

2.48.040 Designation criteria.
A. An historic resource may be designated as a Lakewood landmark if it is more than 50 years old or, in the case of a landmark district, contains resources that are more than 50 years old, and possesses integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association, and:
    1. Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of national, state or local history; or
    2. Is associated with the lives of persons significant in national, state or local history; or
    3. Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, style or method of design or construction, or that represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or
    4. Has yielded or may be likely to yield information important in prehistory or history; or
    5. Is an outstanding work of a designer or builder who has made a substantial contribution to the art.
B. A historic resource may be designated a community landmark because it is an easily identifiable visual feature of a neighborhood or city and contributes to the distinctive quality or identity of such neighborhood or the City or because of its association with significant historical events or historic themes, association with important or prominent persons in the community or county, or recognition by local citizens for substantial contribution to the neighborhood or community. An improvement or site qualifying for designation solely by virtue of satisfying criteria set out in this section shall be designated a community landmark.
C. Cemeteries, birthplaces or graves of historical figures, properties owned by religious institutions or used for religious purposes, structures that have been moved from their original locations, reconstructed historic buildings, properties primarily commemorative in nature, and properties that have achieved significance within the past 40 years shall not be considered eligible for designation. However, such a property shall be eligible for designation if it is:
    1. An integral part of districts that meet the criteria set out in this chapter; or
    2. A religious property deriving primary significance from architectural or artistic distinction or historical importance; or
    3. A building or structure removed from its original location but which is significant primarily for its architectural value, or which is the surviving structure most importantly associated with a historic person or event; or
    4. A birthplace, grave or residence of a historical figure of outstanding importance if there is no other appropriate site or building directly associated with his or her productive life; or
    5. A cemetery that derives its primary significance from graves of persons of transcendent importance, from age, from distinctive design features, or from association with historic events; or
    6. A reconstructed building when accurately executed in a suitable environment and presented in a dignified manner or as part of a restoration master plan, and when no other building or structure with the same association has survived; or
    7. A property commemorative in intent of design, age, tradition, or symbolic value has invested it with its own historical significance; or
    8. A property achieving significance within the past 40 years if it is of exceptional importance. [Ord. 578 § 1, 2014; Ord. 251 § 1, 2000.]

2.48.050 Nomination procedure.
A. Any person, including any member of the Board, may nominate an historic resource for designation as a landmark or community landmark. Procedures set forth may be used to amend existing designations or to terminate an existing designation based on changes which affect the applicability of the criteria for designation. The nomination or designation of an historic resource as a landmark shall constitute nomination or designation of the land which is occupied by the historic resource unless the nomination provides otherwise. Nominations shall be made on official nomination forms provided by the Historic Preservation Officer, shall be filed with the Historic Preservation Officer and shall include all data required.
B. Upon receipt by the Historic Preservation Officer of any nomination for designation, the Officer shall review the nomination, consult with the person or persons submitting the nomination, and the owner, and prepare any amendments to or additional information on the nomination deemed necessary by the Officer. The Historic Preservation Officer may refuse to accept any nomination for which inadequate information is provided by the person or persons submitting the nomination. It is the responsibility of the person or persons submitting the nomination to perform such research as is necessary for consideration by the Board. The Historic Preservation Officer may assume responsibility for gathering the required information or appoint an expert or experts to carry out this research in the interest of expediting the consideration.
C. When the Historic Preservation Officer is satisfied that the nomination contains sufficient information and complies with the Board’s regulations for nomination, the Officer shall give notice in writing, certified mail/return receipt requested, to the owner of the property or object, to the person submitting the nomination and any interested persons of record that a preliminary or a designation determination on the nomination will be made by the Board. The notice shall include:
    1. The date, time and place of hearing;
    2. The address and description of the historic resource and the boundaries of the nominated resource;
    3. A statement that, upon a designation or upon a preliminary determination of significance, the certificate of appropriateness procedure set forth will apply;
    4. A statement that, upon a designation or a preliminary determination of significance, no significant feature may be changed without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the Board, whether or not a building or other permit is required. A copy of the provisions of this code shall be included with the notice;
    5. A statement that all proceedings to review the action of the Board at the hearing on a preliminary determination or a designation will be based on the record made at such hearing and that no further right to present evidence on the issue of preliminary determination or designation is afforded pursuant to this chapter.
D. The Historic Preservation Officer shall, after mailing the notice required herein, refer the nomination and all supporting information to the Board for consideration on the date specified in the notice. No nomination shall be considered by the Board less than 30 nor more than 45 calendar days after notice setting the hearing date has been mailed. Notice of hearings must be published in a local paper at least 10 days in advance.
E. Before the Historic Preservation Officer shall refer the nomination to the Board, the Historic Preservation Officer shall obtain confirmation from the owner of a parcel of private property that the owner is in agreement with the nomination. If such owner is not in agreement with the nomination, the nomination shall not be forwarded to the Board for consideration. [Ord. 578 § 1, 2014; Ord. 251 § 1, 2000.]

2.48.060 Designation procedure.
A. After the conclusion of the required public hearing, the Board may recommend approval, denial, amendment or termination of the designation of a historic resource as a landmark or community landmark. At the hearing the Board shall receive evidence and hear argument only on the issues of (1) whether the historic resource meets the criteria for designation of landmark or community landmark as specified in this chapter and merits designation as a landmark or community landmark, and (2) the significant features of the landmark. The hearing may be continued from time to time at the discretion of the Board. In the event the hearing is continued, the Board may make a preliminary determination of significance if the Board determines, based on the record before it, that the historic resource is of significant value and likely to satisfy the criteria for designation set out in this chapter. Such preliminary determination shall be effective as of the date of the public hearing at which it is made. Where the Board makes a preliminary determination, it shall specify the boundaries of the nominated resource, the significant features thereof and such other description of the historic resource as it deems appropriate. Within five working days after the Board has made a preliminary determination, the Historic Preservation Officer shall file a written notice of such action with the City Manager and mail copies of the same to the person submitting the nomination and interested persons of record. Such notice shall include:
    1. A copy of the Board’s preliminary determination;
    2. A statement that while proceedings pursuant to this chapter are pending, or six months from the date of the notice, whichever is shorter, and thereafter if the designation is approved by the Board, the certificate of appropriateness procedures set out in this chapter, a copy of which shall be enclosed, shall apply to the described historic resource whether or not a building or other permit is required. The decision of the Board shall be made after the close of the public hearing or at the next regularly scheduled public meeting of the Board thereafter.
B. Whenever the Board recommends the designation of an historic resource under consideration for designation as a landmark, it shall, within 14 calendar days of the public meeting at which the decision is made, issue a written report which shall include:
    1. The boundaries of the nominated resource and such other description of the resource sufficient to identify its ownership and location;
    2. The significant features and such other information concerning the historic resource as the Board deems appropriate;
    3. Findings of fact and reasons supporting the designation with specific reference to the criteria for designation set forth in this chapter;
    4. A statement that no significant feature may be changed, whether or not a building or other permit is required, without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the Board pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, a copy of which shall be included in the designation report. This subsection shall not apply to historic resources designated as community landmarks.
C. Whenever the Board rejects the nomination of an historic resource under consideration for designation as a landmark, it shall, within 14 calendar days of the public meeting at which the decision is made, issue a written decision including findings of fact and reasons supporting its determination that the criteria set forth in this chapter have not been met. If an historic resource has been nominated as a landmark and the Board designates such historic resource as a community landmark, such designation shall be treated as a rejection of the nomination for Lakewood landmark status and the foregoing requirement for a written decision shall apply. Nothing contained herein shall prevent renominating any historic resource rejected under this subsection as a Lakewood landmark at a future time.
D. A copy of the Board’s recommendation shall be delivered or mailed to the owner, to interested persons of record and the City Manager within five working days after it is issued. Upon receipt by the City Manager of the Board’s recommendation that a nomination be approved, the recommendation shall also be set for consideration by the City Council no less than 30 and no later than 60 days after the date of the recommendation. The City Council shall be the final authority in approving a nomination.
E. If the City approves or amends a landmark designation, the provisions of this chapter shall apply as approved or amended. A copy of the Board’s designation report or designation amendment shall be filed with the appropriate City office together with a legal description of the designated resource and notification that the provisions of this chapter apply. If the City terminates the designation of an historic resource, the provisions of this chapter shall no longer apply to said historic resource. [Ord. 578 § 1, 2014; Ord. 251 § 1, 2000.]

2.48.070 Certificate of appropriateness procedure.
A. At any time after a designation report and notice have been filed with the City Manager and for a period of six months after notice of a preliminary determination of significance has been mailed to the owner and filed with the City Manager, a certificate of appropriateness must be obtained from the Board before any alterations may be made to the significant features of the landmark identified in the preliminary determination report or thereafter in the designation report. The designation report shall supersede the preliminary determination report. This requirement shall apply whether or not the proposed alteration also requires a building or other permit.
B. Ordinary repairs and maintenance which do not alter the appearance of a significant feature and do not utilize substitute materials do not require a certificate of appropriateness. Repairs to or replacement of utility systems do not require a certificate of appropriateness; provided, that such work does not alter a significant exterior feature.
C. There shall be three types of certificates of appropriateness, as follows:
    1. Type I, for restorations and major repairs which utilize in-kind materials.
    2. Type II, for alterations in appearance, replacement of historic materials and new construction.
    3. Type III, for demolition, moving and excavation of archaeological sites.
D. The Historic Preservation Officer may approve Type I certificates of appropriateness administratively without public hearing, subject to procedures adopted by the Board. Alternatively the Historic Preservation Officer may refer applications for Type I certificates of appropriateness to the Board for decision.
E. Type II and III certificates of appropriateness shall be decided by the Board and the following general procedures shall apply to such Board actions:
    1. Application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be made by filling out an application for such certificate with the Historic Preservation Officer on forms provided by the Board.
    2. If an application is made to the City Manager or designee for a permit for any action which affects a landmark, the City Manager shall promptly refer such application to the Historic Preservation Officer and such application shall be deemed an application for a certificate of appropriateness. The City Manager or designee may continue to process such permit application, but shall not issue any such permit until the time has expired for filing with the City Manager the notice of denial of a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of appropriateness has been issued pursuant to this chapter.
    3. After the Board has commenced proceedings for the consideration of any application for a certificate of appropriateness by giving notice of a hearing pursuant to LMC 2.48.050(C), no other application for the same or similar alteration may be made until such proceedings and all administrative appeals therefrom pursuant to this chapter have been concluded.
    4. Within 45 calendar days after the filing of an application for a certificate of appropriateness with the Board or the referral of an application to the Board by the City Manager, except those decided administratively by the Historic Preservation Officer pursuant to subsection D of this section, the Board shall hold a public hearing thereon. The Historic Preservation Officer shall mail notice of the hearing to owner, the applicant, and parties of record at the designation proceedings, not less than 10 calendar days before the date of the hearing. No hearing shall be required if the Board, the owner and the applicant agree in writing to a stipulated certificate approving the requested alterations thereof. This agreement shall be ratified by the Board in a public meeting and reflected in the Board meeting minutes. If the Board grants a certificate of appropriateness, such certificate shall be issued forthwith and the Historic Preservation Officer shall promptly file a copy of such certificate with the City Manager.
    5. If the Board denies the application for a certificate of appropriateness, in whole or in part, it shall so notify the applicant, the owner, and interested persons of record setting forth the reasons why approval of the application is not warranted.
    6. The Board shall adopt such other supplementary procedures consistent with the City Code as it determines are necessary to carry out the intent of this section. [Ord. 578 § 1, 2014; Ord. 251 § 1, 2000.]

2.48.080 Evaluation of economic impact.
A. At the public hearing on any application for a Type II or Type III certificate of appropriateness, or Type I if referred to the Board by the Historic Preservation Officer, the Board shall, when requested by the property owner, consider evidence of the economic impact on the owner of the denial or partial denial of a certificate. In no case may a certificate be denied, in whole or in part, when it is established that the denial or partial denial will, when available incentives are utilized, deprive the owner of a reasonable economic use of the landmark and there is no viable and reasonable alternative which would have less impact on the features of significance specified in the preliminary determination section of the designation report.
B. To prove the existence of a condition of unreasonable economic return, the applicant must establish, and the Board must find, both of the following:
    1. The landmark is incapable of earning a reasonable economic return without making the alterations proposed. This finding shall be made by considering, and the applicant shall submit to the Board evidence establishing, each of the following factors:
        a. The current level of economic return on the landmark as considered in relation to the following:
            i. The amount paid for the landmark, the date of purchase, and party from whom purchased, including a description of the relationship, if any, between the owner and the person from whom the landmark was purchased;
            ii. The annual gross and net income, if any, from the landmark for the previous five years; itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous five years; and depreciation deduction and annual cash flow before and after debt service, if any, during the same period;
            iii. The remaining balance on any mortgage or other financing secured by the landmark and annual debt service, if any, during the prior five years;
            iv. Real estate taxes for the previous four years and assessed value of the landmark according to the two most recent valuations;
            v. All appraisals obtained within the previous three years by the owner in connection with the purchase, financing or ownership of the landmark;
            vi. The fair market value of the landmark immediately prior to its designation and the fair market value of the landmark (in its protected status as a designated landmark) at the time the application is filed;
            vii. Form of ownership or operation of the landmark, whether sole proprietorship, for profit or not-for-profit corporation, limited partnership, joint venture, or both;
            viii. Any state or federal income tax returns on or relating to the landmark for the past two years.
        b. The landmark is not marketable or able to be sold when listed for sale or lease. The sale price asked, and offers received, if any, within the previous two years, including testimony and relevant documents, shall be submitted by the property owner. The following also shall be considered:
            i. Any real estate broker or firm engaged to sell or lease the landmark;
            ii. Reasonableness of the price or lease sought by the owner;
            iii. Any advertisements placed for the sale or lease of the landmark.
        c. The unfeasibility of alternative uses that can earn a reasonable economic return for the landmark as considered in relation to the following:
            i. A report from a licensed engineer or architect (each with experience in historic restoration or rehabilitation) as to the structural soundness of the landmark and its suitability for restoration or rehabilitation;
            ii. Estimates of the proposed cost of the proposed alteration and an estimate of any additional cost that would be incurred to comply with the recommendation and decision of the Board concerning the appropriateness of the proposed alteration;
            iii. Estimated market value of the landmark in the current condition after completion of the proposed alteration; and, in the case of proposed demolition, after renovation of the landmark for continued use;
            iv. In the case of proposed demolition, the testimony of an architect, developer, real estate consultant, appraiser or other real estate professional experienced in historic restoration or rehabilitation as to the economic feasibility of rehabilitation or reuse of the existing landmark;
            v. The infeasibility of new construction around, above, or below the historic resource.
        d. Potential economic incentives and/or funding available to the owner through federal, state, county, City or private programs.
    2. The owner has the present intent and the secured financial ability, demonstrated by appropriate documentary evidence, to complete the alteration.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing enumerated factors, the property owner may demonstrate other appropriate factors applicable to economic return.
D. Upon reasonable notice to the owner, and subject to the availability of funds budgeted for that purpose and approval of the expenditure by the City Council, the Board may appoint and hire an expert or experts to provide advice and/or testimony concerning the value of the landmark, the availability of incentives and the economic impacts of approval, the potential for public acquisition, denial or partial denial of a certificate of appropriateness.
E. Any adverse economic impact caused intentionally or by willful neglect shall not constitute a basis for granting a certificate of appropriateness. [Ord. 578 § 1, 2014; Ord. 251 § 1, 2000.]

2.48.090 Appeal procedure.
A. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board or of the Historic Preservation Officer relative to a certificate of appropriateness may, within 14 calendar days of mailing of notice of such decision, appeal such decision in writing to the Hearing Examiner. The written notice of appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk, and shall be accompanied by a statement setting forth the grounds of the appeal, supporting documents and argument, and an appeal fee in accordance with the City’s fee schedule as set forth in LMC 3.20.010.
B. If after examination of the written appeal and the record, the Hearing Examiner determines that an error in fact exists in the record, it may remand the proceeding to the Board or Historic Preservation Officer for reconsideration. Otherwise, it shall accept the facts as determined by the Board or Historic Preservation Officer. If the Hearing Examiner determines that the decision of the Board or Historic Preservation Officer is based on an error in the application of City Code provisions, it may modify or reverse the decision.
C. The Hearing Examiner’s decision shall be based solely upon the closed record; provided, that the Hearing Examiner may at his/her discretion permit the appellant and the Board or the Historic Preservation Officer, or their representatives, to submit arguments and statements explaining their positions, either in writing or orally at a public hearing held for the purpose, or both.
D. A final action under this chapter shall be final unless within 21 calendar days from the date of the action an aggrieved person seeks review by a court of competent jurisdiction. [Ord. 578 § 1, 2014; Ord. 251 § 1, 2000.]

2.48.110 Penalties for violating this chapter.
A. The performance of alterations, replacement, demolitions, repairs, moving or excavation of a landmark without a required certificate of appropriateness shall be designated as an infraction.
B. Any person cited for violation of this chapter, shall be subject to a penalty amount not to exceed $500.00 per day. Each day for which a violation or failure to comply occurs may constitute a separate offense; provided, however, that no penalty shall be imposed for any violation or failure to comply which occurs during the pendency of legal proceedings filing in any court challenging the validity of the provision or provisions of this chapter as to which such violation or failure to comply is charged.
C. Infraction under this chapter may be issued by a holder of a limited commission under LMC 2.14.110 and 2.14.120.
D. All violations of this chapter are detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare and are public nuisances. All conditions that are determined after review by the City to be in violation of this chapter are subject to abatement. [Ord. 578 § 1, 2014; Ord. 251 § 1, 2000.]

2.48.120 Special valuation for historic properties.
A. There is hereby established and implemented a special valuation for historic properties as provided in Chapter 221, 1986 Laws of Washington, and Chapter 84.26 RCW.
B. The Lakewood Landmarks and Heritage Advisory Board is hereby designated as the “Local Review Board” for the purposes related to Chapter 221, 1986 Laws of Washington, and is authorized to perform all functions required by Chapter 221, 1986 Laws of Washington, Chapter 84.26 RCW, and Chapter 254-20 WAC.
C. All Lakewood landmarks designated and protected under authority of City ordinance shall be eligible for special valuation as set forth in Chapter 221, 1986 Laws of Washington, and Chapter 84.26 RCW. [Ord. 578 § 1, 2014; Ord. 251 § 1, 2000.]

2.48.130 Severability.
A. If any provisions of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected. [Ord. 251 § 1, 2000.]

2.48.140 Retroactive approval of acts.
Actions undertaken by the Landmarks and Heritage Advisory Board before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are hereby ratified. [Ord. 578 § 1, 2014.]

Chapter 2.66 LAKEWOOD ARTS COMMISSION

Sections:
2.66.010     Lakewood Arts Commission created.
2.66.020     Membership.
2.66.030     Appointment.
2.66.040     Terms and vacancies.
2.66.050     Officers – Meetings.
2.66.060     Role of the Arts Commission.
2.66.070     Compensation.

2.66.010 Lakewood Arts Commission created.
There is created an advisory body to be known as the “Lakewood Arts Commission.” [Ord. 421 § 1, 2006.]

2.66.020 Membership.
There shall be at least seven but no more than 15 members of the Lakewood Arts Commission who shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council, and who shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. [Ord. 421 § 1, 2006.]

2.66.030 Appointment.
The members of the Lakewood Arts Commission shall be appointed from among members of the public to include, to the extent reasonably possible, representation from people representative of acknowledged accomplishment or persons working outside of professional practice in the arts, but who demonstrate a deep interest in and appreciation of cultural and artistic activities. At least one member shall be a working professional artist; at least one person working in the Lakewood education community; and at least one currently active in a Lakewood community organization. [Ord. 421 § 1, 2006.]

2.66.040 Terms and vacancies.
The terms of office of the members shall be for periods of three years; provided, however, that in the appointment of the first Commission, one third of the members shall be appointed for one year, one third of the members for two years, and one third of the members for three years. At the expiration of each of said terms so provided for, a successor shall be provided for a term of three years. Each member shall serve until his or her successor is qualified and appointed. [Ord. 421 § 1, 2006.]

2.66.050 Officers – Meetings.
A. At its first meeting of each year, the Lakewood Arts Commission members shall elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson from among the members of the Commission. The Lakewood Arts Commission shall establish a regular time and place of meeting and shall hold at least six regular meetings a year. Special meetings of the Commission may be called at any time by the chair or by a majority of the members of the Commission upon written notice being given to all members of the Commission. All meetings must be properly noticed in compliance with the Open Public Meetings Act.
B. It shall be the duty of the chairperson to preside over all meetings of the Commission. The vice chairperson shall preside at all meetings where the chairperson is absent. Minutes shall be kept and meeting agendas prepared in coordination between members of the Board and staff members. A majority of the appointed members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and a majority vote of those present shall be necessary to carry any recommended action. [Ord. 421 § 1, 2006.]

2.66.060 Role of the Arts Commission.
The purpose of the Lakewood Arts Commission, consistent with guidance from the Lakewood City Council, is to assess needs, establish priorities, and make recommendations for the enrichment of the community and promotion of its cultural vitality through the arts.
The Lakewood Arts Commission will therefore do the following:
A. Promote the visual, performing and literary arts;
B. Encourage the creative contribution of local artists;
C. Make recommendations for public art to the City Council;
D. Support community-building events; and
E. Foster the City’s cultural heritage. [Ord. 421 § 1, 2006.]

2.66.070 Compensation.
The members of the Lakewood Arts Commission shall serve without compensation. [Ord. 421 § 1, 2006.]

Chapter 2.67 AD HOC COMMITTEES

Sections:
2.67.010     Appointment.
2.67.020     Work plan.
2.67.030     Membership.
2.67.040     Compensation.
2.67.050     Termination.
2.67.060     Reporting.

2.67.010 Appointment.
The City Council may appoint ad hoc committees for any proper City Council purpose, subject to such direction and control as the Council may provide. Council action under this section may be taken by motion. Ad hoc committees are advisory bodies to the City Council and cannot take final action within the meaning of RCW 42.30.020(3). [Ord. 594 § 8, 2014.]

2.67.020 Work plan.
Upon creation of an ad hoc committee, the City Council shall adopt a work plan for the committee which shall identify the purpose of the committee, duties, a general timeline including end date and reporting requirements specific to the committee. [Ord. 594 § 8, 2014.]

2.67.030 Membership.
Members shall be appointed to accomplish the goals and objectives of the ad hoc committee as identified in the work plan. Membership shall be sufficient in number, experience, expertise and interest to effectively complete the work plan. [Ord. 594 § 8, 2014.]

2.67.040 Compensation.
Members of the ad hoc committee shall serve without compensation. [Ord. 594 § 8, 2014.]

2.67.050 Termination.
The term of the ad hoc committee is as specified in the work plan for the committee. When an ad hoc committee is unable to accomplish the work plan in the term specified, the committee must so inform the City Council. The City Council may allow the committee to terminate as scheduled without completion of the work, amend the work plan as desired to accomplish the purposes intended or extend the term of the existing work plan to a specific date. [Ord. 594 § 8, 2014.]

2.67.060 Reporting.
In addition to any reporting required in the work plan for an ad hoc committee, each committee shall be required to, upon completion of the work plan, provide a final report to the City Council as described in Chapter 2.68 LMC. [Ord. 594 § 8, 2014.]

Chapter 2.68 ANNUAL WORK PLANS FOR COMMUNITY BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AD HOC COMMITTEES

Sections:
2.68.010     Work plan required.
2.68.020     Creation and authorization.
2.68.030     Conduct of business.
2.68.040     Amendment.
2.68.050     Communication and annual reporting.

2.68.010 Work plan required.
All City of Lakewood community boards, commissions, ad hoc committees and any other similar body authorized by the City Council to conduct research, make recommendations or perform other work in furtherance of the goals and objectives of the City shall be required to follow a properly executed annual work plan specific to that body. [Ord. 594 § 9, 2014.]

2.68.020 Creation and authorization.
Work plans as specified in this chapter should incorporate Council goals, input from the City Manager or designee and the committee expected to perform the work. The work plan should also identify goals and objectives, available resources including any City employees assigned, reporting requirements and expected timelines. The City Council shall approve work plans annually. [Ord. 594 § 9, 2014.]

2.68.030 Conduct of business.
A. At the first meeting each year, the advisory board members shall elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson from among the members of the advisory board. The advisory board shall meet as needed to perform the duties of the advisory board and to fulfill the role of being an advisory body to the City Council.
B. It shall be the duty of the chairperson to preside over all meetings of the advisory board. The vice chairperson shall preside at all meetings where the chairperson is absent. Minutes shall be kept and meeting agendas prepared in coordination between members of the board and staff members. A majority of the appointed members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and a majority vote of those present shall be necessary to carry any recommended actions. [Ord. 594 § 9, 2014.]

2.68.040 Amendment.
Work plans may be amended at any time by the City Council and amendments may be initiated by the City Council, a request from the City Manager or the community board, commission, or ad hoc committee working under the work plan. [Ord. 594 § 9, 2014.]

2.68.050 Communication and annual reporting.
Each committee and body subject to this chapter must submit an annual report to the City Council which evaluates the work of the committee pursuant to the work plan. The City Council should use the annual report as a reference for developing future work plans. [Ord. 594 § 9, 2014.]

Chapter 2.90 PLANNING COMMISSION

Sections:
2.90.010     Planning Commission created.
2.90.011     Planning agency identified.
2.90.020     Appointment.
2.90.030     Terms and vacancies.
2.90.040     Jurisdiction, powers and authority.
2.90.050     Rules of procedure.
2.90.060     Construction of Planning Advisory Board.

2.90.010 Planning Commission created.
The City hereby creates a Planning Commission consistent with Chapter 35A.63 RCW. [Ord. 594 § 10, 2014.]

2.90.011 Planning agency identified.
There shall be not more than seven members of the Commission who shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council, and who shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. The members shall be residents of the City unless the Council finds that appointment of a nonresident, by virtue of business involvement or expertise, will benefit the Commission and ultimately the City. [Ord. 594 § 10, 2014.]

2.90.020 Appointment.
The members of the Commission shall be appointed from among members of the public to include, to the extent reasonably possible, representation from people involved with or interested in the various opportunities and projects to enhance the provision of planning in the City. [Ord. 594 § 10, 2014.]

2.90.030 Terms and vacancies.
The members of the Commission shall serve for a term of five years. It is provided, however, that the first four members to be appointed shall be initially appointed for four-year terms and the second three members to be appointed shall be initially appointed for two-year terms. [Ord. 594 § 10, 2014.]

2.90.040 Jurisdiction, powers and authority.
The jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Planning Commission, as these relate to matters covered by LMC are established in this chapter. In addition, the City Council may, from time to time, grant to the Planning Commission such other jurisdiction, powers, duties and authority as City Council deems appropriate and consistent with state and City law. The Planning Commission shall work in accordance with a work plan as detailed in Chapter 2.68 LMC. [Ord. 594 § 10, 2014.]

2.90.050 Rules of procedure.
The Planning Commission may from time to time establish and publish rules of procedure for the efficient and fair conduct of its business, consistent with state law and City ordinances. [Ord. 594 § 10, 2014.]

2.90.060 Construction of Planning Advisory Board.
All references to the Planning Advisory Board in other sections of the Lakewood Municipal Code, unless the context reflects otherwise, shall be construed as meaning the Planning Commission provided for in this chapter. [Ord. 604 § 1, 2015.]

Chapter 2.100 LAKEWOOD FAMILY-WAGE JOBS CREDIT PROGRAM

Sections:
2.100.010    Title.
2.100.020    Purpose.
2.100.030    Definitions.
2.100.040    Family-wage jobs credit.
2.100.050    Administration.
2.100.060    Reconsideration.
2.100.070    Sunset.

2.100.010 Title.
This chapter shall be officially cited as the Lakewood family-wage jobs credit program. [Ord. 698 § 1, 2018.]

2.100.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to encourage businesses to create new family-wage jobs in the City of Lakewood by crediting certain charges and fees associated with establishing or expanding a business. [Ord. 698 § 1, 2018.]

2.100.030 Definitions.
“Credit” means a monetary payment or reduction in present or future balance due to the Department.
“Department” means the Community and Economic Development Department.
“Eligible charges and fees” means monetary payments paid by the family-wage jobs credit applicant or the applicant’s agent to the City of Lakewood after December 31, 2018, for building permits, downtown plan traffic mitigation fees, critical area review, and land use actions, such as conditional permits and variances. Expressly excluded from the definition of “eligible charges and fees” are state building code charges and fees, Tacoma-Pierce County Health Department charges and fees, recordation fees, fire inspection charges and fees, residential land use action charges and fees, and residential building permit or associated application charges and fees.
“Eligible employer” means an individual or entity that has created and filled at least five new family-wage jobs in the City of Lakewood after January 1, 2019, and has paid, or whose agent has paid, an eligible charge or fee to the City of Lakewood. “Eligible employer” excludes a public agency.
“Family-wage job” means an ongoing employment relationship of indefinite duration in which an employee is compensated by an employer at a gross annualized rate, excluding employer-paid benefits such as health benefits and pension payments of any type, at or above 80 percent of the most recent calculation of Pierce County’s median annual household income by the Washington State Office of Financial Management, which is $52,197 for calendar year 2019.
“New family-wage job” means a family-wage job that an employer did not advertise or fill in the previous calendar year that results in a net increase in employees employed by the employer in the City of Lakewood compared to the previous calendar year.
“Public agency” includes the federal government or any federal department or agency, Indian tribes, Washington State, all departments, agencies, boards and commissions of Washington State, Pierce County, school districts, fire districts, all municipal corporations, special service districts, and any other political subdivisions of Washington State. [Ord. 698 § 1, 2018.]

2.100.040 Family-wage jobs credit.
Eligible employers may apply to the Community and Economic Development Department for a credit in the amount of $275.00 per new family-wage job created in the City of Lakewood, up to the maximum allowed credit amount.
The maximum allowed credit amount is the total of eligible charges and fees paid to the City of Lakewood by the eligible employer or the eligible employer’s agent. Credit payments shall be subject to funds available from other sources appropriated for this purpose. Eligible employers may apply multiple times but may not receive credits exceeding the maximum allowed credit amount for each eligible family-wage job they created. [Ord. 698 § 1, 2018.]

2.100.050 Administration.
The Community and Economic Development Department is responsible for administering this chapter.
The Department shall create and make publicly available a standard application that enables the Department to determine applicant eligibility for a credit under the provisions of this chapter. The Department may require applicants provide Wage and Hour Reports (Form 5208) as submitted to the Washington State Employment Security Department, with Social Security numbers redacted, and may require applicants provide other information deemed necessary by the Department Director.
The Department must review applications for completeness prior to acceptance and no credit may issue without Department approval. Approved credits must be processed in a reasonably expeditious manner. [Ord. 698 § 1, 2018.]

2.100.060 Reconsideration.
Within seven working days of the date of the Director’s decision, aggrieved applicants may file with the Department a written request for reconsideration based on any one of the following grounds:
A. Errors of procedure or misinterpretation of fact, material to the party seeking the request for reconsideration.
B. Additional supporting information will demonstrate the applicant’s eligibility for a credit under this chapter.
Upon receipt of a request for reconsideration, the Director shall review said request considering the record and take such further action as is deemed proper including, but not limited to, requesting a response from another party, denying the request, granting the request, and may render a revised decision. The result of the reconsideration is the final determination. [Ord. 698 § 1, 2018.]

2.100.070 Sunset.
The Department shall not accept any applications for a credit utilizing the provisions of this chapter after December 31, 2020. This chapter shall sunset on December 31, 2021. [Ord. 698 § 1, 2018.]

Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE

Chapters:
3.09         City Funds
3.20         Fees for Services
3.21         Collection of Franchise Fees
3.22         Nonpayment – Outstanding Accounts Receivable
3.24         Sales Tax
3.28         Real Estate Excise Tax
3.30         Second One-Quarter Percent Real Estate Excise Tax
3.32         Leasehold Excise Tax
3.34         Gambling Tax
3.36         Lodging Tax
3.38         Surface Water Management
3.40         Imprest Funds
3.44         Admissions Tax
3.48         Indigent Defense Services Application Fee
3.52         Utility Tax
3.54         Brokered Natural Gas Use Tax
3.56         Crime Prevention Funding
3.64         Tax Incentive Urban Use Center Development
3.70         Emergency Response Costs

Chapter 3.09 CITY FUNDS

Sections:
3.09.010     General fund.
3.09.015     Investment control fund.
3.09.020     Street operations and maintenance.
3.09.030     Real estate excise tax.
3.09.035     Transportation benefit district.
3.09.040     Hotel/motel lodging tax.
3.09.050     Property abatement.
3.09.060     Public art.
3.09.070     Narcotics seizure.
3.09.080     Felony seizure.
3.09.090     Federal seizure.
3.09.100     Community development block grant.
3.09.110     Neighborhood Stabilization Program.
3.09.120     Office of Economic Adjustment.
3.09.130     Police ARRA grant.
3.09.140     Public safety grants.
3.09.150     General obligation (GO) bond debt service.
3.09.160     LID debt service.
3.09.170     Police facility debt service.
3.09.180     Sewer project debt service.
3.09.190     LID guaranty debt service.
3.09.200     Parks capital project.
3.09.201     Transportation capital project.
3.09.210     Sewer capital project.
3.09.230     LID capital project.
3.09.240     Surface water management.
3.09.250     Fleet and equipment fund.
3.09.260     Property management.
3.09.264     Risk management fund.
3.09.270     Information technology fund.
3.09.300     Grant administration.
3.09.310     Interfund loan – Authorization.
3.09.320     Interfund loan – Procedures.
3.09.330     Interfund loan – Additional authority.

3.09.010 General fund.
There is hereby established a fund known as the general fund (fund 001) as follows:
A. Purpose. This fund is used to account for all receipts and disbursements associated with ordinary City operations that are not required to be accounted for in another fund. This fund is both tax and general revenue supported.
B. Revenue Sources. Tax and general revenue supported. Examples include property taxes, local sales taxes, franchise fees, gambling taxes, liquor taxes, utility taxes, fines and forfeitures, license fees, permits, recreation fees and other revenues that support general government operations. [Ord. 589 § 2, 2014.]

3.09.015 Investment control fund.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this fund is to account for investment transactions. It is used to record the amount of pooled moneys invested from all City funds. [Ord. 613 § 1, 2015.]

3.09.020 Street operations and maintenance.
There is hereby established a fund known as the street operations and maintenance fund (fund 101) as follows:
A. Purpose. This fund is used to account for the receipts and disbursements associated with City planning, establishing, repairing and maintaining City streets, sidewalks, and appurtenances, including pedestrian and bicycle paths, lanes and routes.
B. Revenue Sources. Specific revenue sources shall include, but not be limited to, unrestricted motor vehicle fuel taxes, transportation-related fees and permits, interest earnings and such other sources as may be authorized by the City Council. [Ord. 589 § 3, 2014.]

3.09.030 Real estate excise tax.
There is hereby established a fund known as the real estate excise tax fund (fund 102) as follows:
A. Purpose. The purpose of this fund shall be to account for certain funds as follows:
    1. First 0.25 percent real estate excise tax authorized by RCW 82.46.010, and dedicated for the capital purposes defined in RCW 35.43.040.
    2. Second 0.25 percent real estate excise tax authorized by the Growth Management Act, RCW 82.46.035. These revenues are restricted to financing capital project specified in a capital facilities plan.
B. Revenue Sources. The revenue sources of this fund shall be as follows:
    1. The first 0.25 percent shall be from real estate excise tax authorized by RCW 82.46.010, and other revenue sources that may be authorized by the City Council.
    2. The second 0.25 percent shall be from real estate excise tax authorized by RCW 82.46.035 and other revenue sources that may be authorized by the City Council. [Ord. 599 § 1, 2014; Ord. 589 § 4, 2014.]

3.09.035 Transportation benefit district.
There is hereby established a fund known as the transportation benefit district fund (fund 103) as follows:
A. Purpose. To account for receipts and disbursements related to the Lakewood transportation benefit district.
B. Revenue Sources. Revenues supporting this fund’s activities include a $20.00 annual vehicle licensing fee used to fund specific transportation projects and other revenue sources that may be authorized by board of the Lakewood transportation benefit district. [Ord. 599 § 2, 2014.]

3.09.040 Hotel/motel lodging tax.
There is hereby established a fund known as the hotel/motel lodging tax fund (fund 104) as follows:
A. Purpose. This fund is used to account for all lodging tax receipts and disbursements related to tourism promotion and the acquisition or operation of tourism-related facilities.
B. Revenue Sources. The primary source of revenues are special hotel/motel lodging tax and transient rental income tax. [Ord. 589 § 5, 2014.]

3.09.050 Property abatement.
There is hereby established a fund known as the property abatement fund (fund 105) as follows:
A. Purpose. The purpose of this fund is to account for projects that the City has identified and processed through the abatement process.
B. Revenue Sources. All revenues from the rightful recovery of those project expenses, along with all revenues from fees, fines, and interest, and other rightful recoveries from those projects are deposited into the fund for the purpose of funding additional abatement projects. [Ord. 589 § 6, 2014.]

3.09.060 Public art.
There is hereby established a fund known as the public art fund (fund 106) as follows:
A. Purpose. The sole purpose of this fund is to fund approved public art activities.
B. Revenue Sources. All revenues associated with the fees charged for the rental of the McGavick center. [Ord. 589 § 7, 2014.]

3.09.070 Narcotics seizure.
There is hereby established a fund known as the narcotics seizure fund (fund 180) as follows:
A. Purpose. The purpose of this fund, together with the imprest accounts, is for the purposes of expenditures and revenues related to Police Department activities where the expenditures are governed by RCW 69.50.505.
B. Revenue Sources. The primary revenues from this fund will be the proceeds of asset forfeitures conducted under the provisions of Chapter 69.50 RCW. [Ord. 589 § 8, 2014.]

3.09.080 Felony seizure.
There is hereby established a fund known as the felony seizure fund (fund 181) as follows:
A. Purpose. The purpose of this fund is to account for expenditures associated with the Police Department activities where the expenditures are governed by RCW 10.105.101.
B. Revenue Sources. The primary revenues of this fund will be the proceeds of seizure activities pursuant to Chapter 10.105 RCW. [Ord. 589 § 9, 2014.]

3.09.090 Federal seizure.
There is hereby established a fund known as the federal seizure fund (fund 182) as follows:
A. Purpose. The purpose of this fund is to account for the revenues and expenditures associated with the Police Department activities where the revenues are derived from federal law enforcement activities.
B. Revenue Sources. The primary revenues shall be derived from federal law enforcement activities. [Ord. 589 § 10, 2014.]

3.09.100 Community development block grant.
There is hereby established a fund known as the CDBG fund (fund 190) as follows:
A. Purpose. A project fund established in which to place moneys from designated federal grants received through the Department of Housing and Urban Development’s community development block grant program or other agency, approved, accepted and assigned to this fund by the City Council. Any City moneys required for any such grant shall also be placed in this fund. Such moneys shall be used for the purposes specified by the terms of each grant agreement.
B. Revenue Sources. Grant revenues received through community development block grant program, City contributions or other revenue sources as may be authorized by the City Council. [Ord. 589 § 11, 2014.]

3.09.110 Neighborhood Stabilization Program.
There is hereby established a fund known as the Neighborhood Stabilization Program fund (fund 191) as follows:
A. Purpose. The purpose of this fund is to account for the revenues and expenditures associated with the Federal Neighborhood Stabilization Program. The NSP was established for the purpose of stabilizing communities that have suffered from foreclosures and abandonment.
B. Revenues. Grants and abatement liens. [Ord. 589 § 12, 2014.]

3.09.120 Office of Economic Adjustment.
There is hereby established a fund known as the Office of Economic Adjustment fund (fund 192) as follows:
A. Purpose. The purpose of this fund is to account for the revenues and expenditures associated with the Federal Office of Economic Adjustment Grant Program, which provides grants to assist communities with the alleviation of socioeconomic effects that may result from military base closures and realignments, including the South Sound Military and Communities Partnership program.
B. Revenues. Primary revenue sources are grants, and partnership funding. [Ord. 589 § 13, 2014.]

3.09.130 Police ARRA grant.
There is hereby established a fund known as the police ARRA grant fund (fund 193) as follows:
A. Purpose. The purpose of this fund is to account for the revenues and expenditures related to Police Department grants received from the federal government’s American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009.
B. Revenue. Grants received via the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009. [Ord. 589 § 14, 2014.]

3.09.140 Public safety grants.
There is hereby established a fund known as the public safety grants fund (fund 195) as follows:
A. Purpose. The purpose of this fund is to account for the revenues and expenditures related to Police Department grants and local revenues received from sources not related to the federal government’s American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009.
B. Revenue. Grants received from sources other than the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009. [Ord. 589 § 15, 2014.]

3.09.150 General obligation (GO) bond debt service.
There is hereby established a fund known as the general obligation (GO) bond debt service fund (fund 201) as follows:
A. Purpose. The purpose of this fund is to account for general obligation bond debt.
B. Revenue. A 2005 interfund transfer. [Ord. 589 § 16, 2014.]

3.09.160 LID debt service.
There is hereby established a fund known as the LID debt service fund (fund 202) as follows:
A. Purpose. The purpose of this fund is to account for the debt service for the City’s combined local improvement district (CLID 1103) and the local improvement district (LID 1108). The fund was created as part of the process in establishing the permanent financing for LIDs 1101, 1102, and 1103. When the City secured permanent financing for the three LIDs, it combined them into one bond offer entitled CLID 1101-1103. The CLID bonds were a public offering. This fund also accounts for LID 1108, which is a one-property-owner LID. This bond was a private placement with Cashmere Valley Bank. This fund was established via Ordinance 352 adopted by City Council in April 2004, which established the LIDs 1101, 1102, and 1103 and created the fund.
B. Revenue. 
[Ord. 589 § 17, 2014.]

3.09.170 Police facility debt service.
There is hereby established a fund known as the police facility debt service fund (fund 203) as follows:
A. Purpose. The purpose of this fund was to account for the revenues (transfer in from the general fund) and the debt service for the police facility. In 2010 this debt was transferred to the general fund. This fund is currently inactive.
B. Revenues. This fund is currently inactive. [Ord. 589 § 18, 2014.]

3.09.180 Sewer project debt service.
There is hereby established a fund known as the sewer project debt service fund (fund 204) as follows:
A. Purpose. The purpose of this fund is to account for the public works trust fund loans that the City secured to fund both the sewer main construction (the finished asset has been donated to Pierce County) and the side sewer construction loan program, through which the City made loans to private property owners whose property abutted the new sewer main, making possible their connection to it.
B. Revenues. This fund is paid through property owner loan repayments. [Ord. 589 § 19, 2014.]

3.09.190 LID guaranty debt service.
There is hereby established a fund known as the LID guaranty debt service fund (fund 251) as follows:
A. Purpose. This fund was created in conjunction with establishing the permanent financing of CLID 1101-1103. The money needed to establish and deposit into the fund was part of the costs of the LID and borne by the property owners included in the district.
B. Revenues. The source of funding was the LID bonds and underlying that, the assessment payments from property owners. [Ord. 589 § 20, 2014.]

3.09.200 Parks capital project.
There is hereby established a fund known as the parks capital project fund (fund 301) as follows:
A. Purpose. To account for receipts and disbursements related to the acquisition, design, and construction of major park capital facilities with the exception of those facilities financed by proprietary and trust funds.
B. Revenues. Revenues supporting this fund’s activities include grant proceeds, contributions/donations and other revenue sources as may be authorized by the City Council.
C. Other General/Financial Information. Fund appropriations shall not lapse at the end of any calendar year but shall remain in effect until the project is completed. [Ord. 599 § 3, 2014; Ord. 589 § 21, 2014.]

3.09.201 Transportation capital project.
There is hereby established a fund known as the transportation capital project fund (fund 302) as follows:
A. Purpose. To account for receipts and disbursements related to acquisition, design, construction and any other related street capital project expenditures.
B. Revenue Sources. Revenues supporting this fund’s activities include grant proceeds, mitigation fees, interfund transfers and other revenue sources as may be authorized by the City Council.
C. Other General/Financial Information. Fund appropriations shall not lapse at the end of any calendar year but shall remain in effect until the project is completed. [Ord. 599 § 4, 2014.]

3.09.210 Sewer capital project.
There is hereby established a fund known as the sewer capital project fund (fund 311) as follows:
A. Purpose. The purpose of this fund is to account for the construction and expansion of a sewer system and related administrative costs to maintain and operate the fund.
B. Revenues. Primary revenue sources are grants, contributions, public works trust fund loans, sewer surcharges and sewer availability charges. [Ord. 702 § 1, 2018; Ord. 589 § 22, 2014.]

3.09.230 LID capital project.
There is hereby established a fund known as the LID capital project fund (fund 351) as follows:
A. Purpose. The purpose of this fund is to account for the local improvement district (LID) capital related projects of streets and sidewalks.
B. Revenues. The projects are funded by assessments on the benefiting properties. This fund is currently inactive. [Ord. 589 § 24, 2014.]

3.09.240 Surface water management.
There is hereby established a fund known as the surface water management fund (fund 401) as follows:
A. Purpose. The purpose of this fund is to administer and account for all receipts and disbursements related to the City’s surface and storm management system.
B. Revenues. All service charges are deposited into this fund for the purpose of paying the expense of maintaining and operating surface and storm water management facilities. [Ord. 589 § 25, 2014.]

3.09.250 Fleet and equipment fund.
There is hereby established a fund known as the fleet and equipment fund (fund 501) as follows:
A. Purpose. The purpose of this fund is to account for all costs associated with operating, maintaining and replacing the City’s vehicles and other motorized equipment.
B. Revenue. Revenue source is replacement reserves and interfund charge to the benefiting or user fund. Other revenues may include interest earnings, proceeds from the sale of assets, interfund transfers, and other revenue sources designated by City Council. [Ord. 589 § 26, 2014.]

3.09.260 Property management.
There is hereby established a fund known as the property management fund (fund 502) as follows:
A. Purpose. The purpose of this fund is to account for all costs associated with the maintenance and operation of City owned, leased and maintained buildings specified by the City Manager.
B. Revenue. Revenue source is replacement reserves and interfund charge to the benefiting or user fund. Other revenues may include interest earnings, proceeds from the sale of assets, interfund transfers, and other revenue sources designated by City Council. [Ord. 599 § 5, 2014; Ord. 589 § 27, 2014.]

3.09.264 Risk management fund.
There is hereby established a fund known as the risk management fund (fund 504) as follows:
A. Purpose. To account for the financial administration of the City’s comprehensive risk management program. This fund assures that the revenues and assets of the City are protected through an established risk control and risk finance program including risk management goals and objectives, a formalized risk assessment process and methodology for reviewing and monitoring the effectiveness of the risk management program.
B. Revenue Sources. Revenues supporting this fund’s activities include interfund charge to the benefiting or user fund. Other revenues may include interest earnings and other revenue sources designated by the City Council. [Ord. 599 § 6, 2014.]

3.09.270 Information technology fund.
There is hereby established a fund known as the information technology fund (fund 503) as follows:
A. Purpose. The purpose of this fund is to account for all costs associated with data processing, telecommunications and geographical information systems for the City.
B. Revenue. Revenue source is interfund charge to the benefiting or user fund. Other revenues may include replacement reserves, interest earnings, proceeds from the sale of assets, interfund transfers and other revenue sources designated by City Council. [Ord. 589 § 28, 2014.]

3.09.300 Grant administration.
As to any funds which are funded in whole or part by grants, the following provisions apply:
A. The City Manager or designee shall maintain a separate record of accounts showing the receipts and disbursements of each and every grant assigned to such fund. The department assigned, by the terms of the City’s acceptance of such grant, to administer any program or activity financed wholly or in part by the grant financially controlled by this fund, shall approve all expenditures therefrom and shall maintain such records and documents, and prepare such reports as may be required by the grantor agency or the City Council.
B. Other General/Financial Information. 
    1. Projects Established. Individual grant projects shall be established in this fund, based on council authorization or acceptance. Fund appropriations shall not lapse at the end of any calendar year but shall remain in effect until the grant project is completed. Administrative housekeeping-oriented projects may be established by the Assistant City Manager for Finance and Administrative Services.
    2. Financing. The grant fund is hereby authorized to borrow moneys from time to time from other City funds in amounts necessary to effectuate the purposes of such fund. Authorization for each such loan shall be made by the City Manager or designee. Such authorization shall be given only when the lending fund has sufficient resources to make the loan, which shall be determined by the Finance Director. Such loans shall be without interest unless interest is required by law, and shall be repaid when there no longer exists a financing need within such fund. Where interest is required by law, the Assistant City Manager for Finance and Administrative Services shall designate the appropriate rate. [Ord. 589 § 31, 2014.]

3.09.310 Interfund loan – Authorization.
The City Council does hereby authorize the City Manager, or designee, to make interfund loans of those municipal moneys which are otherwise legally available for investment purposes, where such loans would be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of RCW 43.09.210. [Ord. 589 § 32, 2014.]

3.09.320 Interfund loan – Procedures.
The following procedures shall be used for the establishment and accounting of all interfund loans made pursuant to this chapter:
A. The City Manager or designee shall approve all interfund loans and provide in the written authorization a planned schedule of repayment of the loan principal and shall set a reasonable rate of interest, based upon the external rate available to the City, to be paid to the lending fund.
B. Interest shall be charged in all cases unless:
    1. The borrowing fund has no independent source of revenue other than the lending fund;
    2. The borrowing fund is normally funded by the lending fund; or
    3. The lending fund is the general fund, which, being unrestricted, can loan interest-free, except to a proprietary fund.
C. The borrowing fund must anticipate sufficient revenues to be in a position over the period of the loan to make the specified principal and interest payments as required in the authorizing ordinance.
D. The term of loan should whenever practicable be restricted to a period of one year, but in no case shall the term of loan exceed three years, except for those funds which are legally permitted to support one another through appropriations, transfers, advances, etc.
E. Only that portion of a given fund which, in the prudent management of municipal finances as determined by the mayor, is clearly inactive or in excess of current needs may be loaned to other municipal funds or invested.
F. Appropriate accounting records shall be maintained to reflect the balances of loans payable and receivable in every fund affected by such transactions. [Ord. 589 § 33, 2014.]

3.09.330 Interfund loan – Additional authority.
The City Council further hereby grants to the City Manager or designee, the authority to make interim, temporary loans from one fund to another during the course of the fiscal year. The term of such loan shall not exceed the end of the fiscal year in which loan was made. [Ord. 589 § 34, 2014.]

Chapter 3.20 FEES FOR SERVICES

Sections:
3.20.010     Fees established.

3.20.010 Fees established.
The fees and charges for services provided by the City are established as set forth on the list on file with the Office of the City Clerk. The City may hereafter establish or amend fees or charges identified on said list for services provided by the City by resolution. [Ord. 18 § 1, 1995.]

Chapter 3.21 COLLECTION OF FRANCHISE FEES

Sections:
3.21.010     Purpose.
3.21.020     Authority.
3.21.030     Definitions.
3.21.040     Fees not a tax.
3.21.050     Purpose of penalty and interest.
3.21.060     Fee delinquency unlawful acts.
3.21.070     Delinquent fees discovered through audit.
3.21.080     Appeal to the Hearing Examiner.
3.21.090     Noncompliance – Penalty.
3.21.100     Designated official to administer and make rules.
3.21.110     Severability.

3.21.010 Purpose.
The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the power of the City to impose and collect franchise fees for the use of City rights-of-way. The provisions herein are intended to secure fair and reasonable compensation to the City and the residents of the City for permitting private use of public rights-of-way. Further, this chapter is intended to assure that the City can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety and welfare by controlling access to and use of its public rights-of-way. [Ord. 275 § 1, 2002.]

3.21.020 Authority.
Pursuant to RCW 35.21.860, the City of Lakewood is authorized to impose franchise fees as follows:
A. To recover actual administrative expenses incurred by the City that are directly related to receiving and approving a permit, license, and franchise, to inspecting plans and construction, or to the preparation of a detailed statement pursuant to Chapter 43.21C RCW;
B. That are allowed as franchise requirements and fees for cable television services as allowed by federal law;
C. Upon a site-specific charge pursuant to an agreement between the City and a service provider of personal wireless services acceptable to the parties for:
    1. The placement of new structures in the right-of-way regardless of height, unless the new structure is the result of a mandated relocation in which case no charge will be imposed if the previous location was not charged;
    2. The placement of replacement structures when the replacement is necessary for the installation or attachment of wireless facilities, and the overall height of the replacement structure and the wireless facility is more than 60 feet; or
    3. The placement of personal wireless facilities on structures owned by the City located in the right-of-way. However, a site-specific charge shall not apply to the placement of personal wireless facilities on existing structures, unless the structure is owned by the City. [Ord. 275 § 1, 2002.]

3.21.030 Definitions.
“City” means the City of Lakewood.
“Fee” means any and all lawful monetary compensation, excluding taxes, allowed to the City for the use of or administering or regulating the use or occupation of rights-of-way.
“Franchise” means an agreement or contract between a service provider and the City of Lakewood whereby said service provider may use or occupy City rights-of-way for providing utilities, cable television services, telecommunications services, or other similar goods or services to any person or area within the City.
“Service provider” means any company subject to a franchise agreement with the City of Lakewood for the delivery of utility services, cable television transmission or services, telecommunications transmission or services, or other services, transmissions or goods delivered pursuant to a franchise agreement for use of the City’s rights-of-way between said entity and the City. [Ord. 275 § 1, 2002.]

3.21.040 Fees not a tax.
The fees, penalties and interest charges provided for in this chapter are separate from, and additional to, any and all federal, state, local, and City taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a service provider, franchisee or other entity that desires to occupy or use public rights-of-way of the City to provide goods or services to any person or area within the City. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to create an obligation upon any person for which the City is forbidden to require pursuant to federal, state or other law. [Ord. 275 § 1, 2002.]

3.21.050 Purpose of penalty and interest.
Any penalty or interest charged to a service provider or franchisee under this chapter shall be for the purpose of mitigating additional expenses the City may incur in administering or monitoring the use of its rights-of-way in the event of nonpayment, for the purpose of compensating the City for additional staff time and resources expended in the collection of past-due fees, and to compensate the City for loss of use and interest that may have accrued upon funds paid as fees had such fees been paid in a timely manner. [Ord. 275 § 1, 2002.]

3.21.060 Fee delinquency unlawful acts.
A. Delinquent Fee Payments. For fees due, if payment is not made by the due date thereof, in addition to any other remedies available under law or contract, there shall be added penalty and interest as follows:
    1. If paid 30 days late or more, the City of Lakewood shall charge the franchisee interest on all delinquent fees and penalties at the rate of one percent per month upon all amounts while said amounts remain late.
    2. The fees imposed under any franchise, and the interest charged thereon, shall constitute a debt to the City and may be collected by court proceedings in the same manner as any other debt which remedy shall be in addition to all other available remedies. Any judgment entered in favor of the City may include an award to the City of all court and collection costs including attorneys’ fees to the extent permitted by law. Amounts delinquent more than 60 days may be assigned to a third party for collection, in which case the amount of any collection charges shall be in addition to all other amounts owed. Amounts due shall not be considered paid until the City of Lakewood has received payment for the full amount due or has discharged the amount due and not paid. [Ord. 275 § 1, 2002.]

3.21.070 Delinquent fees discovered through audit.
For delinquent fees under this chapter which were discovered through an audit, the penalty shall be an amount of interest at a rate of one percent per month added to the amount of fees due, plus any additional audit costs. [Ord. 275 § 1, 2002.]

3.21.080 Appeal to the Hearing Examiner.
The City Manager, or the designee thereof, shall determine the full amount of fees, including penalties and interest, due in accordance with this chapter. Unless a contract or franchise agreement governs disputes regarding the payment of fees, including penalties and interest as provided herein for late or past-due payments, any person, firm or corporation aggrieved may appeal the determination of the amount owing to the City Hearing Examiner in accordance with, and subject to, the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.36 LMC or such subsequent superseding procedures as may be adopted by ordinance; provided, that in such appeal hearing the Hearing Examiner shall receive and examine available information, conduct public hearings, prepare records and reports thereof, and make decisions, which shall be final and conclusive. Pending a hearing the aggrieved party may withhold the fee, including penalties and interest. If any such payment is withheld, the party withholding such payment will be liable for the full amount of the payment, penalties and interest from the date the amount was withheld should the Hearing Examiner find that the payment, interest or penalty, was wrongfully withheld. [Ord. 275 § 1, 2002.]

3.21.090 Noncompliance – Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation subject to the provisions of this chapter, who fails or refuses to pay any lawful fee, and any penalty or interest accrued upon such fee, or who otherwise violates or refuses to comply with any provision of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person, firm or corporation is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 for each day or portion thereof which such person, firm or corporation is found guilty of noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 275 § 1, 2002.]

3.21.100 Designated official to administer and make rules.
The City Manager, or the designee thereof, shall have the power to construe, interpret, administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall further have the power, and it shall be his or her duty, from time to time, to adopt, publish and enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or with the law for the purpose of implementing, interpreting and carrying out the provisions thereof, and it is unlawful to violate or fail to comply with any such rule or regulation. [Ord. 275 § 1, 2002.]

3.21.110 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remainder of this chapter and its provisions and regulations or the application thereof to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. [Ord. 275 § 1, 2002.]

Chapter 3.22 NONPAYMENT – OUTSTANDING ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE

Sections:
3.22.010     Payment plan.
3.22.020     Write-off.

3.22.010 Payment plan.
The Assistant City Manager for Finance, or designee, is authorized to enter into payment plans with individuals who cannot meet their financial obligation to the City in one payment. Such arrangements are at the discretion of the City and may factor in interest and the additional cost of monitoring time payments. [Ord. 510 § 1, 2010.]

3.22.020 Write-off.
The City shall make reasonable attempts to collect all money owing in compliance with City policy and procedure. If such attempts fail and at least 120 days have passed since the original due date, the receivable will be sent to a collection agency. No less than 24 months after the original due date, if the receivable remains uncollected, the City may write-off the debt, provided the amount of the receivable is less than $250.00, and both the City Manager and Assistant City Manager for Finance authorize the write-off. Any decisions regarding write-off are discretionary with the City and may consider any variety of factors, including but not limited to resources of the City for purposes of attempting collection and aggregate impact of receivables at the time. [Ord. 510 § 1, 2010.]

Chapter 3.24 SALES TAX

Sections:
3.24.010     Imposition of sales and use tax as authorized by RCW 82.14.030(1).
3.24.020     Imposition of sales and use tax as authorized by RCW 82.14.030(2).
3.24.030     Administration – Collection.
3.24.040     Inspection of records – Agreement with Department of Revenue.
3.24.050     Subject to referendum.
3.24.060     Penalty.

3.24.010 Imposition of sales and use tax as authorized by RCW 82.14.030(1).
A. Tax Imposed. There is imposed a sales and/or use tax as the case may be, upon every taxable event as defined in Chapter 82.14 RCW, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, which occurs within the City limits. The tax shall be imposed upon and collected from those persons from whom the state sales and/or use tax is collected pursuant to Chapters 82.08 and 82.12 RCW, as the same now exist or may hereafter be amended.
B. Tax Rate. The rate of tax imposed by subsection A of this section shall be one-half of one percent of the selling price or value of the article used as the case may be; provided, that during such period as there is in effect a sales and/or use tax imposed by Pierce County pursuant to RCW 82.14.030(1), the rate imposed by this chapter shall be as provided in RCW 82.14.030(1), as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. The rate as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be four hundred twenty-five thousandths of one percent. [Ord. 5 § 1, 1995.]

3.24.020 Imposition of sales and use tax as authorized by RCW 82.14.030(2).
A. Tax Imposed. In addition to other taxes which may be imposed by the City, there is imposed a separate sales and/or use tax, as the case may be, upon the same taxable events and upon which the tax imposed pursuant to RCW 82.14.030(1) is levied, as the same exists or may hereafter be amended, and as specifically authorized by RCW 82.14.030(2).
B. Tax Rate. The rate of tax imposed by this section, which shall be in addition to the rate of tax permitted to be imposed by City ordinance pursuant to RCW 82.14.030(1), as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, shall be one-half of one percent of the selling price (in the case of a sales tax) or value of the article used (in the case of a use tax); provided, that if Pierce County shall impose a sales and/or use tax pursuant to RCW 82.14.030(2), as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, at a rate that is equal to or greater than the rate imposed under this chapter, then said county shall receive 15 percent of the City tax; provided further, that if Pierce County shall impose a sales and/or use tax pursuant to RCW 82.14.030(2), at a rate that is less than the rate imposed under this chapter, the county shall receive that amount of revenues from the City tax equal to 15 percent of the rate of tax imposed by the county. [Ord. 6 § 1, 1995.]

3.24.030 Administration – Collection.
The administration and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions of RCW 82.14.050, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. [Ord. 6 § 2, 1995; Ord. 5 § 2, 1995.]

3.24.040 Inspection of records – Agreement with Department of Revenue.
The City consents to the inspection of such records as are necessary to qualify the City for inspection of records of the Department of Revenue, pursuant to RCW 82.32.330, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. The City Manager is authorized to enter into an agreement with the Department of Revenue for the administration of the tax. [Ord. 6 § 3, 1995; Ord. 5 § 3, 1995.]

3.24.050 Subject to referendum.
A. Pursuant to RCW 82.14.036, the tax imposed by LMC 3.24.020 is subject to referendum. A referendum petition to repeal the tax imposed by said LMC 3.24.020 must be filed with the City Clerk or the City Manager within seven days of passage of the ordinance creating and establishing said LMC 3.24.020. Within 10 days of filing of the referendum petition, the City Manager shall confer with the petitioner concerning the form and style of the petition, issue an identification number for the petition and write a ballot title for the measure. The ballot title shall be posed as a question so that an affirmative answer to the question and an affirmative vote on the measure results in the tax or tax rate increase being imposed, and a negative answer to the question and a negative vote on the measure results in the tax or tax rate increase not being imposed. The petitioner shall be notified of the identification number and ballot title within the 10-day period.
B. After notification of the identification number and ballot title, the petitioner shall have 30 days to secure on petition forms the signatures of not less than 15 percent of the registered voters of the City and to file the signed petitions with the City Clerk or the City Manager. Each petition form must contain the ballot title and the full text of the measure to be referred. [Ord. 6 § 4, 1995.]

3.24.060 Penalty.
It is unlawful for any seller to fail or refuse to collect taxes with intent to violate the provisions of this chapter, or to gain some advantage or benefit, whether direct or indirect, or for any buyer to refuse to pay any tax due under the provisions of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof punished pursuant to state law or City ordinance. [Ord. 6 § 5, 1995; Ord. 5 § 4, 1995.]

Chapter 3.28 REAL ESTATE EXCISE TAX

Sections:
3.28.010     One-quarter percent excise tax on real estate sales.
3.28.020     County to collect payment.
3.28.030     Tax is obligation of seller.
3.28.040     Tax lien on real property.
3.28.050     Duties of County Treasurer.
3.28.060     Payment due.
3.28.070     Refunds.
3.28.080     Penalty.

3.28.010 One-quarter percent excise tax on real estate sales.
A. Imposition. Pursuant to RCW 82.46.010, there is imposed an excise tax on each sale of real property in the City constituting a taxable event as defined in Chapter 82.45 RCW, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. The tax imposed under this section shall be collected from persons who are taxable by the state under Chapter 82.45 RCW, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, and such tax shall comply with all applicable rules, regulations, laws and court decisions regarding real estate excise taxes as imposed by the state under Chapters 82.45 and 82.46 RCW, as the same now exist or may hereafter be amended.
B. Tax Rate. The rate of tax imposed by this section pursuant to RCW 82.46.010, as the same exists or may hereafter be amended, shall be one-quarter of one percent of the selling price of all real property upon which this tax is imposed.
C. Use of Proceeds. All proceeds from the tax imposed by this section shall be placed by the City Manager or authorized designee in the City’s general fund, identified in a separate line item, with expenditures therefrom restricted solely to those uses permitted by state law, namely, for financing capital projects, as defined in RCW 82.46.010(6), as the same exists or may hereafter be amended, specified in the capital facilities plan element of the City’s comprehensive plan or for housing relocation assistance under RCW 59.18.440 and 59.18.450. [Ord. 23 § 1, 1995.]

3.28.020 County to collect payment.
The County Treasurer shall collect the taxes imposed by this chapter. The County Treasurer shall place one percent of the proceeds of the taxes imposed and collected by this chapter in the county current expense fund to defray costs of collection. The remaining proceeds from City taxes imposed by this chapter shall be distributed to the City monthly. [Ord. 23 § 2, 1995.]

3.28.030 Tax is obligation of seller.
The taxes imposed by this chapter are the obligation of the seller and may be enforced through the action of debt against the seller or in the manner prescribed for the foreclosure of mortgages. [Ord. 23 § 3, 1995.]

3.28.040 Tax lien on real property.
The taxes imposed by this chapter and any interest or penalties thereon is a specific lien upon each piece of real property sold from the time of sale or until the tax is paid, which lien may be enforced in the manner prescribed for the foreclosure of mortgages. Resort to one course of enforcement is not an election not to pursue the other. [Ord. 23 § 4, 1995.]

3.28.050 Duties of County Treasurer.
The taxes imposed by this chapter shall be paid to and collected by the County Treasurer. The County Treasurer shall cause a stamp evidencing satisfaction of the lien to be affixed to the instrument of sale or conveyance prior to its recording or to the real estate excise tax affidavit in the case of used mobile home sales. A receipt issued by the County Treasurer for the payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidence of the satisfaction of the lien imposed in this chapter and may be recorded in the manner prescribed for recording satisfactions of mortgages. No instrument of sale or conveyance evidencing a sale subject to the tax may be accepted by the Pierce County Auditor’s Office for filing or recording until the tax is paid and the stamp affixed thereto. In case the tax is not due on the transfer, the instrument shall not be accepted until suitable notation of this fact is made on the instrument by the County Treasurer. [Ord. 23 § 5, 1995.]

3.28.060 Payment due.
The tax imposed by this chapter shall become due and payable immediately at the time of the sale, and if not so paid within 30 days thereafter, shall bear interest at the maximum rate permitted by law from the time of sale until the date of payment. [Ord. 23 § 6, 1995.]

3.28.070 Refunds.
If, upon written application by taxpayer to the County Treasurer for a refund, it appears that tax has been paid in excess of the amount actually due or upon a sale or other transfer declared to be exempt, such excess amount or improper payment shall be refunded by the County Treasurer to the taxpayer; provided, that no refund shall be made unless the state has first authorized the refund of an excessive amount or an improper amount paid, unless such improper amount was paid as a result of miscalculation. Any refund made shall be withheld from the next monthly distribution to the City. [Ord. 23 § 7, 1995.]

3.28.080 Penalty.
It is unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to pay taxes with intent to violate the provisions of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, punished pursuant to state law or City ordinance. [Ord. 23 § 8, 1995.]

Chapter 3.30 SECOND ONE-QUARTER PERCENT REAL ESTATE EXCISE TAX

Sections:
3.30.010     Second one-quarter percent excise tax on real estate sales.
3.30.020     County to collect payment.
3.30.030     Tax is obligation of seller.
3.30.040     Tax lien on real property.
3.30.050     Duties of County Treasurer.
3.30.060     Payment due.
3.30.070     Refunds.
3.30.080     Penalty.

3.30.010 Second one-quarter percent excise tax on real estate sales.
A. Imposition. Pursuant to RCW 82.46.035, there is imposed an additional excise tax on each sale of real property constituting a taxable event as defined in Chapter 82.45 RCW, and occurring within the corporate limits of the City. The tax imposed under this section shall be collected from persons who are taxable by the state under Chapter 82.45 RCW and such tax shall comply with all applicable rules, regulations, laws and court decisions regarding real estate excise taxes as imposed by the state under Chapter 82.45 RCW.
B. Tax Rate. The rate of tax imposed by this section pursuant to RCW 82.46.035 shall be one-quarter of one percent of the selling price of all real property upon which this tax is imposed.
C. Use of Proceeds. All proceeds from the tax imposed by this section shall be placed by the City Manager or authorized designee in the City’s general fund, identified in a separate line item, with expenditures therefrom restricted solely to those uses permitted by state law, namely, solely for the financing of capital projects specified in a capital facilities plan element of a comprehensive plan approved by the City Council. [Ord. 102 § 1, 1996.]

3.30.020 County to collect payment.
The County Treasurer shall collect the taxes imposed by this chapter. The County Treasurer shall place one percent of the proceeds of the taxes imposed and collected by this chapter in the county current expense fund to defray costs of collection. The remaining proceeds from City taxes imposed by this chapter shall be distributed to the City monthly. [Ord. 102 § 1, 1996.]

3.30.030 Tax is obligation of seller.
The taxes imposed by this chapter are the obligation of the seller and may be enforced through the action of debt against the seller or in the manner prescribed for the foreclosure of mortgages. [Ord. 102 § 1, 1996.]

3.30.040 Tax lien on real property.
The taxes imposed by this chapter and any interest or penalties thereon is a specific lien upon each piece of real property sold from the time of sale or until the tax is paid, which lien may be enforced in the manner prescribed for the foreclosure of mortgages. Resort to one course of enforcement is not an election not to pursue the other. [Ord. 102 § 1, 1996.]

3.30.050 Duties of County Treasurer.
The taxes imposed by this chapter shall be paid to and collected by the County Treasurer. The County Treasurer shall cause a stamp evidencing satisfaction of the lien to be affixed to the instrument of sale or conveyance prior to its recording or to the real estate excise tax affidavit in the case of used mobile home sales. A receipt issued by the County Treasurer for the payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidence of the satisfaction of the lien imposed in this chapter and may be recorded in the manner prescribed for recording satisfactions of mortgages. No instrument of sale or conveyance evidencing a sale subject to the tax may be accepted by the Pierce County Auditor’s Office for filing or recording until the tax is paid and the stamp affixed thereto. In case the tax is not due on the transfer, the instrument shall not be accepted until suitable notation of this fact is made on the instrument by the County Treasurer. [Ord. 102 § 1, 1996.]

3.30.060 Payment due.
The tax imposed by this chapter shall become due and payable immediately at the time of the sale, and if not so paid within 30 days thereafter, shall bear interest at the maximum rate permitted by law from the time of sale until the date of payment. [Ord. 102 § 1, 1996.]

3.30.070 Refunds.
If, upon written application by taxpayer to the County Treasurer for a refund, it appears that tax has been paid in excess of the amount actually due or upon a sale or other transfer declared to be exempt, such excess amount or improper payment shall be refunded by the County Treasurer to the taxpayer; provided, that no refund shall be made unless the state has first authorized the refund of an excessive amount or an improper amount paid, unless such improper amount was paid as a result of miscalculation. Any refund made shall be withheld from the next monthly distribution to the City. [Ord. 102 § 1, 1996.]

3.30.080 Penalty.
It is unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to pay taxes with intent to violate the provisions of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, punished pursuant to state law or City ordinance. [Ord. 102 § 1, 1996.]

Chapter 3.32 LEASEHOLD EXCISE TAX

Sections:
3.32.010     Leasehold excise tax imposed.
3.32.020     Contract authorized.

3.32.010 Leasehold excise tax imposed.
Pursuant to RCW 82.29A.040, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, the City imposes a leasehold excise tax as authorized by Chapter 82.29A RCW, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. The tax shall be equal to four percent of taxable rent. [Ord. 22 § 1, 1995.]

3.32.020 Contract authorized.
Pursuant to RCW 82.29A.080, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, the City Manager is authorized to enter into a contract prior to the effective date of the ordinance establishing this chapter with the Department of Revenue for the administration and collection of the tax. [Ord. 22 § 2, 1995.]

Chapter 3.34 GAMBLING TAX

Sections:
3.34.010     Imposition of tax on gambling activities.
3.34.020     Definitions.
3.34.030     Exemptions.
3.34.040     Declaration of intent to conduct charitable, nonprofit gambling activity.
3.34.050     Payment of tax on gambling activities.
3.34.060     Tax due date – Delinquency.
3.34.070     Financial records.
3.34.080     Additional rules.
3.34.090     Unlawful acts.
3.34.100     Penalty.

3.34.010 Imposition of tax on gambling activities.
There is hereby imposed a tax, at the rates set forth below, upon the following gambling activities, when authorized by Chapter 9.46 RCW, and when conducted in the City:
A. Five percent of the gross receipts from pull tabs, as that term is defined by RCW 9.46.0273 and rules and regulations of the Gambling Commission.
B. Three percent of the gross receipts from punch boards, as that term is defined by RCW 9.46.0273, and rules and regulations of the Gambling Commission.
C. Five percent of the gross revenue, less the amount paid for or as prizes, received from bingo and raffles, as those terms are defined by RCW 9.46.0205 and 9.46.0277.
D. Two percent of the gross revenue, less the amount paid for or as prizes, from amusement games, as that term is defined by RCW 9.46.0201.
E. Eleven percent of the gross monthly revenue from social card games, as that term is defined by RCW 9.46.0281 and rules and regulations of the Gambling Commission. [Ord. 443 § 1, 2007; Ord. 407 § 1, 2006; Ord. 227 § 1, 2000; Ord. 223 § 1, 1999; Ord. 88 § 1, 1996; Ord. 20 § 1, 1995.]

3.34.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms used herein shall have the same meanings as defined in Chapter 9.46 RCW, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. [Ord. 20 § 2, 1995.]

3.34.030 Exemptions.
Bona fide charitable or nonprofit organizations, as defined by RCW 9.46.0209, conducting bingo, raffles, amusement games or gambling within the City shall be exempt from payment of the taxes imposed by LMC 3.34.010 on those activities. [Ord. 407 § 2, 2006; Ord. 20 § 3, 1995.]

3.34.040 Declaration of intent to conduct charitable, nonprofit gambling activity.
For the purpose of identifying the persons, associations and organizations that shall be subject to the tax imposed by LMC 3.34.010, any bona fide charitable or nonprofit corporation intending to conduct or operate any bingo game, raffle, amusement game or gambling which requires licensing as provided in and authorized by Chapter 9.46 RCW, as the same now exists or may be hereafter amended, shall, prior to commencement of any such activity, file with the City Finance Department a sworn declaration of intent to conduct or operate such activity, together with a copy of the license issued in accordance with Chapter 9.46 RCW, as the same now exists or may be hereafter amended. [Ord. 407 § 3, 2006; Ord. 20 § 4, 1995.]

3.34.050 Payment of tax on gambling activities.
Every holder of a license issued by the Washington State Gambling Commission who shall conduct any taxable gambling activities within the City shall provide to the City a copy of each activity report required by the Gambling Commission pursuant to Chapter 230-08 WAC, no later than the date of filing required therein, and shall make payment, in full, of all taxes owing to the City at the same time. [Ord. 20 § 5, 1995.]

3.34.060 Tax due date – Delinquency.
A. Tax imposed by LMC 3.34.010 shall be due and payable in monthly installments, and remittance therefor shall accompany such return and be made on or before the fifteenth day of the month following the month in which the tax accrued.
B. For each payment due, if such payment is not made by the due date thereof, there shall be added a penalty and interest as follows:
    1. If paid one to 10 days late, there shall be a penalty of 10 percent added to the amount of tax due;
    2. If paid 11 to 20 days late, there shall be a penalty of 15 percent added to the amount of tax due;
    3. If paid 21 to 30 days late, there shall be a penalty of 20 percent added to the amount of tax due;
    4. If paid 31 to 60 days late, there shall be a penalty of 25 percent added to the amount of tax due.
C. In addition to the above penalty, the City will charge the taxpayer interest of all taxes due at the rate of one percent per month or portion thereof that said amounts are past due.
D. Delinquent taxes, penalties and interest shall constitute a public debt owing to the City which may be collected by action at law and writ of attachment pursuant to RCW 9.46.350, as presently enacted together with amendments thereof or additions thereto, or which may be referred to a collection agency pursuant to RCW 19.16.500, as presently enacted together with amendments thereof or additions thereto. [Ord. 20 § 6, 1995.]

3.34.070 Financial records.
It shall be the responsibility of all officers, directors and managers of any corporation conducting any gambling activities subject to taxation under this chapter to make available at all reasonable times such financial records as the City Clerk may require to determine full compliance with this chapter. [Ord. 20 § 7, 1995.]

3.34.080 Additional rules.
The City Manager, or designee, shall have authority to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, for carrying out and enforcing payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein levied. Such rules and regulations may include the form of tax return required to be filed with the City at the time of payment of the tax on gambling activities, and procedures for auditing of the taxpayer’s records. A copy of the rules and regulations so adopted shall be on file and available for public examination in the Clerk’s office. [Ord. 20 § 8, 1995.]

3.34.090 Unlawful acts.
It is unlawful for any person liable for the tax imposed by this chapter to fail to pay the tax when due or for any person to make any false or fraudulent return or any false statement in connection with the return. [Ord. 20 § 9, 1995.]

3.34.100 Penalty.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof punished pursuant to state law or City ordinance. [Ord. 20 § 10, 1995.]

Chapter 3.36 LODGING TAX

Sections:
3.36.010     RCW 67.28.180 tax levied – Amount.
3.36.030     Definitions.
3.36.040     Tax deemed in addition to license fee or other taxes.
3.36.050     Fund created – Use of funds.
3.36.055     Lodging Tax Advisory Committee.
3.36.060     Administration and collection.

3.36.010 RCW 67.28.180 tax levied – Amount.
There is hereby created a special excise tax of seven percent on the sale of or charge made for the furnishing of lodging that is subject to tax under Chapters 67.28 and 82.08 RCW. Of this tax, two percent is assessed pursuant to the terms of RCW 67.28.180, two percent is assessed pursuant to the terms of RCW 67.28.181(1) and three percent is assessed pursuant to the terms of RCW 67.28.181(2). The tax imposed under this section applies to the sale of or charge made for the furnishing of lodging by a hotel, motel, rooming house, tourist court, or trailer camp, and the granting of any similar license to use real property as distinguished from the renting or leasing of real property. It shall be presumed that the occupancy of real property for a continuous period of one month or more constitutes a rental or lease of real property and not a mere license to use or enjoy the same. [Ord. 580 § 2, 2014; Ord. 229 § 1, 2000; Ord. 21 § 1, 1995.]

3.36.030 Definitions.
The definitions in RCW 82.08.010 are adopted and apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise. [Ord. 580 § 5, 2014; Ord. 21 § 3, 1995.]

3.36.040 Tax deemed in addition to license fee or other taxes.
The taxes levied herein shall be in addition to any license fee or any tax imposed or levied under any law or any other ordinance of the City; provided, however, that pursuant to Chapter 67.28 RCW, such tax shall be deducted from the amount of tax the seller would otherwise be required to collect and to pay to the State Tax Commission under the provisions of Chapter 82.08 RCW. [Ord. 229 § 4, 2000; Ord. 21 § 4, 1995.]

3.36.050 Fund created – Use of funds.
There is created a special revenue fund 104 – hotel-motel/lodging tax fund in the City and all taxes collected under this chapter shall be placed in this fund to be used solely for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of tourism promotion, acquisition of tourism-related facilities, or operation of tourism-related facilities or to pay for any other uses as authorized in Chapter 67.28 RCW, as now or hereafter amended. [Ord. 580 § 6, 2014; Ord. 229 § 5, 2000; Ord. 120 § 1, 1997; Ord. 21 § 1, 1995.]

3.36.055 Lodging Tax Advisory Committee.
A. There is hereby created a Lodging Tax Advisory Committee which shall be composed as follows:
    1. At least five members, appointed by the legislative body of the municipality, unless the municipality has a charter providing for a different appointment authority. The Committee membership shall include:
        a. At least two members who are representatives of businesses required to collect tax under this chapter; and
        b. At least two members who are persons involved in activities authorized to be funded by revenue received under this chapter.
    Persons who are eligible for appointment under subsection (A)(1)(a) of this section are not eligible for appointment under subsection (A)(1)(b) of this section. Persons who are eligible for appointment under subsection (A)(1)(b) of this section are not eligible for appointment under subsection (A)(1)(a) of this section. Organizations representing businesses required to collect tax under this chapter, organizations involved in activities authorized to be funded by revenue received under this chapter, and local agencies involved in tourism promotion may submit recommendations for membership on the Committee. The number of members who are representatives of businesses required to collect tax under this chapter shall equal the number of members who are involved in activities authorized to be funded by revenue received under this chapter. One member shall be an elected official of the municipality who shall serve as chair of the Committee. An advisory committee for a city or town may include one nonvoting member who is an elected official of the county in which the city or town is located. The appointing authority shall review the membership of the Advisory Committee annually and make changes as appropriate.
    2. Any proposals for the imposition or expenditure of hotel-motel/lodging tax funds, whether it involves the imposition of a tax, an increase in the rate of a tax, repeal of an exemption from a tax, or a change in the use of revenue received, shall be submitted to the Lodging Tax Advisory Committee for review and comment. The submission shall occur at least 45 days before final action on or passage of the proposal by the municipality. The Advisory Committee shall submit comments on the proposal in a timely manner through generally applicable public comment procedures. The comments shall include an analysis of the extent to which the proposal will accommodate activities for tourists or increase tourism, and the extent to which the proposal will affect the long-term stability of the fund created under RCW 67.28.1815. Failure of the Advisory Committee to submit comments before final action on or passage of the proposal shall not prevent the municipality from acting on the proposal. A municipality is not required to submit an amended proposal to an Advisory Committee under this section. [Ord. 580 § 7, 2014; Ord. 229 § 6, 2000; Ord. 133 § 1, 1997.]

3.36.060 Administration and collection.
For the purpose of the taxes levied herein pursuant to this chapter:
A. The Department of Revenue of the state is designated as the agent of the City for the purpose of collection and administration;
B. The administrative provisions contained in RCW 82.08.050 through 82.08.070, and as contained in Chapter 82.32 RCW, shall apply with respect to the administration and collection by said Department;
C. All rules and regulations adopted by the Department of Revenue for the administration of Chapter 82.08 RCW, are adopted;
D. The Department of Revenue is authorized to prescribe and utilize such special forms and procedures as the Department may deem necessary and appropriate. [Ord. 21 § 6, 1995.]

Chapter 3.38 SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT

Sections:
3.38.010     Purpose.
3.38.020     Creation and authority.
3.38.030     Definitions.
3.38.040     Policy for service charges.
3.38.050     Method of calculating service charges.
3.38.060     Deposit of funds.
3.38.070     Authorization for administrative procedures.
3.38.080     Lien for delinquent charges and foreclosures.
3.38.090     Overpayment refund requests.
3.38.100     Administrative refunds or adjustments.
3.38.110     Amount of refund limited.
3.38.120     Appeals.

3.38.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to create a funding methodology which provides resources to plan, manage, design, construct, maintain, revise, and upgrade the storm drainage and surface water runoff systems within the corporate limits of the City of Lakewood. This authority is invoked to minimize property damage, promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare, minimize water quality degradation by preventing siltation, contamination and erosion of the City’s waterways, protect aquifers, ensure the safety of City streets and rights-of-way, assure compliance with federal and state storm drainage, surface water management, and water quality regulations and legislation, increase educational and recreational opportunities, encourage the preservation of natural drainage systems, and foster other beneficial public uses. [Ord. 687 § 1, 2018; Ord. 47 § 1, 1996.]

3.38.020 Creation and authority.
A. There was created in 1996 a storm drainage and surface water management program for the City of Lakewood. Said program became a utility on January 1, 2002. Said storm drainage and surface water management utility is administered by the City Manager or designee.
B. The City elects to exercise all lawful powers necessary and appropriate for the construction, acquisition, and condemnation of property rights, maintenance, management, operations and regulation of storm drainage and surface water runoff systems including, without limitation, all lawful powers to fix, alter, regulate, and control the charges and conditions for the use thereof. [Ord. 687 § 1, 2018; Ord. 289 § 2, 2002; Ord. 47 § 2, 1996.]

3.38.030 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the words or phrases below shall have the following meanings:
“City” shall mean the City of Lakewood, Washington, or as indicated by the context, may mean the appropriate department, official or employee, or agent representing the City in the discharge of his or her duties. For purposes of this chapter, “City” shall be construed to also include those areas joining the City’s utility by execution of an interlocal agreement for drainage services within the City.
“Detention” shall mean the short-term storage of storm drainage runoff that has been artificially collected and then released at a predetermined rate.
“Duplex” shall mean one two-family dwelling, either wholly or partially located on a parcel or contiguous parcels, consisting of a building containing not more than two complete living units, designated and/or used to house not more than two families living independently of each other and including all necessary household functions of each such family.
“Duplex condo” shall mean one complete condominium living unit with its own tax parcel number connected to another complete condominium living unit.
“Duplex condo equivalent” shall mean 1,703 square feet of impervious area.
“Duplex equivalent” shall mean 3,406 square feet of impervious area.
“Engineer” shall mean a professional civil engineer, currently licensed by the state of Washington, retained by and acting on behalf of the parcel owner.
“Gravel” shall mean all graveled surfaces available for use as roads, driveways, or other access ways for vehicular traffic, parking, production, storage, staging, and holding areas. (Gravel surface area shall be considered 75 percent impervious.)
“Impervious area” shall mean the horizontally projected surface area of all nonvertical surfaces of all buildings, mobile homes, or other structures, and the surface areas of all asphalt, concrete, gravel, oil mat, bituminous or other finished surfaces not covered by structures.
“Master plan” shall mean the storm drainage and surface water management plan adopted by City ordinance for managing storm drainage and surface water runoff facilities and features within the City.
“Mobile home equivalent” shall mean 1,457 square feet of impervious area.
“Multifamily” shall mean a dwelling, either wholly or a building containing more than two complete living units, designated and/or used to house more than two families living independently of each other and including all necessary household functions of each family.
“Owner or owner of record” shall mean the holder of title by recorded deed or the purchaser under a recorded real estate contract.
“Parcel” shall mean a state, county, or City public highway, or the smallest unit or plot of land separately segregated for tax purposes.
“Residential” shall mean a parcel or contiguous parcels with one single-family home or mobile home, designed and/or used to house a single family, either wholly or partially located on it or them.
“Residential equivalent” shall mean 2,640 feet of impervious area.
“Retention” shall mean the long-term storage of ground water by means of percolation.
“Service charge” means the charge levied on parcels in the City.
“System” shall mean the entire system of storm drainage and surface water runoff facilities owned by the City or over which the City has right of use and responsibility for the movement and control of storm drainage and surface water runoff, including both naturally occurring and manmade facilities.
“Urban service area” shall mean the drainage basins located in the City served by the storm drainage and surface water management utility as identified in the City’s adopted storm drainage and surface water management plan.
“Vacant/undeveloped” shall mean a parcel of land that has no impervious area. [Ord. 687 § 1, 2018; Ord. 289 § 3, 2002; Ord. 47 § 3, 1996.]

3.38.040 Policy for service charges.
The City shall apply a rate structure as a utility service charge to all parcels within the City as authorized by LMC 3.38.050.
A. All parcels are subject to a service charge except the following exempt parcels:
    1. All parcels consisting of mineral rights only.
    2. All parcels consisting entirely of tidelands, rivers, lakes, creeks and/or streams.
    3. All vacant/undeveloped parcels.
    4. All parcels that are (a) used for church, community center, community hall, grange or community service-oriented purposes, and (b) owned by an organization with nonprofit public benefit status as defined by RCW 24.03.490. A service charge for these parcels will be phased in over a five-year period beginning in 2019, with the exempt status phased out in 2023.
B. Low-income senior citizens and disabled persons receiving relief under RCW 84.36.381 shall receive the following partial exemption from surface water service charges and surcharge, as applicable:
    1. All parcels for which a person qualifies for an exemption under RCW 84.36.381(5)(a) shall be exempt from 40 percent of surface water utility fees and surcharge.
    2. All parcels for which a person qualifies for an exemption under RCW 84.36.381(5)(b)(i) shall be exempt from 60 percent of surface water utility fees and surcharge.
    3. All parcels for which a person qualifies for an exemption under RCW 84.36.381(5)(b)(ii) shall be exempt from 80 percent of surface water utility fees and surcharge. [Ord. 687 § 1, 2018; Ord. 411 § 1, 2006; Ord. 333 § 3 (Sunset clause to revert back to Ord. 321), 2003; Ord. 333 § 1, 2003; Ord. 321 § 1, 2003; Ord. 289 § 4, 2002; Ord. 186 § 1, 1998; Ord. 47 § 4, 1996.]

3.38.050 Method of calculating service charges.
Commencing on January 1, 2019, the annual service charge schedule for storm drainage and surface water management is hereby set and established for the areas of the City as set forth herein.
A. Annual service charges are as follows:
    1. Residential: $116.10.
    2. Duplex: $151.73.
    3. Duplex condo: $72.50.
    4. All mobile homes other than subsection (A)(1) of this section: $61.05 per vacant or occupied mobile home site (mobile home equivalent) plus $0.04653 per square foot of impervious area in addition to mobile home site.
    5. All other parcels: $0.04653 per square foot of impervious area but in no case shall the minimum service charge be less than the residential equivalent rate.
Beginning in 2020 annual service charges shall increase two and one-half percent each year to account for inflation. Rates listed for each subsequent year shall be in effect on January 1st of the year listed unless and until amended by City Council action.
+--------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
|                         Storm Water Rates 2019 – 2024                          |
+--------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
| Year         | 2019     | 2020     | 2021     | 2022     | 2023     | 2024     |
+--------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
| Increase     | 50%      | 2.5%     | 2.5%     | 2.5%     | 2.5%     | 2.5%     |
+--------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
| Residential  | $116.10  | $119.00  | $121.98  | $125.03  | $128.15  | $131.36  |
+--------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
| Duplex       | $151.73  | $155.52  | $159.41  | $163.40  | $167.48  | $171.67  |
+--------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
| Duplex Condo | $72.50   | $74.31   | $76.17   | $78.07   | $80.03   | $82.03   |
+--------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
| Mobile Homes | $61.05   | $62.58   | $64.14   | $65.74   | $67.39   | $69.07   |
| per Unit     |          |          |          |          |          |          |
+--------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
| Mobile Homes | $0.04653 | $0.04769 | $0.04889 | $0.05011 | $0.05136 | $0.05264 |
| per Square   |          |          |          |          |          |          |
| Foot of      |          |          |          |          |          |          |
| Impervious   |          |          |          |          |          |          |
| Area         |          |          |          |          |          |          |
+--------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
| All Other    | $0.04653 | $0.04769 | $0.04889 | $0.05011 | $0.05136 | $0.05264 |
| Parcels      |          |          |          |          |          |          |
| per Square   |          |          |          |          |          |          |
| Foot of      |          |          |          |          |          |          |
| Impervious   |          |          |          |          |          |          |
| Area         |          |          |          |          |          |          |
+--------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+----------+
B. The annual service charge shall be calculated based on impervious area and parcel status as of January 1st each year. The annual service charge shall be due the City on or before April 30th of each year and shall be paid together with payment of real property tax upon the parcel, if any, and shall be delinquent thereafter; provided, that if real property tax upon the parcel payable in that year exceeds $30.00, and one-half of the tax, together with one-half of the annual service charge provided by this section, is paid on or before April 30th of such year, the remaining one-half of the annual service charge shall be due and payable on October 30th, next following, or at the time of payment of the remaining tax on the parcel, whichever is earlier, and shall be delinquent after that date. The service charge shall be incorporated on the Pierce County real property tax statement.
C. Annual Service Charge Credit. 
    1. Credit will apply to all categories listed in subsection A of this section.
    2. Credit Application Submittal Requirements. To qualify for a credit, the owner of record shall provide the City:
        a. A “hold harmless” statement on a form provided by the City that indemnifies the City from any loss incurred arising from the construction and maintenance and operation of the owner’s drainage facilities for both water quantity and quality runoff from the owner’s property. This statement shall be signed by the owner and will be held in record along with the application, certification, and recertification submissions. The owner of record shall provide the City a notarized copy of the agreement.
        b. Each owner of record must enter into an agreement with the City that allows the City to enter onto the owner’s parcel to inspect the drainage facility and verify all information submitted by the owner and his/her engineer. The agreement form will be provided by the City. This statement shall be signed by the owner and will be held in record along with the application, certification, and recertification submissions. The owner of record shall provide the City a notarized copy of the agreement.
        c. “As constructed” plans stamped by the owner’s engineer should be accompanied by engineering calculations in accordance with design criteria acceptable to the City. Both quantity and quality BMPs shall be shown. Examples of acceptable quality BMPs include bioswales, constructed wetlands, and approved filter vaults.
        d. An operation and maintenance manual prepared and stamped by the owner’s engineer for the owner to follow in maintaining the storm drainage system.
        e. A certified statement that all maintenance as outlined in the operation and maintenance manual has been completed.
        f. A copy of any maintenance contracts and contractors’ certified statement that all maintenance as outlined in the operation and maintenance manual has been completed.
    3. Resubmittal Requirements. Biennially, each owner of record shall provide a certified statement by October 1st of the year preceding the year for which the owner of record is requesting credit on a form provided by the City verifying that all specified maintenance has been performed in accordance with the operation and maintenance manual prepared by the owner’s engineer on the facility for the calendar year the credit is being requested.
    4. Credit percentages shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule:
        a. Single-lot residential, duplex, duplex condo, and single-lot mobile homes:
        +------------------+----------------+
        |  Facility Type   | Percent Credit |
        +------------------+----------------+
        | Retention        |                |
        +------------------+----------------+
        | 100-year storage | 43%            |
        +------------------+----------------+
        | 25-year storage  | 18%            |
        +------------------+----------------+
        | Detention        | 0%             |
        +------------------+----------------+
        b. Residential subdivisions, mobile home parks, multifamily, and all other parcels NOT subsections (A)(1) through (A)(4) of this section:
        +-----------------------------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+
        |           Facility Type           |    Percentage Credit    |                           |
        +-----------------------------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+
        | Retention                         |                         |                           |
        +-----------------------------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+
        | 100-year storage                  | 43%                     |                           |
        +-----------------------------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+
        | 25-year storage                   | 18%                     |                           |
        +-----------------------------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+
        | Detention                         | 0%                      |                           |
        +-----------------------------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+
        |                                   | Percentage Credit       |                           |
        +-----------------------------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+
        |                                   | Natural Drainage Course | Municipal Drainage System |
        +-----------------------------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+
        | 100-year storage; release         | 30%                     | 25%                       |
        | rate of 50% of the predevelopment |                         |                           |
        | discharge rate for a 2-year       |                         |                           |
        | storm                             |                         |                           |
        +-----------------------------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+
        | 25-year storage; 2-year release   | 15%                     | 13%                       |
        +-----------------------------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+
    The maximum credit amount for properties receiving an 85 percent credit prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section will be sequentially reduced to 43 percent over a five-year period beginning in 2019, thus reaching the new maximum allowable credit in 2023. The credit amount for properties currently receiving credits between 11 percent and 84 percent will be similarly reduced by 50 percent over the same time period. The credit amount for properties currently receiving a 10 percent credit will be similarly reduced to zero over the same time period.
D. No credit shall be given for a retention/detention facility with less than a 25-year storage. The annual service charge credits will be calculated using the schedule in subsection (C)(4) of this section at the time the credit application was approved. Credits will be recalculated when the certified statement defined in subsection (C)(3) of this section is due.
E. It is the intention of the City Council to provide rates that accurately reflect the needs of the surface water and storm drainage management utility, and that rates be set in responsible and appropriate amounts not more than necessary to meet the utility’s needs. Therefore, the City Council directs staff to return to the City Council proposals, reports and recommendations regarding the appropriate rate levels, including information to determine system needs, and to consider whether the rate should be continued, reduced or otherwise amended, which proposals, reports and recommendations shall be provided to the City Council not later than October 31st of each even-numbered calendar year. [Ord. 687 § 1, 2018; Ord. 393 § 1, 2005; Ord. 333 § 3 (Sunset clause to revert back to Ord. 321), 2003; Ord. 333 § 2, 2003; Ord. 321 § 2, 2003; Ord. 289 § 5, 2002; Ord. 244 § 1, 2000; Ord. 186 § 2, 1998; Ord. 47 § 5, 1996.]

3.38.060 Deposit of funds.
All storm drainage and surface water management utility funds from service charges, grant funds, or any other revenue received shall be deposited in the surface water management fund of the City, identified as fund 401, as a special revenue fund. All revenue in the surface water management fund shall be deposited in interest-bearing or income-earning accounts. [Ord. 687 § 1, 2018; Ord. 289 § 7, 2002; Ord. 47 § 6, 1996.]

3.38.070 Authorization for administrative procedures.
The City Manager or designee is hereby authorized and directed to establish all administrative procedures necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 687 § 1, 2018; Ord. 47 § 7, 1996.]

3.38.080 Lien for delinquent charges and foreclosures.
A. The City shall place a lien on any parcel with a delinquent service charge, including interest thereon. Such liens shall be effective and shall be enforced and foreclosed in the same manner as provided for sewerage liens of cities and towns by RCW 35.67.200 through 35.67.290, except that, alternatively, the service charge lien shall be effective for a total not to exceed one year’s delinquent service charges without the necessity of any writing or recording of the lien with the Pierce County Auditor.
B. Delinquent service charges shall bear interest provided in RCW 35.67.200 at the rate of eight percent per annum, or such rate as may hereafter be authorized by law, computed on a monthly basis from the date of delinquency until paid. Interest shall be calculated at the rate in effect at the time of payment of the charges regardless of when the charges were first delinquent. [Ord. 687 § 1, 2018; Ord. 47 § 8, 1996.]

3.38.090 Overpayment refund requests.
Any person may request the refund of service charge overpayment(s) by doing so in writing to the City Manager or designee. The basis of the request explaining the nature of the overpayment should be clearly stated. The City Manager or designee shall investigate the overpayment to have occurred. The City Manager or designee will use best efforts within 60 days of receipt of the request. The City Manager or designee shall specify in the written decision the basis for authorizing or denying the refund request. No refund may be authorized for overpayment paid or levied more than two years prior to the date the written request is received. [Ord. 687 § 1, 2018; Ord. 47 § 9, 1996.]

3.38.100 Administrative refunds or adjustments.
The City Manager or designee may authorize in writing a refund, credit, or adjustment of any amounts when he/she determines that an error, miscalculation, or mistake has occurred which affects any ratepayer(s). The nature of the error, miscalculation, or mistake should be documented together with the steps taken to prevent future occurrences. No refunds, credits or service charge adjustments may be authorized pursuant to this section unless brought to the attention of the City Manager or designee within two years of the occurrence of the error, miscalculation or mistake. [Ord. 687 § 1, 2018; Ord. 47 § 10, 1996.]

3.38.110 Amount of refund limited.
In any instance where a refund or credit is authorized by the City Manager or designee, the amount shall not include any interest. [Ord. 687 § 1, 2018; Ord. 47 § 11, 1996.]

3.38.120 Appeals.
Any decision of the City Manager or designee made pursuant to this chapter may be appealed to the City of Lakewood Hearing Examiner upon payment of the fees and pursuant to Chapter 1.36 LMC. [Ord. 687 § 1, 2018; Ord. 585 § 11, 2014; Ord. 47 § 12, 1996.]

Chapter 3.40 IMPREST FUNDS

Sections:
3.40.003     Imprest funds – In general.
3.40.005     Fund amounts.
3.40.007     Administration.
3.40.070     Police Department – Police general investigations.
3.40.080     Police Department – Police special investigations.
3.40.110     General fund petty cash and change funds.
3.40.120     South Sound Military Communities Partnership (SSMCP).

3.40.003 Imprest funds – In general.
A. Employees designated in accordance with rules and regulations established by the City Manager may have access to petty cash, working, or revolving funds for such purposes as making change, paying postage and small purchases only to the extent that specific imprest funds are established by ordinance. [Ord. 581 § 2, 2014.]

3.40.005 Fund amounts.
A. The amount of any imprest fund shall not exceed the amount fixed by the City Council.
B. The City Manager may increase, subject to subsection A of this section, or decrease the amount in an imprest fund from time to time.
C. All funds under this chapter shall be established by issuance of a check drawn upon the funds of the City and cash in the accounts shall be maintained by the City Manager or designee. The accounts shall be replenished upon approval of vouchers by the City Council in accordance with usual policy and procedure. [Ord. 581 § 3, 2014.]

3.40.007 Administration.
The Assistant City Manager for Finance and Administrative Services or designee may establish in writing rules and regulations regarding disbursement, replenishment, accounting and use of imprest funds. [Ord. 581 § 4, 2014.]

3.40.070 Police Department – Police general investigations.
There is established a Police Department general investigative imprest fund to be known as the City of Lakewood Police Department police general investigations account, in an amount not to exceed $40,000. [Ord. 638 § 1, 2016; Ord. 581 § 11, 2014.]

3.40.080 Police Department – Police special investigations.
There is established a Police Department special investigative imprest fund to be known as the City of Lakewood Police Department police special investigations account in an amount not to exceed $5,000. [Ord. 581 § 12, 2014.]

3.40.110 General fund petty cash and change funds.
A. The City Manager or designee is hereby authorized to establish a general fund petty cash account in such amount as the City Manager may from time to time, in writing, determine necessary for the efficient handling of the purposes for which the fund is established but not to exceed the amounts set forth in this section. This fund is established for the purpose of making minor authorized disbursements and the making of change.
B. These funds shall be maintained up to the maximum amounts as follows:
    1. The sum of $4,800 to be utilized for petty cash;
    2. The sum of $3,200 to be utilized for change funds.
C. The funds shall be administered by the Assistant City Manager for Administrative Services or designee, in accordance with regulations providing for such lawful administration. [Ord. 624 §  1, 2015; Ord. 581 § 14, 2014.]

3.40.120 South Sound Military Communities Partnership (SSMCP).
There is established a $300.00 change fund for the South Sound Military Communities Partnership. [Ord. 661 § 1, 2017.]

Chapter 3.44 ADMISSIONS TAX

Sections:
3.44.010     Tax levied.
3.44.020     Definitions.
3.44.030     Admission tax exemption.
3.44.040     Form of admission ticket.
3.44.050     Collection of tax.
3.44.060     Remittance of tax.
3.44.070     Books and records.
3.44.080     Termination of collector’s business.
3.44.090     Procedure upon failure to file return.
3.44.100     Interest and penalty.
3.44.110     Selling tickets above stated price.
3.44.120     Rules and regulations.
3.44.125     Applications and returns confidential.
3.44.130     Failure to remit.
3.44.140     Violation – Penalty.
3.44.150     Severability.

3.44.010 Tax levied.
A tax is levied on every person paying an admission fee, cover charge, entrance price or similar compensation of any nature whatsoever or however paid, to any place where an admission charge as defined in this chapter is paid, in the amount of $0.01 on $0.20 or fraction thereof of the admission charge to such place, including but not limited to any motion picture theater, dance hall, amphitheater, auditorium, stadium, athletic pavilion or field, baseball or other athletic park, golf course or driving range, circus side show, outdoor amusement park, merry-go-round, Ferris wheel, roller coaster, observation tower and similar activity, event, attraction, facility, building, structure, location or place. The tax shall also be assessed on the value of admission where a person is admitted free of charge or at reduced rates to any place for which other persons pay a charge or a regular higher charge for the same privileges or accommodations, in which case, the tax shall be computed on the basis of the regular higher charge for the same privileges or accommodations. The tax shall also be assessed on the value of admission where a person is admitted free of charge, but where the person is required to make one or more purchase(s) or a minimum purchase or minimum number of purchases, in which case, the value of the admission is deemed to be the price or cost to the person of the required purchase(s) or minimum purchase(s), and the tax shall be computed on the basis of such cost or price. [Ord. 167 § 1, 1998.]

3.44.020 Definitions.
“Admission charge” means the amount which must be paid as a condition to being admitted to an event, activity, show, play, course, place or business, whether for recreation, entertainment or otherwise, and whether as a participant or spectator, and whether or not such amount includes payment for any other products, services, rentals, beverages, food or other items or benefits. It includes the charge made for season tickets or subscriptions, and includes the cover charge, or charge made for use of seats and tables reserved or otherwise, and other similar accommodations; and the charge made for food and refreshment in any place where free entertainment, recreation or amusement is provided; and includes the charge made for rental or use of equipment or facilities for purposes of recreation or amusement. If the rental of the equipment or facilities is necessary to the enjoyment of a privilege for which a general admission is charged, the combined charges shall be considered as the admission charge.
“Arts organization” as used in LMC 3.44.030(D) means a not-for-profit, 501(c)(3) organization whose principal function or purpose involves the following kinds of events: performances of ballet, dance or choral performances, concerts (instrumental or vocal), plays (with or without music), operas, literary readings, exhibitions of paintings, sculpture, photography, graphic and craft arts. Events not included within the exception of LMC 3.44.030(D) are movies, circuses, ice or burlesque shows, sporting events and dances, performances, shows, or exhibitions of any other type or nature. This provision is to be construed against allowing an exemption, unless an event falls clearly within an exempt category.
“Department” means the Finance Department of the City, its employees, agents, or representatives.
“Person” means an individual, receiver, assignee, firm, copartnership, joint venture, corporation, company, joint stock company, association, society, or a group of individuals acting as a unit whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit, or otherwise.
“Place” includes a theater, dance hall, amphitheater, auditorium, stadium, athletic pavilion or field, baseball or other athletic park, golf course or driving range, circus side show, outdoor amusement park, merry-go-round, Ferris wheel, roller coaster, observation tower and similar attraction, facility, building, structure or location. [Ord. 167 §1, 1998.]

3.44.030 Admission tax exemption.
The admission tax is not imposed:
A. When the admission charge, either for a single event or by prorating a season ticket or subscription price, is $0.10 or less;
B. Upon a person paying an admission charge to an activity of an elementary or secondary school where the school or school district is the sponsor;
C. Where no admission charge or compensating payment is made, other than as provided in LMC 3.44.010;
D. Upon a person paying an admission charge to an activity or performance of a nonprofit arts organization furnishing evidence of tax-exempt status under the Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3); provided:
    1. This exemption applies only if the artistic performance or activity represents examples of the arts organization’s primary purpose, whereas this exemption does not apply when the arts organization merely sponsors or promotes an attraction or professional engagement; and
    2. The City taxes and licenses office receives a properly completed application, including proof of tax-exempt status, for this exemption at least 15 days prior to the event;
E. Upon a person paying an admission charge to an activity or performance of a nonprofit organization furnishing evidence of tax-exempt status under the Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3); provided:
    1. For each nonprofit organization this exemption applies only to the first $20,000 of gross ticket sales generated from its event within each calendar year; and
    2. The City taxes and licenses office receives a properly completed application, including proof of tax-exempt status, for this exemption at least 15 days prior to the event; and
    3. The City taxes and licenses office receives a properly completed tax return within three business days or other time set by the office, following an event, showing proof of gross ticket sales and other information requested by the office. [Ord. 167 § 1, 1998.]

3.44.040 Form of admission ticket.
A. A person may not sell or offer for sale an admission ticket, card or similar device, which does not have the name of the place of the ticketed event and the total admission price, which shall include the admissions tax, conspicuously and indelibly printed, stamped, or written on that part of the ticket which is to be taken up by the management of the place at the time of admission.
B. All tickets, cards or similar devices sold must be consecutively numbered or reflect house seat locations to allow the City taxes and licenses office to verify the number of tickets sold. [Ord. 167 § 1, 1998.]

3.44.050 Collection of tax.
Every person receiving payment for admission is required to collect the amount of the admissions tax from the person making the admission payment and at the time the admission charge is paid. [Ord. 167 § 1, 1998.]

3.44.060 Remittance of tax.
A. The tax collected under LMC 3.44.050 is held in trust until paid to the City Finance Department. Should a person required to collect the admissions tax fail either to collect or remit the tax, the City shall have a similar claim for the amount of the tax, plus interest as provided in this chapter, against the proceeds of admissions charges received by such person.
B. Unless in a particular case the City Manager or designee directs or authorizes a different procedure, each person required to collect the admissions tax must file a tax return accompanied by remittance of the tax due bimonthly, by the fifteenth day of the month next following the end of each bimonthly reporting period. The City Manager prescribes the form and content of the tax returns. Whenever it appears that the collection of taxes due is in jeopardy, the City Manager, after notice to the person collecting the tax, is authorized to require reporting and payment of taxes due at any interval other than bimonthly as the City Manager shall deem appropriate under the circumstances. For the purposes of this chapter, “City Manager” refers to the City Manager for the City or designee.
C. Not by way of limiting the City Manager’s discretion to regulate the remittance of the tax under this chapter, the City Manager is specifically authorized to require verified annual tax returns and to require the immediate remittance of the tax on admissions to a single event or series of a temporary or transitory nature.
D. Payment or remittance of the tax collected may be made by check, unless payment or remittance is otherwise required by the City Manager, but payment by check shall not relieve the person collecting the tax from liability for payment and remittance of the tax to the Department unless the check is honored and is in the full and correct amount.
E. The City Manager may, after notice to the person collecting the tax, require the placement of taxes collected in a trust account at an approved local depository bank. The taxes collected shall be held in said trust account until payment to the Department. The City Manager shall have such authority to deem when a trust account is necessary to insure payment of the taxes collected to the City. [Ord. 167 § 1, 1998.]

3.44.070 Books and records.
Every person required to collect the admissions tax is required to keep and make available at all reasonable times for inspection and audit by the City Manager or designee all books, records, and accounts pertinent to the tax for a period of two years. [Ord. 167 § 1, 1998.]

3.44.080 Termination of collector’s business.
Whenever a person required to collect the tax under this chapter quits or otherwise disposes of the business, any tax collected becomes immediately payable to the City of Lakewood. If such tax is not remitted within 10 days after a sale or other disposal of the business, the purchaser or successor becomes liable to the City for such tax. [Ord. 167 § 1, 1998.]

3.44.090 Procedure upon failure to file return.
Whenever a person required to collect the tax under this chapter quits or otherwise disposes of the business, any tax collected becomes immediately payable to the City of Lakewood. If such tax is not remitted within 10 days after a sale or other disposal of the business, the purchaser or successor becomes liable to the City for such tax. [Ord. 167 § 1, 1998.]

3.44.100 Interest and penalty.
A. Should a person fail to pay the tax due in the time prescribed, said person shall become liable for interest on the tax due at the rate of one percent per month.
B. Should a person fail to pay the tax due within 30 days after it is due, said person shall become liable for a penalty of 10 percent of the amount of the tax due, in addition to the interest provided for in subsection A of this section, and in addition to any other rights to enforce the requirements of this chapter that the City may have pursuant to this chapter or under law or equity. [Ord. 167 § 1, 1998.]

3.44.110 Selling tickets above stated price.
A. No person may sell an admission ticket, card or similar device at a price in excess of the price printed, stamped, or written thereon, as required in LMC 3.44.040.
B. This section does not forbid a ticket agent, duly authorized to sell tickets by the event presenter, from collecting a reasonable handling charge from the purchaser, in addition to the disclosed ticket price, consistent with general marketing practices in the Puget Sound area. The handling charge is not part of the admission charge for purposes of the City admissions tax. [Ord. 167 § 1, 1998.]

3.44.120 Rules and regulations.
The City Manager or designee is authorized to adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for administration and enforcement of this chapter, a copy of which shall be placed on file for public examination in the Office of the City Clerk. [Ord. 167 § 1, 1998.]

3.44.125 Applications and returns confidential.
A. The applications and returns made to the City Manager pursuant to this chapter or any audit or investigation made by the City Manager may not be made public, nor are they subject to the inspection of any person except as herein provided. This section does not prohibit the City or its agents from:
    1. Giving such facts or information in evidence in any court action involving the tax imposed hereunder or involving a violation of this chapter;
    2. Giving such facts and information to the person paying the tax or his duly authorized agent;
    3. Publishing statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular returns and reports of items thereof; or
    4. Permitting its records to be audited and examined by the proper state officer, his agents and employees.
B. The City consents to the inspection of such records as necessary by the State Department of Revenue. [Ord. 167 § 1, 1998.]

3.44.130 Failure to remit.
Any person failing to timely remit any admissions tax payable to the City is personally liable for the amount of tax due and for interest and penalty as provided in LMC 3.44.100 and is also subject to prosecution for violation of this chapter. Any tax due and unpaid under this chapter, and all penalties thereon, constitute a debt to the City and may be collected by court proceedings in the same manner as any other debt in like amount, which remedy is in addition to all other existing remedies. [Ord. 167 § 1, 1998.]

3.44.140 Violation – Penalty.
It is unlawful for a person to fail to comply with any requirement of this chapter or the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder. Each violation is a separate offense punishable by fine not to exceed $1,000, imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. [Ord. 167 § 1, 1998.]

3.44.150 Severability.
Should any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstances be held invalid, the remainder of the chapter or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. [Ord. 167 § 1, 1998.]

Chapter 3.48 INDIGENT DEFENSE SERVICES APPLICATION FEE

Sections:
3.48.010     Application fee established.
3.48.020     Severability.

3.48.010 Application fee established.
A. A person applying for the appointment of counsel in criminal, juvenile, involuntary commitment, or dependency cases, or in any other case where the right to counsel attaches, shall be assessed a nonrefundable application fee of $10.00.
B. Application fees paid shall be used to defray the costs and expenses incurred by the City of Lakewood in making the determination of indigency pursuant to Chapter 10.101 RCW. Such costs and expenses include conducting indigency screening, verifying information, processing applications, and providing a written report to the court.
C. The application fee shall be collected at the time of application.
D. No defendant will be denied the assistance of counsel in those rare instances where the applicant is unable to pay such a fee without extreme financial hardship. [Ord. 209 § 1, 1999.]

3.48.020 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. [Ord. 209 § 1, 1999.]

Chapter 3.52 UTILITY TAX

Sections:
3.52.010     Exercise of license revenue power.
3.52.020     Definitions.
3.52.030     Purpose for utility tax revenues.
3.52.040     Utility business license.
3.52.050     Utility businesses subject to tax – Amount.
3.52.060     Cellular telephone service – Income allocation and administration.
3.52.070     Tax rate change.
3.52.080     Exemption.
3.52.090     License tax year.
3.52.100     Deductions.
3.52.110     Monthly installments.
3.52.120     Taxpayer’s records.
3.52.130     Applications and returns confidential.
3.52.140     Failure to make returns or pay the tax in full.
3.52.150     Overpayment of tax.
3.52.160     Appeal to Hearing Examiner.
3.52.170     False returns.
3.52.180     Tax delinquency unlawful acts.
3.52.190     Noncompliance – Penalty.
3.52.200     Customer utility tax relief.
3.52.210     Customer utility tax relief qualifications.
3.52.220     Claim filing procedures.
3.52.230     Consumer Price Index changes.
3.52.240     Designated official to administer, make rules.
3.52.250     Severability.

3.52.010 Exercise of license revenue power.
The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the power of the City of Lakewood to tax for revenue. [Ord. 253 § 1, 2000; Ord. 215 § 1, 1999.]

3.52.020 Definitions.
In construing the provisions of this chapter, the following definitions shall be applied:
“Cable service” means:
    1. A system providing service pursuant to a franchise issued by the City under the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 Public Law No. 98-549, 47 U.S.C. Section 521, as it may be amended or superseded; or
    2. Any system that competes directly with such franchised system by employing antennas, microwave, wires, wave guides, coaxial cables, or other conductors, equipment or facilities designed, construed or used for the purpose of:
        a. Collecting and amplifying local and distant broadcast television signals and distributing and transmitting them;
        b. Transmitting original cable-cast programming not received through television broadcast signals; or
        c. Transmitting television pictures, film and videotape programs not received through broadcast television signals, whether or not encoded or processed to permit reception by only selected receivers; provided, however, that “cable television service” shall not include entities that are subject to charges as “Commercial TV Stations” under 47 U.S.C. Section 158.
“Cellular telephone service” means two-way voice and data telephone/telecommunications system based in whole or substantially in part on wireless radio communications and which is not subject to regulation by the Washington Utilities and Transportation Commission (WUTC). This includes cellular mobile service. The definition of cellular mobile service includes other wireless radio communications services such as specialized mobile radio (SMR), personal communications services (PCS) and any other evolving wireless radio communications technology which accomplishes the same purpose as cellular mobile service.
“Competitive telecommunication service” means the providing by any person of telecommunications equipment or apparatus, or service related to that equipment or apparatus such as repair or maintenance service, if the equipment or apparatus is of a type which can be provided by persons that are not subject to regulation as telephone companies under RCW Title 80 and for which a separate charge is made.
“Designated official” means such City employee or agent as the City Manager of the City shall designate.
“Gross income” means the value proceeding or accruing from the sale of any tangible property or service, and receipts (including all sums earned or charged, whether received or not), by reason of the investment of capital in the business engaged in, including rentals, royalties, fees, or other emoluments, however designated (excluding receipts or proceeds from the use or sale of real property or any interest therein, and proceeds from the sale of notes, bonds, mortgages, or other evidences of indebtedness, or stocks and the like) and without any deduction on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs, interest or discount paid, or any expense whatsoever, and without any deduction on account of losses, including the amount of credit losses actually sustained by the taxpayer whose regular books or accounts are kept upon an accrual basis.
“Network telecommunication service” means the providing by any person of access to a local telephone network, local telephone network switching service, toll service, or coin telephone services, or the providing of telephonic, video, data, pagers, or similar communication or transmission for hire, via a local telephone network, toll line or channel, cable, microwave, or similar communication or transmission system. “Network telecommunication service” includes interstate service, including toll service, originating from or received on telecommunications equipment or apparatus in this state if the charge for the service is billed to a person in this state. “Network telecommunication service” does not include the providing of competitive telecommunication service, the providing of cable television service, nor the providing of broadcast services by radio or television stations.
“Telecommunication business” means the business of providing network telecommunication service, as defined in this section. It includes cooperative or farmer line telephone companies or associations operating an exchange.
“Telecommunication service” means competitive telecommunication service or network telecommunication service, or both, as defined in this section.
“Telecommunications company” includes every corporation, company, association, joint stock association, partnership and person, their lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any court whatsoever, and every city or town owning, operating or managing any facilities used to provide telecommunications for hire, sale, or resale to the general public within this state. [Ord. 253 § 1, 2000; Ord. 215 § 1, 1999.]

3.52.030 Purpose for utility tax revenues.
The revenue generated by the tax established pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be used solely for public safety and transportation needs of the City. [Ord. 253 § 1, 2000; Ord. 215 § 1, 1999.]

3.52.040 Utility business license.
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in or carry on any business, occupation or act or privilege for which a tax is imposed by LMC 3.52.050 without first having obtained, and being the holder of, a business license as provided in LMC Title 5. [Ord. 253 § 1, 2000; Ord. 215 § 1, 1999.]

3.52.050 Utility businesses subject to tax – Amount.
There are levied upon, and shall be collected from everyone, including the City, on account of certain business activities engaged in or carried on in the City, utility business occupation taxes in the amounts to be determined by the application of rates given against gross income as follows:
A. Upon everyone engaged in and carrying on a telegraph business, a tax equal to 6.0 percent of the total gross income, not including the amount of the tax, from such business in the City during the period for which the tax is due;
B. Upon everyone engaged in or carrying on a competitive telecommunication service or network telecommunication service, a tax equal to six percent of the total gross income, not including the amount of the tax, from such business in the City during the period for which the tax is due. In determining gross income from such business, including intrastate toll service, the taxpayer shall include 100 percent of the gross income received from such business in the City;
C. Upon everyone engaged in or carrying on the business of cellular telephone service, a tax equal to six percent of the total gross income, not including the amount of the tax, from such business in the City during the period for which the tax is due;
D. Upon everyone engaged in or carrying on the business of selling, brokering or furnishing artificial, natural or mixed gas for domestic, business or industrial consumption, a tax equal to five percent of the total gross income, not including the amount of the tax, from such business in the City during the period for which the tax is due;
E. Upon everyone engaged in or carrying on the business of selling or furnishing electric energy, a tax equal to five percent of the total gross income, not including the amount of the tax, from such business in the City during the period for which the tax is due; provided, this tax shall not apply to any entity engaged in or carrying on the business of selling or furnishing electric energy on which there is already imposed a tax on the business of selling or furnishing electric energy levied by and paid to any other municipality of the state of Washington organized under the provisions of RCW Title 35 or 35A;
F. Upon everyone engaged in or carrying on the business of cable communications, a fee or tax equal to six percent of the total gross income, not including the amount of the tax, from gross subscriber revenues in the City during the period for which the fee or tax is due. For purposes of this chapter, “gross subscriber revenues” means and includes those revenues derived from the supplying of subscription services, that is, installation fees, disconnect and reconnect fees, fees for regular cable benefits including the transmission of broadcast signals and access and origination channels and per-program or per-channel charges; it does not include leased channel revenue, advertising revenue, or any other income derived from the system;
G. Upon the City with respect to its conducting, maintaining and/or operating any municipal storm water management program or utility that it operates, or may operate in the future, as a public utility a tax of six percent of the total gross income, not including the amount of the tax, from such business in the City during the period for which the tax is due;
H. Upon the City with respect to its conducting, maintaining and/or operating any municipal garbage collection service or utility that it operates, or may operate in the future as a public utility, a tax of six percent of the total gross income, not including the amount of the tax, from such business in the City during the period for which the tax is due. [Ord. 290 § 1, 2002; Ord. 253 § 1, 2000; Ord. 215 § 1, 1999.]

3.52.060 Cellular telephone service – Income allocation and administration.
A. Allocation of Income. 
    1. Service Address. Payments by a customer for cellular telephone service from telephones without a fixed location shall be allocated among taxing jurisdictions to the location of the customer’s principal service address during the period for which the tax applies.
    2. Presumption. There is a presumption that the service address a customer supplies to the taxpayer is current and accurate, unless the taxpayer has actual knowledge to the contrary.
    3. Roaming. When the cellular telephone service is provided while a subscriber is roaming outside the subscriber’s normal cellular network area, the gross income shall be assigned consistent with the taxpayer’s accounting system to the location of the originating cell site of the call, or to the location of the main cellular switching office that switched the call.
B. Authority of Administrator. The City Manager or his or her designee is authorized to represent the City in negotiations with other cities for the proper allocation of cellular telephone service taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter. [Ord. 253 § 1, 2000; Ord. 215 § 1, 1999.]

3.52.070 Tax rate change.
No change in the rate of tax imposed by LMC 3.52.050 shall apply to business activities occurring before the effective date of the change and, except for a change in the tax rate authorized by RCW 35.21.870, no change in the rate of the tax may take effect sooner than 60 days following the enactment of the ordinance establishing the change. The designated official shall send to each affected business at the address of record a copy of any ordinance changing the rate of tax promptly upon its enactment. [Ord. 253 § 1, 2000; Ord. 215 § 1, 1999.]

3.52.080 Exemption.
The tax herein levied is in lieu of any excise, privilege or occupational tax under any chapters of this title with respect to activities specifically within the provisions of this chapter. Nothing herein shall be construed to exempt persons taxable under the provisions of this chapter from tax under any other chapters of this title with respect to activities other than those specifically within the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 253 § 1, 2000; Ord. 215 § 1, 1999.]

3.52.090 License tax year.
All utility occupation licenses and the fee for the tax therefor shall be for the tax year for which issued and shall expire at the end of the tax year. The tax year shall commence January 1st and shall end on December 31st. [Ord. 253 § 1, 2000; Ord. 215 § 1, 1999.]

3.52.100 Deductions.
In computing the tax imposed by this chapter, the following items may be deducted from the measure of the tax:
A. The amount of credit losses actually sustained by taxpayers whose regular books are kept upon an accrual basis.
B. Charges by a taxpayer engaging in a telephone business to a telecommunications company for telephone service that the purchaser buys for the purpose of resale.
C. That portion of the gross income derived from charges to another telecommunications company for connecting fees, switching charges, or carrier access charges relating to intrastate toll telephone services, or for access to, or charges for, interstate services.
D. Adjustments made to a billing or to a customer account or to an accrual account in order to reverse a billing or charge that had been made as a result of third-party fraud or other crime and was not properly a debt of the customer.
E. Amounts derived from a business which the City is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution of this state or the Constitution or laws of the United States.
F. Grants from governmental agencies. [Ord. 253 § 1, 2000; Ord. 215 § 1, 1999.]

3.52.110 Monthly installments.
The tax imposed by LMC 3.52.050 shall be due and payable in monthly installments, and remittance therefor shall be made on or before the last day of the month following the end of the monthly period in which the tax is accrued. On or before said due date, the taxpayer shall file with the designated official a written return upon such form and setting forth such information as the designated official shall reasonably require, together with the payment of the amount. [Ord. 253 § 1, 2000; Ord. 215 § 1, 1999.]

3.52.120 Taxpayer’s records.
Each taxpayer shall keep records for up to six years reflecting the amount of his or her gross operating revenues on services within the City, and such records shall be open at all reasonable times to inspection by the designated official, or his or her duly authorized subordinates, for verification of said tax returns or for the filing of the tax of a taxpayer who fails to make such return, or for other appropriate uses. Where necessary, and in addition to other remedies provided for herein, the City’s designated official or his or her agent may fix a time and place for an investigation of the correctness of any return and may issue a subpoena to the taxpayer or any other person, to attend upon such investigation and there testify, under oath in regard to the matters inquired into and may, by subpoena, require the taxpayer or any other person to bring with him or her such books, records and papers as may be required by the designated official. [Ord. 374 § 1, 2005; Ord. 253 § 1, 2000; Ord. 215 § 1, 1999.]

3.52.130 Applications and returns confidential.
The applications, statements or returns made to the designated official pursuant to this chapter shall not be made public, nor shall they be subject to the inspection of any person except the City Manager, City Attorney, designated official or authorized agent and to the Mayor and members of the City Council; and it is unlawful for any person to make public or inform any other person as to the contents of or any information contained in or to permit inspection of any application or return; provided, however, that the foregoing shall not be construed to prohibit the designated official from making known or revealing names, addresses and telephone numbers of utilities operating within the City, facts or information contained in any return to any taxpayer or disclosed in any investigation or examination of the taxpayer’s books or records to the State Department of Revenue, for official purposes, but only if the statutes of the state grant substantially similar privileges to the proper officers of the City. [Ord. 253 § 1, 2000; Ord. 215 § 1, 1999.]

3.52.140 Failure to make returns or pay the tax in full.
If any taxpayer fails, neglects or refuses to make its return as and when required herein the designated official is authorized to determine the amount of tax payable, and by mail to notify such taxpayer of the amount so determined. The amount so fixed shall thereupon be the tax and be immediately due and payable, together with penalty and interest. Delinquent taxes, including any penalty and interest, are subject to an interest charge of 12 percent per year on any unpaid balance from the date the tax became due as provided in LMC 3.52.110 until paid. [Ord. 253 § 1, 2000; Ord. 215 § 1, 1999.]

3.52.150 Overpayment of tax.
Any money paid to the City through error, or otherwise not in payment of the tax imposed by this chapter, or in excess of such tax, shall, upon the request of the taxpayer, be credited against any tax due or to become due from such taxpayer hereunder, or, upon the taxpayer ceasing to do business in the City, be refunded to the taxpayer. [Ord. 253 § 1, 2000; Ord. 215 § 1, 1999.]

3.52.160 Appeal to Hearing Examiner.
Any taxpayer aggrieved by the amount of the fee or tax determined by the designated official to be due under the provisions of this chapter may appeal such determination to the City Hearing Examiner in accordance with, and subject to the procedures set forth in, Chapter 1.36 LMC or such subsequent superseding procedures as may be adopted by ordinance; provided, that in such appeal hearing, the Hearing Examiner shall receive and examine available information, conduct public hearings, prepare records and reports thereof, and make decisions, which shall be final and conclusive. Pending a hearing, a taxpayer may withhold the fee or tax determined by the designated official. If the tax or fee is withheld, the taxpayer shall pay such amount to the City with interest from the date the amount was withheld. The designated official shall periodically set the applicable interest rate for withholding. [Ord. 253 § 1, 2000; Ord. 215 § 1, 1999.]

3.52.170 False returns.
It is unlawful for any person subject to this chapter to fail or refuse to make application or return for a license or to pay the fee or tax or installment thereof when due, or for any person to make any false or fraudulent application or return or any false statement or representation in, or in connection with, any such application or return, or to aid or abet another in any attempt to evade payment of the fee or tax, or any part thereof; or to testify falsely upon any investigation of the correctness of a return upon the hearing of any appeal or in any manner hinder or delay the City or any of its officers in carrying out the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 253 § 1, 2000; Ord. 215 § 1, 1999.]

3.52.180 Tax delinquency unlawful acts.
A. Delinquent Penalties and Interest. For each payment due, if such payment is not made by the due date thereof, in addition to any other remedies available under the law, there shall be added penalty and interest as follows:
    1. If paid one to 10 days late, there shall be a penalty of 10 percent added to the amount of tax due.
    2. If paid 11 to 20 days late, there shall be a penalty of 15 percent added to the amount of tax due.
    3. If paid 21 to 30 days late, there shall be a penalty of 20 percent added to the amount of tax due.
    4. If paid more than 30 days late, there shall be a penalty of 25 percent added to the amount of tax due.
    5. In addition to the above penalty, the City of Lakewood shall charge the taxpayer interest on all taxes and delinquent penalties due at the rate of one percent per month or the portion thereof that said amounts are past due.
    6. The tax imposed by this chapter, and all penalties and interest thereon, shall constitute a debt to the City of Lakewood, and may be collected by court proceedings in the same manner as any other debt which remedy shall be in addition to all other available remedies. Any judgment entered in favor of the City of Lakewood may include an award to the City of Lakewood of all court and collection costs including attorneys’ fees to the extent permitted by law. Amounts delinquent more than 60 days may be assigned to a third party for collection, in which case the amount of any collection charges shall be in addition to all other amounts owed. Amounts due shall not be considered paid until the City of Lakewood has received payment for the full amount due or has discharged the amount due and not paid. [Ord. 253 § 1, 2000; Ord. 215 § 1, 1999.]

3.52.190 Noncompliance – Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation subject to the provisions of this chapter, who fails or refuses to apply for a business license for a business to which the provisions of this chapter apply, or to make tax returns or to pay any tax when due, or who makes any false statement or representation in or in connection with any tax return or any application for a business license or tax return, or who otherwise violates or refuses to comply with any provision of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person, firm or corporation is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 for each day or portion thereof which such person, firm or corporation is found guilty of noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 253 § 1, 2000; Ord. 215 § 1, 1999.]

3.52.200 Customer utility tax relief.
There is granted to persons who meet the qualifications and requirements of LMC 3.52.210 and 3.52.220 relief from the utility business tax of the City as follows:
A. For all billings paid directly or indirectly by the person during a calendar year for service charges to any entity or organization which paid the utility business tax of the City, the City is authorized to pay to such person a “reimbursement” in a maximum amount determined in accordance with subsection B of this section; provided, that the total amount of all reimbursements paid pursuant to this subsection shall not exceed the total dollar amount established through the budget process.
B. The amount of maximum relief available under subsection A of this section, for any calendar year, is $10.00 for utility taxes paid for each of the following utilities: (1) electric, (2) natural gas and (3) telephone, with a combined total for all three named not to exceed $30.00; provided, that the amount of the relief shall not to exceed the amount of utility business taxes actually paid to the City for the named utilities. The amount of the maximum relief may be adjusted for subsequent years in accordance with the provisions of LMC 3.52.230. The amount of relief shall be prorated on a monthly basis for each month that the customer was a resident of the City, and for which the customer qualified for the relief as set forth in LMC 3.52.210, and was paying the tax. [Ord. 253 § 1, 2000; Ord. 215 § 1, 1999.]

3.52.210 Customer utility tax relief qualifications.
To qualify for the relief set forth in LMC 3.52.200, a person must file a request for tax relief and reimbursement of the amount allowable of the City utility occupation taxes imposed in the current year on the form approved by the City, and must:
A. Meet one of the following criteria:
    1. Be 62 years of age or older at all times during any period for which “reimbursement” is requested; or
    2. Be permanently disabled under the definitions of subsections (2) or (3)(A), (3)(B) or (3)(C) of 42 U.S.C. Section 1382c(a) and receiving funds from a disability program such as Supplemental Security Income, Social Security Disability Insurance or disabled veterans payments; and must:
B. Have an income during the calendar year for which a “reimbursement” is requested from all sources whatsoever, not exceeding 50 percent of the median income level for such calendar year for the Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area (PMSA) per household for the Seattle-Tacoma area, as published by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. If the annual update of the PMSA is not available, the median income level shall be determined by adjusting the prior year median income level in accordance with LMC 3.52.230. As used in this subsection, “income” means:
    1. “Disposable income,” as that term is defined in RCW 84.36.383, as it may be amended or replaced from time to time; plus
    2. The aggregate value of all gifts received during the calendar year for which a “reimbursement” is requested, excluding the first $5,008.69 thereof. The aggregate value of gifts excludable from income as provided in this section shall be adjusted for the calendar year 2000 and each subsequent calendar year in accordance with LMC 3.52.230; and means:
C. Have been a resident of the dwelling unit within the City at all times during any period for which a reimbursement is requested, and have contributed to the payment of City utility tax charges from his or her income or resources. [Ord. 253 § 1, 2000; Ord. 215 § 1, 1999.]

3.52.220 Claim filing procedures.
A. All requests for tax relief under LMC 3.52.200 and 3.52.210 must be filed with the City or its agent no later than the date established by the designated official for the calendar year for which “reimbursement” is requested.
B. The designated official shall adopt rules and procedures for the filing of reimbursement claims, and for the administration of LMC 3.52.200 and 3.52.210 and this section. [Ord. 253 § 1, 2000; Ord. 215 § 1, 1999.]

3.52.230 Consumer Price Index changes.
The amount of the maximum relief established under LMC 3.52.200, and the aggregate value of gifts, subsidies and benefits excludable from income under LMC 3.52.210, and the median income level figure utilized when the primary metropolitan statistical area (PMSA) per household for the Seattle-Tacoma area update is not available, shall be periodically reviewed up to one time per year for adjustment based upon recommendations by the designated official and the City Manager to reflect any change in the cost of living, which adjustment, together with supporting documentation, shall be subject to review and approval by the City Council, and any such approval shall be set forth in an ordinance or resolution duly adopted or passed by the City Council. [Ord. 253 § 1, 2000; Ord. 215 § 1, 1999.]

3.52.240 Designated official to administer, make rules.
The designated official shall have the power to construe, interpret, administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, and shall further have the power, and it shall be his or her duty, from time to time, to adopt, publish and enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or with the law for the purpose of implementing, interpreting and carrying out the provisions thereof, and it is unlawful to violate or fail to comply with any such rule or regulation. [Ord. 253 § 1, 2000; Ord. 215 § 1, 1999.]

3.52.250 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remainder of such chapter and its provisions and regulations or the application thereof to other person or circumstances shall not be affected. [Ord. 253 § 1, 2000; Ord. 215 § 1, 1999.]

Chapter 3.54 BROKERED NATURAL GAS USE TAX

Sections:
3.54.010     Definitions.
3.54.020     Brokered natural gas use tax.
3.54.030     Appeal, administration and enforcement.

3.54.010 Definitions.
The definitions contained within Chapter 3.52 LMC are hereby incorporated into this chapter by reference. In construing, administering, interpreting or collecting the tax authorized by this chapter, authorized representatives of the Washington State Department of Revenue may rely upon relevant definitions as contained within RCW Title 82. [Ord. 519 § 1, 2010.]

3.54.020 Brokered natural gas use tax.
A. Pursuant to RCW 82.14.230, there is hereby fixed and imposed on every person a use tax for the privilege of using natural gas or manufactured gas in the City as a consumer.
B. The amount of the tax imposed is an amount equal to the value of the article used by the taxpayer in the City, multiplied by the tax rate of six percent or if different, the maximum rate permitted by appropriate RCW. The “value of the article used” does not include any amounts that are paid for the hire or use of a natural gas business in transporting the gas subject to tax under this subsection if those amounts are subject to tax under LMC 3.52.050(D).
C. There may be exempted from taxation value otherwise taxable if the person who sold the gas to the consumer has already paid a tax under LMC 3.52.050(D) with respect to the gas for which exemption is sought under this subsection.
D. There is a credit against the tax levied under this section in an amount equal to any tax paid by the person:
    1. Who sold the gas to the consumer when the tax is a gross receipts tax similar to that imposed pursuant to RCW 35.21.870, as implemented in LMC 3.52.050(D), by another state with respect to the gas for which a credit is sought under this subsection; or
    2. Consuming the gas upon which a use tax similar to the tax imposed by this section was paid to another state with respect to the gas for which a credit is sought under this subsection.
E. The use tax hereby imposed is paid by the consumer. The administration and collection of the tax shall be conducted by the Washington State Department of Revenue (DOR), pursuant to RCW 82.14.050, and the DOR may deduct a percentage amount not to exceed two percent of the taxes collected. Funds collected through this use tax shall be distributed to the City and may be used to make refunds as the DOR may determine. [Ord. 555 § 1, 2012; Ord. 519 § 1, 2010.]

3.54.030 Appeal, administration and enforcement.
A. As stated in RCW 82.14.050, the City Manager is hereby authorized to enter all necessary contracts with the state for the purpose of facilitating the administration and collection of this tax. Administration and collection of the taxation program authorized under this chapter shall be conducted by the state of Washington pursuant to the provisions of RCW Title 82, as the same exists or may hereafter be amended. The Department of Revenue may adopt additional rules and regulations, and undertake administrative actions in accordance with the State Administrative Procedures Act, to facilitate the enforcement, administration and collection of the tax authorized herein as the Department of Revenue may deem necessary.
B. For the purpose of enforcing the collection of this tax and administering the taxation program authorized herein, the Washington State DOR shall have the power to construe, interpret, administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. It is unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any such rule, law or regulation.
C. Applications for refunds or credits of taxes paid pursuant to this chapter shall be made to the Washington State Department of Revenue as stated in Chapter 82.32 RCW as the same exists or may hereafter be amended. [Ord. 519 § 1, 2010.]

Chapter 3.56 CRIME PREVENTION FUNDING

Sections:
3.56.010     Funding line item created.
3.56.020     Crime prevention funding – Contribution required.

3.56.010 Funding line item created.
There is created within the police services budget of the City of Lakewood a separate line item to be known as “crime prevention funding.” Moneys deposited in this line item shall be used for funding police and administration of justice projects and activities geared towards crime prevention, including but not limited to: publications and dissemination of crime prevention information and for funding of other crime prevention projects and purposes, and for general police activities responding to and addressing the effects of crime within the community, and for any other purposes geared to improve administration of the criminal justice system, as determined and approved by the City Council. [Ord. 218 § 1, 1999.]

3.56.020 Crime prevention funding – Contribution required.
In any case where an accused has been convicted of any of the below listed crimes, there shall be, in addition to any fine levied, a penalty in the amount of $50.00, per charge, which penalty shall be nonsuspendable, and which shall be deposited into the crime prevention funding line item. The fact that this penalty is imposed on each charge shall not in any way reduce the obligation of the accused to pay any other cost, fine or penalty prescribed by the court.
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
|                CRIME                |      RCW/LMC       | CLASSIFICATION  |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Aiming or Discharging Firearms      | 9.41.230/9.34.900  | Misd            |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Animal Cruelty in the 2nd Degree    | 16.52.207/9.10.900 | Misd            |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Animal Violations (Taking, Killing) | 9.08.070/9.10.900  | Gross Misd      |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Assault in the 4th Degree           | 9A.36.041/9.14.900 | Gross Misd      |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Assault in 4th Degree/DV            | 9A.36.041/9.14.900 | Gross Misd      |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Carrying a Pistol                   | 9.41.050/9.34.900  | Misd            |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Causing Unnecessary Emergency       | 9.78.020           | Misd            |
| Response                            |                    |                 |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Coercion                            | 9A.36.070/9.14.900 | Gross Misd      |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Criminal Trespass 1st Degree        | 9A.52.070/9.90.900 | Gross Misd      |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Criminal Trespass 2nd Degree        | 9A.52.080/9.90.900 | Misd            |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Dangerous Dog Violation             | 6.10.050           | Misd            |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Dangerous Weapons                   | 9.41.250/9.34.900  | Gross Misd      |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Disorderly Conduct                  | 9A.84.030/9.78.010 | Misd            |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Displaying a Weapon                 | 9.41.270/9.34.900  | Misd            |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| DWLS/R 1st Degree                   | 46.20.342/MTO      | Gross Misd      |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| DWLS/R 2nd Degree                   | 46.20.342/MTO      | Gross Misd      |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| DWLS/R 3rd Degree                   | 46.20.342/MTO      | Misd            |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| DUI                                 | 46.61.502/MTO      | Gross Misd      |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Escape in 3rd Degree                | 9A.76.130/9.70.900 | Gross Misd      |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| False Reporting                     | 9A.84.040/9.78.900 | Gross Misd      |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Furnishing Liquor to Minors         | 66.44.270/9.46.900 | Misd/Gross Misd |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Harassment                          | 9.42.020           | Gross Misd      |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Hit and Run Attended/Property       | 46.52.020/MTO      | Gross Misd      |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Hit and Run Unattended              | 46.52.010/MTO      | Misd            |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Indecent Exposure                   | 9.82.010           | Misd/Gross Misd |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Inhaling Toxic Fumes                | 9.47A.020/9.22.900 | Misd            |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Leaving Child Unattended in Vehicle | 9.91.060/9.62.900  | Gross Misd      |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Malicious Mischief 3rd Degree       | 9A.48.090/9.48.900 | Misd/Gross Misd |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Minors Frequenting Taverns          | 66.44.310/9.46.900 | Misd            |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Minor in Possession/Consumption     | 66.44.270/9.46.900 | Misd/Gross Misd |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Minor Purchasing Liquor             | 66.44.290/9.46.900 | Misd/Gross Misd |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Negligent Driving – 1st Degree      | 46.61.525/MTO      | Misd            |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Obstructing a Law Enforcement       | 9A.76.020/9.70.900 | Gross Misd      |
| Officer                             |                    |                 |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Official Misconduct                 | 9A.80.010/9.70.900 | Gross Misd      |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Opening or Consuming Liquor in      | 66.44.100/9.46.900 | Misd            |
| Public                              |                    |                 |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Patronizing a Prostitute            | 9A.88.110/9.82.900 | Misd            |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Permitting Prostitution             | 9A.88.090/9.82.900 | Misd            |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Physical Control                    | 46.61.504/MTO      | Gross Misd      |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Possession of Dangerous Weapon      | 9.41.250/9.34.900  | Gross Misd      |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Possession of Stolen Property       | 9A.56.170/9.86.900 | Gross Misd      |
| 3rd Degree                          |                    |                 |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Possession of Marijuana             | 9.22.010           | Misd            |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Prostitution                        | 9A.88.030/9.82.900 | Misd            |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Reckless Driving                    | 46.61.500/MTO      | Gross Misd      |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Reckless Endangerment 2nd Degree    | 9A.36.050/9.14.900 | Gross Misd      |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Refusal to Give Information         | 46.61.020/MTO      | Misd            |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Resisting Arrest                    | 9A.76.040/9.70.900 | Misd            |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Sales of Liquor to Minors           | 66.44.320/9.46.900 | Misd/Gross Misd |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Stalking                            | 9.42.030           | Gross Misd      |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Theft in 3rd Degree                 | 9A.56.050/9.86.900 | Gross Misd      |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Vehicle Prowling 2nd Degree         | 9A.52.100/9.90.900 | Gross Misd      |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Violation of Order Restricting      | 9A.46.080/9.42.900 | Gross Misd      |
| Contact                             |                    |                 |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
| Violation of Protection Order       | 26.50.110/9.26.900 | Gross Misd      |
+-------------------------------------+--------------------+-----------------+
[Ord. 218 § 1, 1999.]

Chapter 3.64 TAX INCENTIVE URBAN USE CENTER DEVELOPMENT

Sections:
3.64.010     Definitions.
3.64.020     Residential target area designation and standards.
3.64.030     Tax exemptions for multifamily housing in residential target areas.

3.64.010 Definitions.
“Administrator” means the City Manager or authorized designee.
“Affordable housing” means residential housing that is rented by a person or household whose housing costs, including utilities other than telephone, do not exceed 30 percent of the household’s monthly income. For the purposes of housing intended for owner occupancy, “affordable housing” means residential housing that is within the means of low- or moderate-income households.
“High-cost area” means a county where the third quarter median house price for the previous year, as reported by the Washington Center for Real Estate Research at Washington State University, is equal to or greater than 130 percent of the statewide median house price published during the same time period.
“Low-income household” means a single person, family or unrelated persons living together whose adjusted income is at or below 80 percent of the median family income adjusted for family size, for the county where the project is located, as reported by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. For cities located in high-cost areas, “low-income household” means a household that has an income at or below 100 percent of the median family income adjusted for family size, for the county where the project is located.
“Moderate-income household” means a single person, family, or unrelated persons living together whose adjusted income is more than 80 percent but is at or below 115 percent of the median family income adjusted for family size, for the county where the project is located, as reported by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. For cities located in high-cost areas, “moderate-income household” means a household that has an income that is more than 100 percent, but at or below 150 percent of the median family income adjusted for family size, for the county where the project is located.
“Multifamily housing” means a building having four or more dwelling units designed for permanent residential occupancy resulting from new construction, rehabilitation or conversion of vacant, underutilized or substandard buildings. Multifamily housing units as designated herein shall not be designed or used for transient accommodations and do not include hotels and motels.
“Owner” means the property owner of record.
“Permanent residential occupancy” means multifamily housing that provides either rental or owner occupancy for a period of at least one month. This excludes hotels and motels that predominately offer rental accommodation on a daily or weekly basis.
“Rehabilitation improvements” means modifications to existing structures that are vacant for 12 months or longer, or modifications to existing occupied structures which convert nonresidential space to residential space and/or increase the number of multifamily housing units.
“Residential target area” means an area within the tax incentive urban use center that has been designated by the City Council as lacking sufficient, available, desirable and convenient residential housing to meet the needs of the public.
“Tax incentive urban use center” means a compact, identifiable district where urban residents may obtain a variety of products and services. A tax incentive urban use center must contain:
    1. Several existing or previously existing, or a combination of existing and previously existing, business establishments that may include but are not limited to shops, offices, banks, restaurants, governmental agencies;
    2. Adequate public facilities, including streets, sidewalks, lighting, transit, domestic water, and sanitary sewer systems; and
    3. A mixture of uses and activities that may include housing, recreation, and cultural activities in association with either commercial and/or office use. [Ord. 452 § 1, 2007; Ord. 286 § 1, 2002.]

3.64.020 Residential target area designation and standards.
A. Designation. The boundaries of the tax incentive urban use centers shall be by ordinance. The map depicting these boundaries shall be on file in the City Clerk’s office.
B. Public Hearing. For the purposes of designating a residential target area or areas, the City Council must adopt a resolution of intention to so designate an area or areas described in the resolution. The resolution must state the time and place of a hearing to be held by the City Council to consider the designation of any such area and may include such other information pertaining to the designation as the City Council determines to be appropriate to apprise the public of the action intended. Notice of such a hearing shall be made by publication once each week for two consecutive weeks, not less than seven days nor more than 30 days before the date of the hearing in a paper having general circulation in the City where the proposed residential target area is located. The notice must state the time, date, place and purpose of the hearing and generally identify the area proposed to be designated as a residential target area.
C. Criteria. Following the public hearing, the City Council may, in its sole discretion, designate one or more residential target areas. Each designated residential target area must meet the following criteria, as determined by the City Council:
    1. The target area is located within a designated tax incentive urban use center;
    2. The target area lacks sufficient available, desirable, and convenient residential housing, including affordable housing, to meet the needs of the public who would likely live in the urban use center if desirable, attractive and livable places were available; and
    3. The providing of additional housing opportunity, including affordable housing, in the target area will assist in achieving at least one the following purposes:
        a. Encourage increased residential opportunities within the target area; or
        b. Stimulate the construction of new multifamily housing and the rehabilitation of existing vacant and underutilized buildings for multifamily housing.
    4. In designating a residential target area, the City Council may consider other factors, including, but not limited to: whether additional housing in the target area will attract and maintain a significant increase in the number of permanent residents; whether an increased residential population will help alleviate detrimental conditions and social liability in the target area; and whether an increased residential population in the residential target area will help to achieve the planning goals mandated by the Growth Management Act under RCW 36.70A.020. The City Council may, by ordinance, amend or rescind the designation of a residential target area at any time pursuant to the same procedure as set forth in this chapter for designation of such areas.
D. Residential Target Area Standards and Guidelines. For each designated residential target area the City Council must adopt and implement standards and guidelines to be utilized in considering applications and making the determinations required under RCW 84.14.060, basic requirements for both new construction and rehabilitation, including the application process and procedures. The City Council must also adopt guidelines including the following:
    1. Requirements that address demolition of existing structures and site utilization; and
    2. Building requirements that may include elements addressing parking, height, density, environmental impact, public benefit features, compatibility with the surrounding property, and such other amenities as will attract and keep permanent residents and will properly enhance the livability of the residential target area. The required amenities shall be relative to the size of the proposed project and the tax benefit to be obtained.
E. Designated Residential Target Areas. The proposed boundaries of the residential target areas must be within the boundaries of a tax incentive urban use center. A map and accompanying legal descriptions shall be on file in the City Clerk’s office; provided, that the residential target areas shall also include the urban use center(s) designated as noted above and as may hereafter be amended. [Ord. 588 § 1, 2014; Ord. 588 § 1, 2014; Ord. 452 § 1, 2007; Ord. 383 § 1, 2005; Ord. 286 § 1, 2002.]

3.64.030 Tax exemptions for multifamily housing in residential target areas.
A. Intent. Limited eight- or 12-year exemptions from ad valorem property taxation for multifamily housing in tax incentive urban use center(s) are intended to:
    1. Encourage increased residential opportunities within mixed-use centers designated by the City Council as residential target areas;
    2. Stimulate new construction or rehabilitation of existing vacant and underutilized buildings for multifamily housing in residential target areas to increase and improve housing opportunities;
    3. Assist in directing future population growth to designated tax incentive urban use centers, thereby reducing development pressure on single-family residential neighborhoods;
    4. Achieve development densities which are more conducive to transit use in designated tax incentive urban use centers; and
    5. Encourage development of additional and desirable affordable housing units.
B. Duration of Exemption. The value of improvements qualifying under this chapter will be exempt from ad valorem property taxation for eight or 12 successive years beginning January 1st of the year immediately following the calendar year after issuance of the final certificate of tax exemption.
    1. For properties which applications for certificates of tax exemption eligibility are submitted under this section, the value is exempt for eight successive years beginning January 1st of the year immediately following the calendar year of issuance of the certificate.
    2. For 12 successive years beginning January 1st of the year immediately following the calendar year of issuance of the certificate if the property otherwise qualifies for the exemption under Chapter 84.14 RCW and meets the conditions in this subsection, the applicant must commit to renting or selling at least 20 percent of the multifamily housing units as affordable housing units to low- and moderate-income households and the property must satisfy that commitment and any additional affordability and income eligibility conditions adopted by the local government under this chapter. In the case of projects intended exclusively for owner occupancy, the minimum requirement of this subsection (B)(2) may be satisfied solely through housing affordable to moderate-income households.
C. Limits on Exemption. The exemption does not apply to the value of land or to the value of improvements not qualifying under this chapter, nor does the exemption apply to increases in assessed valuation of land and nonqualifying improvements. In the case of rehabilitation of existing buildings, the exemption does not include the value of improvements constructed prior to submission of the completed application required under this chapter.
D. Project Eligibility. A proposed project must meet the following requirements for consideration for a property tax exemption:
    1. Location. The project must be located within a residential target area, as designated in LMC 3.64.020.
    2. Size. The project must include at least four units of multifamily housing within a residential structure or as part of a mixed-use development. A minimum of four new units must be constructed or at least four additional multifamily units must be added to existing occupied multifamily housing. Existing multifamily housing that has been vacant for 12 months or more does not have to provide additional units so long as the project provides at least four units of new, converted, or rehabilitated multifamily housing.
    3. Permanent Residential Housing. At least 50 percent of the space designated for multifamily housing must be provided for permanent residential occupancy, as defined in LMC 3.64.010.
    4. Proposed Completion Date. New construction multifamily housing and rehabilitation improvements must be scheduled to be completed within three years from the date of approval of the application.
    5. Compliance with Guidelines and Standards. The project must be designed to comply with the City’s comprehensive plan, building, housing, and zoning codes, and any other applicable regulations in effect at the time the application is approved. Rehabilitation and conversion improvements must comply with the City’s minimum housing code. New construction must comply with the International Building Code. The project must also comply with any other standards and guidelines adopted by the City Council for the residential target area in which the project will be developed.
E. Application Procedure. A property owner who wishes to propose a project for a tax exemption shall complete the following procedures:
    1. File with the City of Lakewood, as directed in the procedures for participation in the City’s tax incentive urban use center development program, the required application along with the required fees. The initial application fee shall be set by the master fee schedule. An additional fee to cover the Pierce County Assessor’s administrative costs shall be paid to the City. The application fee is nonrefundable.
    2. In addition to any other requirements set forth by Chapter 84.14 RCW, a complete application shall include:
        a. A completed City of Lakewood application form setting forth the grounds for the exemption;
        b. Preliminary floor and site plans of the proposed project;
        c. A statement acknowledging the potential tax liability when the project ceases to be eligible under this chapter;
        d. Verification by oath or affirmation of the information submitted; and
        e. If applicable, a statement that the project meets the affordable housing requirements as described in RCW 84.14.020.
F. Application Review and Issuance of Conditional Certificate. The Administrator may certify as eligible an application which is determined to comply with the requirements of this chapter. A decision to approve or deny an application shall be made within 90 days of receipt of a complete application.
    1. Approval. If an application is approved, the applicant shall enter into a contract with the City, subject to approval by resolution of the City Council, regarding the terms and conditions of the project. Upon City Council approval of the contract, the Administrator shall issue a conditional certificate of acceptance of tax exemption. The conditional certificate expires three years from the date of approval unless an extension is granted as provided in this chapter.
    2. Denial. The Administrator shall state in writing the reasons for denial and shall send notice to the applicant at the applicant’s last known address within 10 days of the denial. An applicant may appeal a denial to the City Council within 14 days of receipt of notice. On appeal to the City Council, the Administrator’s decision will be upheld unless the applicant can show that there is no substantial evidence on the record to support the Administrator’s decision. The City Council’s decision on appeal will be final.
G. Extension of Conditional Certificate. The conditional certificate may be extended by the Administrator for a period not to exceed 24 consecutive months. The applicant must submit a written request stating the grounds for the extension, accompanied by a processing fee as specified in the master fee schedule. An extension may be granted if the Administrator determines that:
    1. The anticipated failure to complete construction or rehabilitation within the required time period is due to circumstances beyond the control of the owner;
    2. The owner has been acting and could reasonably be expected to continue to act in good faith and with due diligence; and
    3. All the conditions of the original contract between the applicant and the City will be satisfied upon completion of the project.
H. Application for Final Certificate. Upon completion of the improvements agreed upon in the contract between the applicant and the City and upon issuance of a temporary or permanent certificate of occupancy, the applicant may request a final certificate of tax exemption. The applicant must file with the City Manager or authorized designee the following:
    1. A statement of expenditures made with respect to each multifamily housing unit and the total expenditures made with respect to the entire property;
    2. A description of the completed work and a statement of qualification for the exemption; and
    3. A statement that the work was completed within the required three-year period or any authorized extension.
    Within 30 days of receipt of all materials required for a final certificate, the Administrator shall determine which specific improvements satisfy the requirements of this chapter including, if applicable, the affordability of the units.
I. Issuance of Final Certificate. If the Administrator determines that the project has been completed in accordance with the contract between the applicant and the City and has been completed within the authorized time period, the City shall, within 10 days, file a final certificate of tax exemption with the Pierce County Assessor.
    1. Denial and Appeal. The Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing that a final certificate will not be filed if the Administrator determines that:
        a. The improvements were not completed within the authorized time period;
        b. The improvements were not completed in accordance with the contract between the applicant and the City;
        c. The owner’s property is otherwise not qualified under this chapter; or
        d. If applicable, the affordable housing requirements as described in RCW 84.14.020 were not met.
    2. Within 10 days of receipt of the Administrator’s denial of a final certificate, the applicant may file an appeal with the City’s Hearing Examiner, as provided in Chapter 1.36 LMC. The applicant may appeal the Hearing Examiner’s decision in Pierce County Superior Court under RCW 34.05.510 through 34.05.598, if the appeal is filed within 30 days of notification by the City to the owner of the decision being challenged.
J. Annual Compliance Review. Within 30 days after the first anniversary of the date of filing the final certificate of tax exemption and each year thereafter, for the tax exemption period, the property owner shall file a notarized declaration with the City Manager or designated agent indicating the following:
    1. A statement of occupancy and vacancy of the multifamily units during the previous year;
    2. A certification by the owner that the property has been in compliance with the affordable housing requirements as described in RCW 84.14.020 since the date of the certificate approved by the City and that the property continues to be in compliance with the contract with the City; and
    3. A description of any subsequent improvements or changes to the property.
    City staff shall also conduct on-site verification of the declaration. Failure to submit the annual declaration may result in the tax exemption being canceled.
K. Cancellation of Tax Exemption. If the Administrator determines the owner is not complying with the terms of the contract, the tax exemption will be canceled. This cancellation may occur in conjunction with the annual review or at any other time when noncompliance has been determined. If the owner intends to convert the multifamily housing to another use, the owner must notify the Administrator and the Pierce County Assessor within 60 days of the change in use.
    1. Effect of Cancellation. If a tax exemption is canceled due to a change in use or other noncompliance, the Pierce County Assessor may impose an additional tax on the property, together with interest and penalty, and a priority lien may be placed on the land, pursuant to state legislative provisions.
    2. Notice and Appeal. Upon determining that a tax exemption is to be canceled, the Administrator shall notify the property owner by certified mail. The property owner may appeal the determination by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 30 days, specifying the factual and legal basis for the appeal. The Hearing Examiner will conduct a hearing at which all affected parties may be heard and all competent evidence received. The Hearing Examiner will affirm, modify or repeal the decision to cancel the exemption based on the evidence received. An aggrieved party may appeal the Hearing Examiner’s decision to the Pierce County Superior Court, in accordance with RCW 34.05.510 through 34.05.598.
L. Annual Report by City. The City shall report annually by December 31st of each year to the Department of Community, Trade and Economic Development. The report must include the following information:
    1. The number of tax exemption certificates granted;
    2. The total number and type of units produced or to be produced;
    3. The number and type of units produced or to be produced meeting affordable housing requirements;
    4. The actual development cost of each unit produced;
    5. The total monthly rent or total sale amount of each unit produced;
    6. The income of each renter household at the time of initial occupancy and the income of each initial purchaser of owner-occupied units at the time of purchase for each of the units receiving a tax exemption and a summary of these figures for the City; and
    7. The value of the tax exemption for each project receiving a tax exemption and the total value of tax exemptions granted. [Ord. 632 § 1, 2016; Ord. 452 § 1, 2007; Ord. 383 § 2, 2005; Ord. 286 § 1, 2002.]

Chapter 3.70 EMERGENCY RESPONSE COSTS

Sections:
3.70.010     Definitions.
3.70.020     Emergency response caused by person’s intoxication – Recovery of costs from convicted person.
3.70.030     Collection – Use.

3.70.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
“Emergency” means an incident that requires a normal police, coroner, fire, rescue emergency medical services, or utility response as a result of a violation of one of the statutes enumerated in LMC 3.70.020.
“Emergency response” means a public agency’s use of emergency services during any emergency or disaster as defined in this section.
“Expense of an emergency response” means reasonable costs incurred by a public agency in reasonably making an appropriate emergency response to the incident, but shall only include those costs directly arising from the response to the particular incident. “Reasonable costs” shall include the costs of providing normal police, coroner, firefighting, rescue, emergency medical services, or utility response at the scene of the incident, as well as the portion of personnel salaries related to responding to the incident.
“Public agency” means the state, and a city, county, municipal corporation, district, town, or public authority located, in whole or in part, within this state which provides or may provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services. [Ord. 449 § 1, 2007.]

3.70.020 Emergency response caused by person’s intoxication – Recovery of costs from convicted person.
A. A person whose intoxication causes an incident resulting in an appropriate emergency response, and who, in connection with the incident, has been found guilty of or has had their prosecution deferred for (1) driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any drug, RCW 46.61.502; (2) operating an aircraft under the influence of intoxicants or drugs, RCW 47.68.220; (3) use of a vessel while under the influence of alcohol or drugs, RCW 88.12.025; (4) vehicular homicide while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any drug, RCW 46.61.520(1)(a); or (5) vehicular assault while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any drug, RCW 46.61.522(1)(b), is liable for the expense of an emergency response by a public agency to the incident.
B. The expense of an emergency response is a charge against the person liable for expenses under this section. The charge constitutes a debt of that person and is collectible by the public agency incurring those costs in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, expressed or implied.
C. In no event shall a person’s liability under this section for the expense of an emergency response exceed $1,000 per incident. If more than one public agency makes a claim for payment from an individual for an emergency response to a single incident under the provisions of this section, and the sum of the claims exceeds the amount recovered, the division of the amount recovered shall be determined by an interlocal agreement consistent with the requirements of Chapter 39.34 RCW. [Ord. 573 § 1, 2013; Ord. 449 § 1, 2007.]

3.70.030 Collection – Use.
A. The public agency may submit a notice of liability for the expense of an emergency response. The notice shall set forth the name of the responsible person, the date of the emergency response, the date of conviction or deferred prosecution, and the amount owing to the City. The total emergency response cost may be ordered by the court as restitution. Where the total emergency response cost has not been ordered by the court, the public agency may collect the expense of the emergency response in the same manner as a contract by sending notice to the person responsible via certified mail with a return receipt. Notice, sent to the last known address, shall be deemed delivered three days after mailing. Any fees not collected within 60 days of the court order or within 60 days of the date of issuance of the notice of liability will be referred to a collection agency. The cost of collection shall be added to the bill.
The amounts collected will be primarily devoted to enhancing DUI enforcement emphases. The City Manager or his designee may expend up to 15 percent of collections per year for other traffic safety requirements. The City Manager may by exception request approval from Council to expend an additional 15 percent of collections per year for any unanticipated public safety issues. Costs and effectiveness of the program will be presented to the Council by staff within year end reports. [Ord. 449 § 1, 2007.]

Title 4 RESERVED

Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS

Chapters:
5.02         Business License Required for All Businesses
5.12         Pawnshops, Secondhand, Antique, Junk and/or Salvage Dealers, Transient Traders in Secondhand Property, Private Sales and Flea Markets
5.16         Adult Cabarets
5.20         Panorams, Previews, Picture Arcades and Peep Shows
5.32         Public Dances, Cabarets, Dance Halls and Teenager Dances
5.35         Massage Businesses
5.56         Solicitors and Peddlers
5.60         Rental Housing Licensing
Prior legislation: Ords. 300 §1 and 644 §1.

Chapter 5.02 BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED FOR ALL BUSINESSES

Sections:
5.02.010     Definitions.
5.02.015     Applicability.
5.02.020     Business license required.
5.02.021     Purpose.
5.02.025     Interpretation of title.
5.02.030     Separate licenses required.
5.02.040     Change in business – License nontransferable.
5.02.050     Exemptions and waivers.
5.02.055     Not-for-profit businesses and organizations.
5.02.060     Application for license.
5.02.070     Fee.
5.02.080     General qualifications of licenses.
5.02.090     Investigations and inspection.
5.02.100     Term of license – General and temporary.
5.02.110     Posting of license.
5.02.130     Late application fee.
5.02.135     Temporary business reports.
5.02.150     Additional rules and regulations.
5.02.160     Inspections – Right of entry.
5.02.171     Stay of suspension or revocation – Summary suspension.
5.02.180     Notice and order.
5.02.190     Appeal from denial or from notice or order.
5.02.210     Continuation of license upon death of licensee.
5.02.220     Assignment of licenses.
5.02.230     Reasonable costs.
5.02.240     Engaging in business without payment of fee.
5.02.250     Violations – Penalty – Remedies.
5.02.260     Separate offenses.

5.02.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this title, the following definitions shall apply:
“Carnival” as used in this section shall mean any entertainment which includes side shows, games, amusement devices, riding devices, and/or refreshments.
“Circus” as used in this section shall mean any entertainment which includes wild animals, acrobats, and/or clowns.
“Conviction” means an adjudication or conviction of guilt and occurs at such time as a plea of guilty has been accepted or a verdict of guilty has been filed, notwithstanding the pendency of any future proceeding including but not limited to sentencing or disposition, post-trial or post-fact finding motions and appeals and also means a bail forfeiture and includes all instances in which a plea of nolo contendere is the basis for the conviction and all proceedings in which the sentence has been deferred or suspended.
“Engaging in business” or “engage in business” means commencing, conducting, or continuing in business, and also the exercise of corporate or franchise powers, as well as liquidating a business when the liquidators thereof hold themselves out to the public as conducting such business.
    1. This section sets forth examples of activities that constitute engaging in business in the City, and establishes safe harbors for certain of those activities so that a person who meets the criteria may engage in de minimis business activities in the City without having to pay a business license fee. The activities listed in this section are illustrative only and are not intended to narrow the definition of “engaging in business” provided in this chapter. If an activity is not listed, whether it constitutes engaging in business in the City shall be determined by considering all the facts and circumstances and applicable law.
    2. Without being all-inclusive, any one of the following activities conducted within the City by a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker or another acting on its behalf, constitutes engaging in business and requires a person to register and obtain a business license:
        a. Owning, renting, leasing, maintaining, or having the right to use, or using, tangible personal property, intangible personal property, or real property permanently or temporarily located in the City.
        b. Owning, renting, leasing, using, or maintaining an office, place of business, or other establishment in the City.
        c. Soliciting sales.
        d. Making repairs or providing maintenance or service to real or tangible personal property, including warranty work and property maintenance.
        e. Providing technical assistance or service, including quality control, product inspections, warranty work, or similar services on or in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf.
        f. Installing, constructing, or supervising installation or construction of, real or tangible personal property.
        g. Soliciting, negotiating, or approving franchise, license, or other similar agreements.
        h. Collecting current or delinquent accounts.
        i. Picking up and transporting tangible personal property, solid waste, construction debris, or excavated materials.
        j. Providing disinfecting and pest control services, employment and labor pool services, home nursing care, janitorial services, appraising, landscape architectural services, security system services, surveying, and real estate services including the listing of homes and managing real property.
        k. Rendering professional services such as those provided by accountants, architects, attorneys, auctioneers, consultants, engineers, professional athletes, barbers, baseball clubs and other sports organizations, chemists, consultants, psychologists, court reporters, dentists, doctors, detectives, laboratory operators, teachers, veterinarians.
        l. Meeting with customers or potential customers, even when no sales or orders are solicited at the meetings.
        m. Training or recruiting agents, representatives, independent contractors, brokers or others, domiciled or operating on a job in the City, acting on its behalf, or for customers or potential customers.
        n. Investigating, resolving, or otherwise assisting in resolving customer complaints.
        o. In-store stocking or manipulating products or goods, sold to and owned by a customer, regardless of where sale and delivery of the goods took place.
        p. Delivering goods in vehicles owned, rented, leased, used, or maintained by the person or another acting on its behalf.
    3. If a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker or another acting on the person’s behalf, engages in no other activities in or with the City but the following, it need not register and obtain a business license:
        a. Meeting with suppliers of goods and services as a customer.
        b. Meeting with government representatives in their official capacity, other than those performing contracting or purchasing functions.
        c. Attending meetings, such as board meetings, retreats, seminars, and conferences, or other meetings wherein the person does not provide training in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf. This provision does not apply to any board of director member or attendee engaging in business such as a member of a board of directors who attends a board meeting.
        d. Renting tangible or intangible property as a customer when the property is not used in the City.
        e. Attending, but not participating in, a “trade show” or “multiple vendor events.” Persons participating at a trade show shall review the City’s trade show or multiple vendor event ordinances.
        f. Conducting advertising through the mail.
        g. Soliciting sales by phone from a location outside the City.
    4. A seller located outside the City merely delivering goods into the City by means of common carrier is not required to register and obtain a business license; provided, that it engages in no other business activities in the City. Such activities do not include those in subsection (3) of this definition.
    5. The City expressly intends that engaging in business include any activity sufficient to establish nexus for purposes of applying the license fee under the law and the Constitutions of the United States and the state of Washington. Nexus is presumed to continue as long as the taxpayer benefits from the activity that constituted the original nexus generating contact or subsequent contacts.
“Flea market” means and includes, but is not limited to, arrangements whereby a person or persons sell, lease, rent, offer or donate to one or more persons a place or area where such persons may offer or display new, secondhand or junk items. “Flea market” includes, but is not limited to, bazaars, rummage sales and swap meets.
“Person” means any individual, corporation, company, firm, joint stock company, partnership, limited liability entity, joint venture, trust, business trust, club, association, society, or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit, or otherwise, receiver, administrator, executor, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, or any other group or entity formed for the purpose of engaging in business.
“Public bathhouse” means any place where baths or facilities for baths of any kind whatever are given or furnished, including without limitation Finnish baths; Russian baths; sauna baths; Swedish baths; Turkish baths; hot tubs; baths by hot air, steam, vapor, water or electric cabinet or a combination of any of the foregoing; provided, that such term shall not include ordinary tub or shower baths, or any of the above-named baths where an attendant is not required.
“Temporary business” means all business of a short term or transitory nature, including but not limited to the following:
    1. Any business which occupies a site or operates within the City for no more than seven days per occurrence twice within any 365-day period.
    2. Roving mobile vendors involved in business such as door-to-door sales, sales from ice-cream trucks, or other businesses that do not have a fixed location;
    3. Operating a carnival or circus within the City. [Ord. 694 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 679 § 1, 2018; Ord. 610 § 2, 2015; Ord. 568 § 1, 2013; Ord. 548 § 1, 2012; Ord. 24 § 1, 1995.]

5.02.015 Applicability.
The provisions of this title shall apply to each and every business in the City as well as individuals conducting business in the City, whether stationary or mobile, ongoing or sporadic, permanent or temporary in nature. The requirements of this title are in addition to any licensing requirements imposed by other jurisdictions. [Ord. 610 § 3, 2015.]

5.02.020 Business license required.
It is unlawful for any person to conduct, operate, engage in, or practice any business in the City that is conducted operated, engaged in, or practiced in whole or in part from real property located within the City, without first obtaining the appropriate general or temporary business license along with any applicable additional license required by this title or other applicable local, state or federal law. [Ord. 610 § 4, 2015; Ord. 548 § 1, 2012; Ord. 24 § 2, 1995.]

5.02.021 Purpose.
The purpose of this title is to:
A. Maintain the aesthetic attractiveness of the City;
B. Promote public safety and orderly movement of pedestrians and traffic within the City;
C. Protect the City’s business community by eliminating the inequity faced by stationary and permanent businesses that compete with itinerant and temporary businesses who may be operating without city business licenses and outside the regulatory authority of the City, which unfair competition threatens to erode city tax revenues and undermine the strength of its commercial life;
D. Reduce the potential for urban blight by encouraging development of permanent structures from which businesses can operate in the City;
E. Establish better record-keeping and data collection practices which can assist police in improving safety and reducing crime throughout the City; and
F. Promote compliance with relevant building, fire, health and safety codes by those who wish to conduct business in the City of Lakewood. [Ord. 610 § 5, 2015.]

5.02.025 Interpretation of title.
This title shall be interpreted liberally in order to accomplish the overall purpose of the title and work in concert with other sections of the code including the use of the nuisance and abatement processes where applicable. Where this title and other code sections are in conflict this title shall prevail. Provisions of this title are subject to local, state and federal regulations. [Ord. 610 § 6, 2015.]

5.02.030 Separate licenses required.
A separate business license shall be obtained for each separate location, within the City, at which the business is conducted. A separate business license shall be obtained for each different and discrete business conducted by any person, whether at the same location, within the City, as another licensed business, or at a different location within the City. [Ord. 24 § 3, 1995.]

5.02.040 Change in business – License nontransferable.
A. Each business license shall authorize a particular business at the designated location. Any change in the ownership or nature of the business shall require a new business license application and license fee.
B. Changes in name or location shall be reported to the City, in writing, no less than 10 days before such change. If in compliance with all applicable codes and regulations, the City shall amend the existing business license to the new name or location.
C. No license issued under this title shall be transferable from one person or entity to another person or entity. Sale or transfer of an interest greater than 50 percent in any business requiring a license under this title renders the existing license null and void. A new application shall be made by the new owner who shall comply with requests for information required to process the new application. Such request may include a release of interest statement from the previous licensee and a signed rental agreement for the establishment. [Ord. 610 § 7, 2015; Ord. 548 § 1, 2012; Ord. 24 § 4, 1995.]

5.02.050 Exemptions and waivers.
A. Notwithstanding the requirement of LMC 5.02.020, the following shall be exempt from the requirement to apply for and obtain a business license. Permits, however, may be required if otherwise required by law.
    1. Sales, delivery, or peddling of any fruits, vegetables, berries, eggs, or any farm produce or edibles by the farmer, gardener, or other person who raised, gathered, produced, or manufactured them; provided, that this exemption shall not apply to any person selling, delivering, or peddling any dairy product, meat, poultry, eel, fish, mollusk, or shellfish.
    2. Any individual in possession of a valid direct retail endorsement, as established in RCW 77.65.510 as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, who sells, delivers, or peddles any legally harvested retail-eligible species, as that term is defined in RCW 77.08.010 as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, that is caught, harvested, or collected under rule of the Department of Fish and Wildlife by such a person at a temporary food service establishment, as that term is defined in RCW 69.06.045 as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time; provided, that such establishment shall not be exempt from inspection to verify that the person is in compliance with State Board of Health and local rules for food service operations.
    3. Small or part-time businesses, professions, or trades performed by minors wherein the annual gross income is less than $2,000 in the nature of babysitting, delivery of newspapers, or sales in the nature of a residential-based “lemonade stand,” or the like; provided, that the activity is not one for which a license would otherwise be required by subsections (1) through (3) of the definition of “temporary business” in LMC 5.02.010.
    4. Stands used to sell or distribute flowers, fruit, vegetables, produce or plants grown on the property where the stand is located.
    5. Vendors at City-sponsored events such as farmers markets, or similar functions. Such events can be organized and sponsored by nonprofit organizations or for-profit organizations and are open to all participants on an equal basis. City-sponsored events shall have the purpose of promoting or benefiting the City and its residents and/or sponsoring organizations.
    6. Residential sales such as garage or yard sales of a typical size and duration as well as want-ad, online marketplace or similar sales of an isolated and infrequent nature.
    7. Any person or business whose annual value of products, gross proceeds of sales, or gross income of the business in the City is equal to or less than $2,000 and who does not maintain a place of business within the City shall be exempt from the general business license requirements in this chapter. The exemption does not apply to regulatory license requirements or activities that require a specialized permit.
B. Any activity, business or function otherwise requiring a license under this title may receive a waiver of any such requirement where the City Manager determines that the activity, business or function otherwise subject to such license is civic rather than commercial in nature, as with civic, community or school events. [Ord. 694 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 610 § 8, 2015; Ord. 548 § 1, 2012; Ord. 300 § 2, 2003; Ord. 79 §1, 1996; Ord. 24 § 5, 1995.]

5.02.055 Not-for-profit businesses and organizations.
Organizations exempt from taxation under 26 U.S.C. Sections 501(C)(3) and (C)(4) must apply and obtain a business license, but shall be exempt from applicable business license fee. This shall not constitute an exemption from all other applicable taxes and fees. Such organizations must be able to show satisfactory proof of such status to the City. [Ord. 548 § 1, 2012.]

5.02.060 Application for license.
No business license shall be issued except upon application made on forms prescribed by the City. Each application shall be accompanied by the prescribed license fee. Upon approval of the application, the business license shall be issued by the City and be delivered to the applicant. In event of denial, the fee paid shall be returned to the applicant together with notice that the application has been denied. [Ord. 548 § 1, 2012; Ord. 24 § 1, 1995.]

5.02.070 Fee.
A. The fee for a license to engage in any business within the City shall be in accordance with the fee schedule in LMC 3.20.010.
B. Any late fees and penalties, as identified in LMC 5.02.130, and other fees, penalties, taxes, and other costs owing to the City, related to the business, shall be paid prior to issuance or renewal of any license. [Ord. 548 § 1, 2012; Ord. 288 § 1, 2002; Ord. 108 § 1, 1996; Ord. 24 § 7, 1995.]

5.02.080 General qualifications of licenses.
Any of the grounds below provide a basis for license denial, revocation or suspension; provided, that no business license issued pursuant to this code shall be denied, revoked, or suspended without cause.
A. Any application to conduct, in whole or in part, activity that is illegal under local, state or federal law.
B. Any applicant, licensee or employee of applicant or licensee who has been convicted of a crime relevant to the business within 10 years for a felony conviction, five years for a gross misdemeanor conviction and three years for a misdemeanor conviction.
C. Within the last five years, any applicant, licensee or employee of applicant or licensee who has suffered any of the following which is relevant to the business: a civil judgment, or any other judgment, cease and desist order, notice and order, consent decree, or administrative action, including prior licensing actions.
D. Any applicant, licensee or employee of applicant, licensee or employee of applicant or licensee who has failed to comply with any of the provisions of this code.
E. Any applicant, licensee or employee of applicant or licensee, if any reasonable grounds exist to believe that such person is dishonest in a manner that is relevant to the business, or that the license was procured by fraud or misrepresentation of fact, or desires to obtain a business license so as to practice some illegal act, some act injurious to the public health, safety or welfare or engaged in unlawful activity.
F. Any applicant, licensee or employee of applicant or licensee who has caused, maintained, permitted, allowed or is likely to cause, maintain, permit, or allow a public nuisance to exist. “Public nuisance,” in addition to its common meaning, includes but is not limited to a business generating a need for significant police and/or other government services.
G. Any applicant, licensee, or employee of applicant or licensee or their agents have or will engage in, maintain, permit, allow or fail to prevent unlawful activity on the business premises.
H. The applicant, licensee or employee of applicant or licensee failed to pay a civil penalty or to comply with any notice and order of the City.
I. If reasonable grounds exist to believe that any applicant, licensee or employee of applicant or licensee is likely to present an adverse impact to the public health, safety, or welfare for any other reason, including but not limited to conduct related to past operations of business.
J. Violation of any rules, regulations or conditions which have been set forth in a conditional license issued under LMC 5.02.150.
K. The failure to submit a complete license application or the failure to cooperate in an investigation under LMC 5.02.090. [Ord. 610 § 9, 2015; Ord. 568 § 2, 2013; Ord. 548 § 1, 2012; Ord. 24 § 8, 1995.]

5.02.090 Investigations and inspection.
Applications for licenses may be investigated by the City and other regulatory agencies, in conjunction with or on behalf of the City, to determine compliance with this code and other applicable regulations. [Ord. 548 § 1, 2012; Ord. 300 § 3, 2003; Ord. 24 § 9, 1995.]

5.02.100 Term of license – General and temporary.
A. Each annual business license shall expire one year from the date of issuance by the City, unless renewed. Upon renewal, each license shall be valid for an additional year from the date of expiration, unless suspended, revoked, closed, or invalidated by a change in business as defined in LMC 5.02.040. Any additional rules and regulations and conditional licenses imposed or stipulated to pursuant to LMC 5.02.150 shall remain in full force and effect notwithstanding any licensing renewals unless expressly terminated in writing by the City.
B. A temporary business license may specify dates for which a license is valid. In no event shall a license issued under this chapter be valid for more than four months after issuance.
If no dates are specified on the face of the temporary business license, a temporary business may operate within the City for no more than seven days after the date of issuance. Upon supplemental application, and payment of any fee, the City may authorize up to one seven-day extension. [Ord. 679 § 2, 2018; Ord. 610 § 10, 2015; Ord. 548 § 1, 2012; Ord. 24 § 10, 1995.]

5.02.110 Posting of license.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business at any location within the City without posting and displaying, prominently and in clear public view the valid business license authorizing such business at such location. [Ord. 300 § 4, 2003; Ord. 24 § 11, 1995.]

5.02.130 Late application fee.
Any applicant or licensee who fails to make application for a business license or renewal under this title within 30 days after expiration of their business license or of the commencement of business in the case of a new business, shall be subject to a late application fee, computed at 100 percent of the cost of the applicable license fee, which shall be added to the prescribed fee. This late penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty or consequence stemming from failure to obtain or maintain an appropriate license.
It is further provided that any annual license fees and late fees, as identified herein, shall be paid for any prior year(s) during which the business operated within the City and for which a business license was required by the City, as a prerequisite for the business to obtain a business license for a current or subsequent year. [Ord. 548 § 1, 2012; Ord. 245 § 2, 2000; Ord. 108 § 1, 1996; Ord. 87 § 2, 1996; Ord. 24 § 13, 1995.]

5.02.135 Temporary business reports.
A. Every owner of real property upon which temporary businesses licensed under this chapter perform business shall furnish weekly reports for the duration of use of the property as the location of any temporary business. Such reports shall be made to the City Manager or designee, on such forms as the City may require therefor, a record which shall include:
    1. The name, address, telephone number and stall number (or other descriptor of the physical location) of each entity performing such business; and
    2. Such other information as is deemed necessary by the City to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
B. Violation of this section shall constitute grounds for revocation of any licenses issued under this title. [Ord. 610 § 11, 2015.]

5.02.150 Additional rules and regulations.
The City is authorized to adopt and enforce rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this title, and any other business license or regulation ordinance, and it shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any of the said rules and regulations. Such additional rules and regulations may be issued in the form of a conditional license. All such rules and regulations promulgated by the City shall be reduced to writing. Any additional rules and regulations imposed or stipulated to pursuant to this section shall remain in full force and effect unless expressly terminated in writing. [Ord. 548 § 1, 2012; Ord. 24 § 15, 1995.]

5.02.160 Inspections – Right of entry.
The City is authorized to make such inspections of licensed premises and take such action as may be required to enforce the provisions of any business license ordinance. The City may designate any appropriate City employees, designated representatives, and other agencies to undertake such inspections. Inspections should, to the extent possible, be in compliance with the following procedure:
A. An inspector may enter any licensed business location, at any reasonable time, to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed on the City, by any business license or regulation ordinance.
B. If the place of business is occupied, the inspector must first present proper credentials prior to entry and inspection.
C. If the place of business is unoccupied, the inspector shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the licensee or other person having charge or control of the premises and shall then present proper credentials and demand entry and right to inspect.
D. No licensee, employee or agent, shall fail or neglect, after proper demand, to admit the inspector, acting within the scope of the inspector’s employment, to any location licensed for business, or to interfere with the inspector while in the performance of the inspector’s duty.
E. Nothing herein shall prevent or prohibit undercover investigations or inspections. [Ord. 548 § 1, 2012; Ord. 24 § 16, 1995.]

5.02.171 Stay of suspension or revocation – Summary suspension.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, enforcement of any suspension or revocation of any business license, or other order issued under this chapter shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to allow the stay of a license revocation in excess of the original term of the license.
B. Where conditions exist that are deemed hazardous to life or property, or where the licensee or his or her employee or agent has knowingly permitted unlawful conduct, the City is authorized to immediately stop such conditions, up to and including closing the business operation and summary suspension of the business license. Such order and demand may be oral or written.
C. At the time the licensee is notified of any summary suspension, the City Clerk shall also schedule a hearing to be held within three business days from the date of the notice of summary suspension and the licensee will be notified by mail, facsimile, email, personal service or hand delivery of the date, time and location of such hearing. Such notices shall state the time and place of the hearing. Such hearing shall be before the City Manager or designee.
D. The decision of the City Manager or designee shall be final. The licensee may, within 10 days from the date of the decision, appeal such suspension or revocation in accordance with LMC 5.02.190. Any summary suspension affirmed by the City Manager or designee shall remain valid and in effect pending the outcome of the appeal, unless stayed pending the outcome of the hearing by the City Manager or the designee who issued the decision or Hearing Examiner. [Ord. 610 § 12, 2015; Ord. 568 § 4, 2013.]

5.02.180 Notice and order.
A. The City may, in addition to seeking criminal or civil penalties allowed by this chapter, elect to issue a notice and order, directed to the licensee whom it has determined is in violation of any of the terms and provisions of any business license or regulation ordinance. The notice and order shall contain:
    1. The street address, when available, and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the violation occurred or is occurring.
    2. A statement that the City has found the business license application, the business, or the conduct of the applicant or licensee, or licensee’s or applicant’s agent(s), manager(s), and/or employee(s), to be in violation of any business license or regulations ordinance, or that the business constitutes a public nuisance, with a description of the facts or conditions upon which the action is based.
    3. A statement of any action required to be taken as determined by the City. If the City determines to suspend or revoke the license, the order shall require surrender of the licenses to the City within 10 days from the date of receipt of the notice and order.
    4. A statement advising that the licensee may appeal from the notice and order of the City, to the City Hearing Examiner, provided the appeal is made in writing as provided in this title and filed with the City Clerk, accompanied by the applicable appeal fee within 10 days from the date of receipt of the notice and order, and that failure to appeal shall constitute a waiver of all right to an administrative hearing and determination of the matter.
B. The notice and order, and any amended or supplemental notice and order, shall be served upon the licensee either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice and order to such licensee at the address which appears on the business license; or by posting upon the property of the business. [Ord. 548 § 1, 2012; Ord. 300 § 5, 2003; Ord. 24 § 18, 1995.]

5.02.190 Appeal from denial or from notice or order.
A. The City Hearing Examiner is designated to hear appeals by applicants or licensees aggrieved by actions of the City pertaining to any denial, or revocation of business licenses, or imposition of any conditions upon a licensee, pursuant to Chapter 1.36 LMC.
B. Any applicant or licensee may, within 10 days after receipt of a notice of denial of application or of a notice and order, file with the City Clerk a written notice of appeal.
C. As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the City Clerk shall fix a date, time, and place for the hearing of the appeal by the Hearing Examiner. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing by the City Clerk, by mailing a copy addressed to each appellant at his or her address shown on the notice of appeal.
D. At the hearing, the appellant or appellants shall be entitled to appear in person, and to be represented by counsel and to offer such evidence as may be pertinent and material to the denial or to the notice and order. The technical rules of evidence need not apply.
E. Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant or appellants in the written notice of appeal shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.
F. Within 10 business days following conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Examiner shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law, supported by the record, and a decision which may affirm, modify, or overrule the denial or order of the City, and may further impose terms and conditions to the issuance or continuation of a business license.
G. Failure of any applicant or licensee to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and adjudication of the denial or of the notice and order. [Ord. 610 § 13, 2015; Ord. 585 § 12, 2014; Ord. 568 § 3, 2013; Ord. 548 § 1, 2012; Ord. 300 § 6, 2003; Ord. 276 § 2, 2002; Ord. 108 § 1, 1996; Ord. 24 § 19, 1995.]

5.02.210 Continuation of license upon death of licensee.
In event of the death of any licensee, his or her duly appointed executor or administrator may continue to conduct business under the license issued to the decedent for the unexpired term thereof, upon filing proof of such appointment with the City. [Ord. 548 § 1, 2012; Ord. 300 § 7, 2003; Ord. 24 § 21, 1995.]

5.02.220 Assignment of licenses.
Every business license shall be personal to the licensee and shall not be assignable or transferable to any person, other than as provided by LMC 5.02.040. [Ord. 24 § 22, 1995.]

5.02.230 Reasonable costs.
In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided herein or by any other business license or regulation ordinance, the City shall be entitled to its costs and reasonable attorneys fees in any action to enforce the provisions of this chapter or any other business license or regulation ordinance. [Ord. 108 § 1, 1996; Ord. 24 § 23, 1995.]

5.02.240 Engaging in business without payment of fee.
If any person engaged in business fails or refuses to pay any license or renewal fee and/or penalty, and/or any other fee, penalty, tax or other costs owing to the City, such person shall not be granted a business license or renewal until all such fees, penalties, and/or costs have been paid in full. Upon any person’s or business’s failure to pay such fees or costs, such fees, penalties and costs may be collected by the City by legal action. Additionally, the license may be suspended or revoked and the person’s business may be ordered to cease and desist from all business activities until all such payments are made in full. This remedy is cumulative and not exclusive. [Ord. 548 § 1, 2012; Ord. 24 § 24, 1995.]

5.02.250 Violations – Penalty – Remedies.
A. Unless a different penalty is set forth, any violation of this title shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each day a violation of this title is allowed to exist shall constitute a separate violation.
B. In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this title or by law, any violation of this title is a civil infraction, pursuant to Chapter 7.80 RCW, punishable by a fine. For a first violation of an offense under this title, the fine shall be $500.00. For a second violation of an offense under this title, the fine shall be $1,000. For a third violation and subsequent violations of this title, the fine shall be $2,000. Each day a violation of this title is allowed to exist shall constitute a separate violation.
C. All violations of this title that are detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare are public nuisances. All conditions that are determined after review by the City to be in violation of this title are subject to abatement. [Ord. 610 § 14, 2015; Ord. 548 § 1, 2012; Ord. 108 § 1, 1996; Ord. 24 § 25, 1995.]

5.02.260 Separate offenses.
Each day that any person engages in any business without having a valid business license or is otherwise in violation of this title or any other business license or regulation ordinance shall constitute a separate offense and may be punished as such. [Ord. 108 § 1, 1996; Ord. 24 § 26, 1995.]

Chapter 5.12 PAWNSHOPS, SECONDHAND, ANTIQUE, JUNK AND/OR SALVAGE DEALERS, TRANSIENT TRADERS IN SECONDHAND PROPERTY, PRIVATE SALES AND FLEA MARKETS

Sections:
5.12.011     Scope of chapter.
5.12.013     Reporting requirements.
5.12.021     Chapter 19.60 RCW provisions adopted by reference.
5.12.023     Chapter 19.290 RCW provisions adopted by reference.
5.12.060     Limitation on number of pawnbrokers.
5.12.065     Limitation of preexisting pawnshop licenses.
5.12.075     Additional requirements for pawnshop licenses.
5.12.076     Requirements for employment as a pawnbroker in pawnshops.
5.12.120     Issuance of pawn tickets.
5.12.140     Prohibited transactions.
5.12.150     Termination of business.
5.12.160     Purchasing of property.
5.12.170     Altered serial numbers.
5.12.200     Disposal of goods.

5.12.011 Scope of chapter.
A. Every entity doing business within the City as a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or secondhand precious metal dealer, as those terms are defined by RCW 19.60.010, shall be subject to the regulations set forth in this chapter and shall be required to obtain a City of Lakewood business license, as set forth in Chapter 5.02 LMC.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall be supplemental to those requirements set forth in Chapter 19.60 RCW and Chapter 5.02 LMC. [Ord. 688 § 1, 2018; Ord. 610 § 16, 2015.]

5.12.013 Reporting requirements.
Every entity subject to this chapter shall be required to report as required by Chapters 19.60 and 19.290 RCW. [Ord. 688 § 1, 2018; Ord. 679 § 3, 2018; Ord. 610 § 17, 2015.]

5.12.021 Chapter 19.60 RCW provisions adopted by reference.
The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full, excepting that any references to the following sections where the text or context references “state,” or “state of Washington,” shall also be construed to reference the City of Lakewood:
19.60.010 Definitions.
19.60.014 Fixed place of business required.
19.60.020 Duty to record information.
19.60.025 Duty to record information – Precious metal property.
19.60.040 Report to chief law enforcement officer.
19.60.042 Report to chief law enforcement officer – Precious metal dealers.
19.60.045 Duties upon notification that property is reported stolen.
19.60.050 Retention of property by pawnbrokers – Inspection.
19.60.055 Retention of property by secondhand dealers – Inspection.
19.60.057 Retention of precious metal property – Inspection.
19.60.060 Rates of interest and other fees – Sale of pledged property.
19.60.061 Pawnbrokers – Sale of pledged property limited – Written document required for transactions.
19.60.066 Prohibited acts – Penalty.
19.60.067 Secondhand precious metal dealers – Prohibited acts – Penalty.
19.60.068 Resale agreement to avoid interest and fee restrictions prohibited.
19.60.085 Exemptions.
19.60.095 Precious metal sales – Hosted home parties. [Ord. 688 § 1, 2018; Ord. 610 § 21, 2015.]

5.12.023 Chapter 19.290 RCW provisions adopted by reference.
The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full, excepting that any references to the following sections where the text or context references “state,” or “state of Washington,” shall also be construed to reference the City of Lakewood:
19.290.010 Definitions.
19.290.020 Private metal property or nonferrous metal property – Records required.
19.290.030 Metal property and metallic wire – Requirements for transactions.
19.290.040 Scrap metal businesses – Record of commercial accounts.
19.290.050 Reports to law enforcement – Records exempt from public disclosure – Private civil liability.
19.290.060 Stolen metal property – Preserving evidence.
19.290.070 Violations – Penalty.
19.290.080 Civil penalties.
19.290.090 Exemptions from chapter.
19.290.240 Chapter to be liberally construed.
19.290.250 No-buy list database program – Scrap metal business to determine if customer is listed. [Ord. 688 § 1, 2018; Ord. 610 § 22, 2015.]

5.12.060 Limitation on number of pawnbrokers.
The current number of pawnshops (four) shall represent the maximum number of pawnshops able to be licensed by the City; provided, that any reduction in the number of licensed pawnshops shall reduce the maximum number of licensed pawnbrokers available in the City to the reduced number. [Ord. 688 § 1, 2018; Ord. 217 § 1, 1999; Ord. 151 § 1, 1998; Ord. 53 § 2, 1996.]

5.12.065 Limitation of preexisting pawnshop licenses.
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of LMC 5.12.060, the number of licensed pawnshops operating within the City who were operating within the City on February 28, 1996, shall be reduced on the occurrence of any one of the following conditions:
    1. A currently licensed pawnshop relocates outside the City;
    2. The pawnshop’s license is revoked pursuant to the provisions of this title;
    3. A licensed pawnshop purchases the pawnshop operations of another licensed pawnshop within the City and does not continue operation of the purchased pawnshop business in the same location; or
    4. A licensed pawnshop location is taken through condemnation, eminent domain, or other such proceedings by any governmental entity.
B. In the event of the destruction of the businesses of a licensed pawnshop operating within the City which was operating within the City on February 28, 1996, whether by fire, flood or other casualty, the licensed pawnshop operator shall have the ability to reconstruct his or her businesses at the same location or, if the existing location of the pawnshop is not zoned for pawnshop business uses, then to any other location in the City subject to compliance with all zoning and land use law or regulations in place at the time of the casualty. [Ord. 688 § 1, 2018; Ord. 217 § 1, 1999.]

5.12.075 Additional requirements for pawnshop licenses.
In order to be licensed and maintain a valid pawnshop license under this chapter, all pawnshops shall have a current valid federal firearms license, and all persons who own or possess an ownership interest of any nature whatsoever (owners) in any pawnshop(s) located within the City of Lakewood must satisfy the following criteria:
A. The owners must submit to the City on the pawnshop business license application form, in a form approved by the City, and shall supplement, amend and resubmit to the City any time the information thereon changes, the following information: each owner’s full name, residential address, telephone number, date and place of birth, race, gender, driver’s license number or state identification card number (with a photocopy of the driver’s license or state identification card), the extent and nature of the ownership interest, and signature.
B. The owners shall have had no criminal convictions or have been placed in any diversion programs, stipulations on continuances, deferred sentences and deferred prosecution or any similar judicial device during the period of the diversion, continuance, deferral or similar program within the previous seven years for any felonies and/or any crimes against moral turpitude, nor for any crimes involving firearms, illegal drugs, theft, possession of stolen property, pawnbroker statutes of the state of Washington or any other state, nor for any violations of the provisions of this chapter.
C. Each owner must meet the following additional criteria:
    1. He or she must meet all of the requirements and be eligible to possess a firearm and a concealed pistol permit under the provisions of Chapter 9.41 RCW, including RCW 9.41.070;
    2. He or she must not have a concealed pistol license in a revoked status;
    3. He or she must be eligible to possess a federal firearms license;
    4. He or she must possess a valid, current state firearms license.
D. The City is authorized and entitled to conduct, or have conducted for and on its behalf, investigations to substantiate and verify any of the above information. [Ord. 688 § 1, 2018; Ord. 217 § 1, 1999.]

5.12.076 Requirements for employment as a pawnbroker in pawnshops.
No person shall be employed to work in a pawnshop as a pawnbroker unless that person meets the following criteria:
A. The owner(s) of each pawnshop must submit to the City a list appended to pawnshop business license application form, in a form approved by the City, and shall supplement, amend and be resubmitted to the City any time the information thereon changes, the following information: each employee’s full name, residential address, telephone number, date and place of birth, race, gender, driver’s license number or state identification card number (with a photocopy of the driver’s license or state identification card).
B. The employee shall have had no criminal convictions or have been included in any diversion programs, stipulations on continuances, deferred sentences and deferred prosecution and any similar judicial device during the period of the diversion, continuance, deferral or similar program within the previous seven years for any crimes against moral turpitude, nor for any felonies and/or any crimes involving firearms, illegal drugs, theft, possession of stolen property, pawnbroker statutes of the state of Washington or any other state, nor for any violations of the provisions of this chapter.
C. Each employee shall also meet the following additional criteria:
    1. He or she must not be ineligible to possess a firearm under the provisions of Chapter 9.41 RCW, and he or she, if 21 years of age or older, shall have a current valid concealed weapons permit pursuant to RCW 9.41.070; including RCW 9.41.040 or 9.41.045;
    2. He or she must not be ineligible to possess a federal firearms license;
    3. He or she must not be ineligible to possess a state firearms license; provided, that with respect to the criteria set forth in subsections (C)(1), (C)(2) and (C)(3) of this section, these provisions shall not be construed as precluding a pawnshop from employing an employee who does not meet the requirements of said subsections (C)(1), (C)(2) and (C)(3) of this section where the failure of the employee to meet the requirements is solely because the employee’s age is under 21 years, so long as the employee is at least 18 years of age and the employee does not engage in or become involved with any transactions involving firearms or any other property where a customer must be 21 years of age.
D. The City is authorized and entitled to conduct, or have conducted for and on its behalf, investigations to substantiate and verify any of the above information. [Ord. 688 § 1, 2018; Ord. 217 § 1, 1999.]

5.12.120 Issuance of pawn tickets.
A. Every pawnshop shall issue a numbered loan contract for each item of property received by him or her as pledges for loans, which loan contract shall be considered receipt for such property. Tags shall be attached to all such property and upon each tag shall be written in legible figures a number which shall correspond to the number on the loan contract issued for such article or articles.
B. All loan contracts must contain all of the elements prescribed by RCW 19.60.061(3). [Ord. 688 § 1, 2018; Ord. 217 § 1, 1999; Ord. 53 § 2, 1996.]

5.12.140 Prohibited transactions.
No pawnbroking transaction, or any other part of such transaction, shall be carried on or conducted on any day before 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.; nor on New Year’s Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day; provided, however, that such establishment may remain open for carrying on the business of retail merchandising at any time upon any day of the week unless otherwise prohibited by law. [Ord. 688 § 1, 2018; Ord. 610 § 18, 2015; Ord. 217 § 1, 1999; Ord. 53 § 2, 1996.]

5.12.150 Termination of business.
Whenever any pawnshop business ceases, terminates or winds up such business, such intention shall be publicized by an advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, and such business shall be continued for a period of not less than 120 days from the date of such publication, during which period no additional loan shall be made; provided, however, that this section shall not apply where such business is sold in its entirety to a pawnshop, duly licensed pursuant to the provisions of this code, in which case a written list of all outstanding loans for which redemption periods have not expired shall be furnished to the law enforcement department/agency of the City prior to the actual date of sale of such business. [Ord. 688 § 1, 2018; Ord. 217 § 1, 1999; Ord. 53 § 2, 1996.]

5.12.160 Purchasing of property.
Every entity subject to this chapter shall have the authority and the power to purchase used property, wares, merchandise, except motor vehicles, in their ordinary course of business as pawnshops, secondhand and antique dealers and transient traders; provided, that every purchase by a pawnshop, secondhand and antique dealer and transient trader shall be pursuant to the regulations set forth in this chapter; and provided further, that no pawnshop shall purchase outright any metal or nonmetal junk. [Ord. 688 § 1, 2018; Ord. 610 § 19, 2015; Ord. 217 § 1, 1999; Ord. 53 § 2, 1996.]

5.12.170 Altered serial numbers.
When any vehicle, equipment, device, or parts thereto is being inspected and a record thereof made as required by this chapter or Chapter 19.60 or 19.290 RCW, if it appears that any of the numbers required to be recorded by said section are intentionally defaced, changed or altered, in any manner, the person so recording shall immediately notify the law enforcement department/agency of the City of such fact. [Ord. 688 § 1, 2018; Ord. 610 § 20, 2015; Ord. 217 § 1, 1999; Ord. 53 § 2, 1996.]

5.12.200 Disposal of goods.
Sale of antiques and secondhand goods must be in compliance with all state laws and regulations, as now enacted or hereafter amended, which govern the sale of secondhand goods. Violation of state laws and regulations governing the sale of secondhand goods shall constitute a violation of this code. [Ord. 688 § 1, 2018; Ord. 217 § 1, 1999; Ord. 53 § 2, 1996.]

Chapter 5.16 ADULT CABARETS

Sections:
5.16.010     Definitions.
5.16.020     License required.
5.16.030     License prohibited to certain classes.
5.16.040     Application.
5.16.050     Standards of conduct and operation – Adult cabarets.
5.16.060     Business license fees and renewals.
5.16.070     Liquor regulations.
5.16.080     Grounds for suspension or revocation, notice and order and appeal.
5.16.090     Violation a misdemeanor.
5.16.100     Nuisance declared.
5.16.110     Additional enforcement.
5.16.120     Severability.

5.16.010 Definitions.
“Adult cabaret” means any commercial premises, including any cabaret premises, to which any member of the public is invited or admitted and where an entertainer provides live adult entertainment to any member of the public.
“Adult entertainment” means:
    1. Any exhibition, performance, dance or conduct of any type conducted in a premises where such exhibition, performance, or dance involves a person who is unclothed or in such costume, attire, or clothing as to expose any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, or wearing any device or covering exposed to view which simulates the appearance of any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or
    2. Any exhibition, performance, dance or conduct of any type conducted in a premises where such exhibition, performance or dance is distinguished or characterized by a predominant emphasis on the depiction, description, simulation or relation to the following specified sexual activities:
        a. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
        b. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or
        c. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or
    3. Any exhibition, performance, dance or conduct which is intended to sexually stimulate any member of the public and which is conducted on a regular basis or as a substantial part of the premises activity. This includes, but is not limited to, any such exhibition, performance, dance or conduct performed for, arranged with or engaged in with fewer than all members of the public on the premises at that time, for which payment is made, either directly or indirectly, for such performance, exhibition, dance or conduct and which is commonly referred to as table dancing, couch dancing, taxi dancing, lap dancing, private dancing or straddle dancing, or similar types of performances, exhibitions, dances or conduct.
“Applicant” means the individual or entity seeking an adult cabaret license in the City of Lakewood.
“Applicant control persons” means all partners, corporate officers and directors and any other individuals in the applicant’s business organization who hold a significant interest in the adult cabaret business, based on responsibility for management of the adult cabaret business.
“City” means the City of Lakewood.
“City Manager” means the City Manager of the City of Lakewood.
“City Manager or designee” means either the City Manager of the City of Lakewood or the person designated by the City Manager of the City of Lakewood to handle or perform some act, function, responsibility or task.
“Employee” means any and all persons who work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of any adult cabaret, including, but not limited to managers and entertainers, regardless of whether any such employee is or considers himself or herself an independent contractor or otherwise.
“Entertainer” means any person who provides adult entertainment within an adult cabaret as defined in this section, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment.
“Liquor” means all beverages defined in RCW 66.04.200.
“Manager” means any person who manages, directs, administers or is in charge of the affairs and/or conduct of any portion of any activity involving adult entertainment occurring at any adult cabaret, and includes assistant managers working with or under the direction of a manager to carry out such purposes.
“Member of the public” means any customer, patron, club member, or person, other than an employee as defined in this section, who is invited or admitted to a cabaret.
“Operator” means any person operating, conducting or maintaining an adult cabaret.
“Person” means any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated or unincorporated association, marital community, joint venture, governmental entity, or other entity or group of persons however organized.
“Sexual conduct” means acts of:
    1. Sexual intercourse within its ordinary meaning, occurring upon any penetration, however slight; or
    2. Any penetration of the vagina or anus, however slight, by an object; or
    3. Any contact between persons involving the sex organs of one person and the mouth or anus of another; or
    4. Masturbation, manual or instrumental, of oneself or of one person by another; or
    5. Touching of the sex organs or anus, whether clothed or unclothed, of oneself or of one person by another; or
    6. Touching of the sexual or other intimate parts of a person done for the purpose of gratifying sexual desire of either party or a third party. [Ord. 171 § 1, 1998.]

5.16.020 License required.
A. It is unlawful for any person to conduct, manage or operate an adult cabaret unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the City to do so, obtained in the manner provided in this chapter.
B. It is unlawful for any entertainer, employee or manager to knowingly work in or about, or to knowingly perform any service or entertainment directly related to the operation of an unlicensed adult cabaret.
C. It is unlawful for any entertainer to perform in an adult cabaret unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the City to do so.
D. It is unlawful for any manager to work in an adult cabaret unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the City to do so. It is also unlawful for any manager to allow or permit an entertainer to perform in an adult cabaret unless such entertainer is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the City to do so, and it is the responsibility of the manager to make sure that the entertainers who are performing while the manager is working are properly licensed. [Ord. 171 § 1, 1998.]

5.16.030 License prohibited to certain classes.
No license shall be issued to:
A. A natural person who has not attained the age of 21 years, except that licenses may be issued to persons who have attained the age of 18 years with respect to cabarets where no intoxicating liquors are served or provided.
B. A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent, unless such manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee, or in the case of a manager of an adult cabaret, the manager has obtained a manager’s license.
C. A copartnership, unless all the members thereof are qualified to obtain a license as provided in this chapter. Such license shall be issued to the manager or agent thereof.
D. A corporation, unless all the officers and directors thereof are qualified to obtain a license as provided herein. Such license shall be issued to the manager or agent thereof.
E. A person, copartnership, or corporation that owns, operates or maintains any other adult cabaret, adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business, as those terms are generally understood to mean, located within the City of Lakewood. It is provided, however, that this limitation shall not be applied so as to prohibit the renewal of a license for such a business where such person, copartnership, or corporation operates two or more adult cabarets, adult entertainment establishments or sexually oriented businesses as of the effective date of the ordinance by which this provision is adopted; provided, that such adult cabarets, adult entertainment establishments or sexually oriented businesses may not be expanded, enlarged or improved in any way, nor modified in any way that increases the amount or level of activity or business at such adult cabaret, adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business, unless the adult cabaret, adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business is brought into full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the Lakewood Municipal Code; provided, that this shall not restrict said person, copartnership, or corporation from making necessary repairs.
F. No more than one adult cabaret, adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business may be located on any piece of property or any adjacent piece of property owned or leased by the same person, copartnership, or corporation. It is provided, however, that this limitation shall not be applied so as to prohibit the renewal of a license for such businesses where such adult cabarets, adult entertainment establishments or sexually oriented businesses were located on the same or adjacent property on the effective date of the ordinance by which this provision is adopted; provided, that such adult cabarets, adult entertainment establishments or sexually oriented businesses may not be expanded, enlarged or improved in any way, nor modified in any way that increases the amount or level of activity or business at either or any such adult cabaret, adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business, unless the adult cabarets, adult entertainment establishments or sexually oriented businesses are brought into full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the Lakewood Municipal Code; provided, that this shall not restrict said person, copartnership, or corporation from making necessary repairs. [Ord. 171 § 1, 1998.]

5.16.040 Application.
A. Adult Cabaret License. 
    1. All applications for an adult cabaret license shall be submitted to the City Manager or designee in the name of the person or entity proposing to conduct an adult cabaret on the business premises and shall be signed by such person and certified as true under penalty of perjury. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the City, which shall require the following information:
        a. For the applicant and for each applicant control person, provide: names, any aliases or previous names, date and place of birth, driver’s license number, if any, social security number if any, and business, mailing, and residential address, and business telephone number.
        b. If a partnership, whether general or limited; and if a corporation, date and place of incorporation, evidence that it is in good standing under the laws of Washington, and name and address of any registered agent for service of process.
        c. Whether the applicant or any partner, corporate officer, or director of the applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter or any license for similar adult entertainment or sexually oriented business, including motion picture theaters and panoramas, from the City or another city, county or state, and if so, the names and addresses of each other licensed business.
        d. A summary of the business history of the applicant and applicant control persons in owning or operating the adult entertainment or other sexually oriented businesses, providing names, addresses and dates of operation for such businesses, and whether any business license or adult entertainment license has been revoked or suspended, and the reason therefor.
        e. For the applicant and all applicant control persons, any and all criminal convictions or forfeitures within five years immediately preceding the date of the application, other than parking offenses or minor traffic infractions including the dates of conviction, nature of the crime, name and location of court and disposition.
        f. For the applicant and all applicant control persons, a description of business, occupation or employment history for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application.
        g. Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek information to confirm any statements set forth in the application.
        h. The location and doing-business-as name of the proposed adult cabaret, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number, together with the name and address of each owner and lessee of the property.
        i. Three two-inch by two-inch color photographs each of the applicant and of applicant control persons, taken within six months of the date of application showing only the full face.
        j. A complete set of fingerprints for the applicant and for each applicant control person, by employees of the department providing law enforcement services for the City of Lakewood.
        k. A scale drawing or diagram showing the configuration of the premises for the proposed adult cabaret, including a statement of the total floor space occupied by the business, and marked dimensions of the interior of the premises. Performance areas, seating areas, manager’s office and stations, restrooms and service areas shall be clearly marked on the drawing. An application for a license for an adult cabaret shall include building plans which demonstrate conformance with LMC 5.16.050.
    2. An application shall be deemed complete upon the applicant’s provision of all information requested above, including identification of “none” where that is the correct response, and the applicant’s verification that the application is complete. The City Manager or designee may request other information or clarification in addition to that provided in a complete application where necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
    3. A nonrefundable application fee must be paid at the time of filing an application in order to defray the costs of processing the application.
    4. Each applicant shall verify, under penalty of perjury, that the information contained in the application is true.
    5. If any person or entity acquires, subsequent to the issuance of an adult cabaret license, a significant interest based on responsibility for management or operation of the licensed premises or the licensed business, notice of such acquisition shall be provided in writing to the City Manager or designee, no later than 21 calendar days following such acquisition. The notice required shall include the information required for the original adult cabaret license application.
    6. The adult cabaret license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is issued, the expiration date, the name or names under which the business shall be done or by which the business shall be known and the address of the location of the licensed adult cabaret. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult cabaret so that it can be easily read at any time the business is open.
    7. No person granted an adult cabaret license pursuant to this chapter shall operate the adult cabaret business under a name not specified on the license, nor shall any person operate an adult cabaret under any designation or at any location not specified on the license.
    8. Upon receipt of the complete application and fee, the City Manager or designee shall provide copies to the Police, Fire, and Community Development Departments for their investigation and review to determine compliance of the proposed adult cabaret with the laws and regulations which each department administers. Each department shall, within 30 calendar days of the date of such application, inspect the application and premises and shall make a written report to the City Manager or designee whether such application and premises comply with the laws administered by each department. No license may be issued unless each department reports that the application and premises comply with the relevant laws. In the event the premises is not yet constructed, the departments shall base their recommendation as to premises compliance on their review of the drawings submitted in the application. Any adult cabaret license approved prior to premises construction shall contain a condition that the premises may not open for business until the premises have been inspected and determined to be in substantial conformance with the drawings submitted with the application. A department shall recommend denial of a license under this subsection if it finds that the proposed adult cabaret is not in conformance with the requirements of this chapter or other law in effect in the City. A recommendation for denial shall cite the specific reason therefor, including applicable laws.
    9. An adult cabaret license shall be issued by the City Manager or designee within 35 calendar days of the date of filing a complete license application and fee, unless the City Manager or designee determines that the applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements of this chapter or provide any information required under this subsection or that the applicant has made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact on the application for a license. The City Manager or designee shall grant an extension of time in which to provide all information required for a complete license application upon the request of the applicant. If the City Manager or designee finds that the applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements for issuance of an adult cabaret license, the City Manager or designee shall deny the application in writing and shall cite the specific reasons therefor, including applicable law. If the City Manager or designee fails to issue or deny the license within 35 calendar days of the date of filing of a complete application and fee, the applicant shall be permitted, subject to all other applicable law, to operate the business for which the license was sought until notification by the City Manager or designee that the license has been denied, but in no event may the City Manager or designee extend the application review time for more than an additional 20 calendar days.
B. Adult Cabaret Manager and Entertainer Licenses. 
    1. No person shall work as a manager, assistant manager or entertainer at an adult cabaret without an entertainer’s or manager’s license from the City. Each applicant for a manager’s or entertainer’s license shall complete an application on forms provided by the City containing the information identified below. A nonrefundable application fee in accordance with LMC 3.20.010, the fee schedule, shall accompany the application and at least one copy of which shall be kept on file in the Office of the Lakewood City Clerk. A copy of the application shall be provided to the Police Department for its review, investigation and recommendation. All applications for a manager’s or entertainer’s license shall be signed by the applicant and certified to be true under penalty of perjury. The manager’s or entertainer’s license application shall require the following information:
        a. The applicant’s true name, home address, home telephone number, date and place of birth, fingerprints taken by employees of the department providing law enforcement services for the City of Lakewood, social security number, and any stage names or nicknames used in entertaining.
        b. The name and address of each business at which the applicant intends to work.
        c. Documentation that the applicant has attained the age of 18 years. Any two of the following shall be accepted as documentation of age:
            i. A motor vehicle operator’s license issued by any state bearing the applicant’s photograph and date of birth;
            ii. A state issued identification card bearing the applicant’s photograph and date of birth;
            iii. An official passport issued by the United States of America;
            iv. An immigration card issued by the United States of America; or
            v. Any other identification that the City determines to be acceptable.
        d. A complete statement of all convictions of the applicant for any misdemeanor or felony violations in this or any other city, county, or state within five years immediately preceding the date of the application, except parking violations or minor traffic infractions.
        e. A description of the applicant’s principal activities or services to be rendered.
        f. Three two-inch by two-inch color photographs of applicant, taken within six months of the date of application showing only the full face.
        g. Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to investigate and confirm any statements set forth in the application.
    2. The City Manager or designee may request additional information or clarification when necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
    3. An adult cabaret manager’s or an adult entertainer’s license shall be issued by the City Manager or designee within 21 calendar days from the date the complete application and fee are received, or the conditional license issued to an applicant for an adult cabaret manager’s or an adult entertainer’s license shall automatically be converted to a permanent license for the year for which the application was submitted, as provided herein below, unless the City Manager or designee determines that the applicant has failed to provide any information required to be supplied according to this chapter, has made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application, or has failed to meet any of the requirements for issuance of a license under this chapter. If the City Manager or designee determines that the applicant has failed to qualify for the license applied for, the City Manager or designee shall deny the application in writing and shall cite the specific reasons therefor, including applicable laws.
    4. If the City Manager or designee has failed to approve or deny an application for an adult cabaret manager’s license within 21 calendar days of filing of a complete application, the applicant may, subject to all other applicable laws, commence work as an adult cabaret manager in a duly licensed adult cabaret until notified by the City Manager or designee that the license has been denied, but in no event may the City Manager or designee extend the application review time for more than an additional 20 calendar days.
    5. Upon receipt of a fully complete license application and fee, an applicant for an adult cabaret manager’s or an adult entertainer’s license shall be issued a conditional license. On the twenty-first day following the filing of the complete application and fee, or at the conclusion of the application review time period if extended by the City Manager or designee, said conditional license will automatically convert to a permanent license for the calendar year for which the license application was submitted unless after review the City Manager or designee has denied the license application; provided, that, if the applicant appeals the denial of the license application, the conditional license shall remain valid until the final determination of the appeal from the denial of the application, as indicated by the final determination of such appeal. In no event may the City Manager or designee extend the application review time for more than an additional 20 calendar days. [Ord. 288 § 3, 2002; Ord. 202 § 1, 1999; Ord. 187 § 1, 1998; Ord. 171 § 1, 1998.]

5.16.050 Standards of conduct and operation – Adult cabarets.
A. The following standards of conduct must be adhered to by employees of any adult cabaret while in any area in which members of the public are allowed to be present:
    1. No employee or entertainer shall be unclothed or in such less than opaque and complete attire, costume or clothing so as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, except upon a stage at least 18 inches above the immediate floor level and removed at least eight feet from the nearest member of the public.
    2. No employee or entertainer mingling with members of the public shall be unclothed or in less than opaque and complete attire, costume or clothing as described in subsection (A)(1) of this section, nor shall any male employee or entertainer at any time appear with his genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered, or wear or use any device or covering which simulates the same.
    3. No employee or entertainer mingling with members of the public shall wear or use any device or covering exposed to view which simulates the breast below the top of the areola, vulva, genitals, anus, any portion of the pubic region, or buttocks.
    4. No employee or entertainer shall caress, fondle or erotically touch any member of the public. No employee or entertainer shall encourage or permit any member of the public to caress, fondle or erotically touch any employee or entertainer.
    5. No employee or entertainer shall perform actual or simulated acts of sexual conduct as defined in this chapter, or any act which constitutes a violation of Chapter 7.48A RCW, the Washington Moral Nuisances Statute.
    6. No employee or entertainer mingling with members of the public shall conduct any dance, performance or exhibition in or about the nonstage area of the adult cabaret unless that dance, performance or exhibition is performed at a distance of no less than four feet from any member of the public.
    7. No payment, tip or gratuity may be paid directly to any adult entertainer or other employee of an adult cabaret as compensation for any adult entertainment, regardless of where the adult entertainer or other employee of an adult cabaret is located. Payments made to cashiers, wait-persons or other employees of an adult cabaret for admission fees or for food, beverage or other product sales do not constitute compensation for any adult entertainment. Any payments, tips or gratuities that any patron or other person intends or desires to pay to any adult entertainer or other employee of an adult cabaret as compensation for any adult entertainment shall be deposited in a box or receptacle clearly identified as the box or receptacle into which payments, tips or gratuities shall be received by or deposited for the intended adult entertainer or other employee of an adult cabaret. The location of such box(es) or receptacle(s) shall be in the vicinity of the cash register or counter where payments are made for services provided in the establishment, and shall be clearly visible to the manager of the adult cabaret and to the public. No payment, tip or gratuity may be offered to, or accepted by an adult entertainer in advance of or prior to any performance, exhibition, dance or conduct provided by the entertainer. No entertainer performing upon any stage area shall be permitted to accept any form of payment, tip or gratuity offered directly to the entertainer by any member of the public.
    8. No adult cabaret entertainer shall perform any other type of work or service for the adult entertainment establishment by which the entertainer is employed other than that of an adult cabaret entertainer during any 12-hour period from a time that the adult cabaret entertainer has or will work for the adult entertainment establishment as an adult cabaret entertainer. (This provision would prohibit a person from acting as an adult cabaret manager or wait-person or any other position other than adult cabaret entertainer during any 12-hour period following or preceding the time that such person acted in the capacity of an adult cabaret entertainer; and would prohibit a person from acting as an entertainer in the adult cabaret during any 12-hour period following or preceding the time that such person acted or served in the capacity as a wait-person, an adult cabaret manager or any other position other than adult cabaret entertainer at the adult cabaret.)
B. At any adult cabaret, the following are required:
    1. Admission must be restricted to persons of the age of 18 years or more. It is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager or other person in charge of an adult cabaret to knowingly permit or allow any person under the minimum age specified to be in or upon such premises. The owner, operator, manager or other person in charge of an adult cabaret shall be responsible for checking the identity and age of persons who appear to be close to or under the age of 18 years.
    2. Neither the performance nor any photograph, drawing, sketch or other pictorial or graphic representation thereof displaying any portion of the breasts below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic hair, buttocks, genitals, and/or anus may be visible outside of the adult cabaret. No member of the public shall be permitted at any time to enter into any of the nonpublic portions of the adult cabaret, which shall include but are not limited to: the dressing rooms of the entertainers or other rooms provided for the benefit of employees, and the kitchen and storage areas; except that persons delivering goods and materials, food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs to the premises or equipment on the premises may be permitted into nonpublic areas to the extent required to perform their job duties.
C. The responsibilities of the manager of an adult cabaret shall include but are not limited to:
    1. A licensed manager shall be on duty at an adult cabaret at all times adult entertainment is being provided or members of the public are present on the premises. The name and license of the manager shall be prominently posted during business hours. The manager shall be responsible for verifying that any person who provides adult entertainment within the premises possesses a current and valid entertainer’s license.
    2. The licensed manager on duty shall not be an entertainer.
    3. The manager or an assistant manager licensed under this chapter shall maintain visual observation of each member of the public at all times any entertainer is present in the public or performance areas of the adult cabaret. Where there is more than one performance area, or the performance area is of such size or configuration that one manager or assistant manager is unable to visually observe, at all times, each adult entertainer, each employee, and each member of the public, a manager or assistant manager licensed under this chapter shall be provided for each public or performance area or portion of a public or performance area visually separated from other portions of the adult cabaret.
    4. The manager shall be responsible for and shall assure that the actions of members of the public, the adult entertainers and all other employees shall comply with all requirements of this chapter.
    5. Every adult entertainer shall provide his or her license to the adult cabaret manager on duty on the premises prior to his or her performance. The manager shall retain the licenses of the adult entertainers readily available for inspection by the City at any time during business hours of the adult cabaret.
D. Premises – Specifications. 
    1. Performance Area. The performance area of the adult cabaret where adult entertainment as described in subsection (A)(1) of this section is provided shall be a stage or platform at least 18 inches in elevation above the level of the patron seating areas, and shall be separated by a distance of at least eight feet from all areas of the premises to which members of the public have access. A continuous railing at least three feet in height and located at least eight feet from all points of the performance area shall separate the performance area and the patron seating areas. The stage and the entire interior portion of cubicles, rooms or stalls wherein adult entertainment is provided must be visible from the common areas of the premises and at least one manager’s station. Visibility shall not be blocked or obstructed by doors, curtains, drapes or any other obstruction whatsoever.
    2. Lighting. Sufficient lighting shall be provided and equally distributed throughout the public areas of the premises so that all objects are plainly visible at all times. A minimum lighting level is established requiring that lighting be sufficient so that eight-point size print on white background would be readable at a distance of 20 inches from the eyes of the person so reading, and that level of lighting shall be provided for all areas of the adult cabaret where members of the public are admitted.
    3. Visibility to Manager. All activity or entertainment occurring on the premises shall be visible at all times by and from the manager on duty at the time.
    4. Visibility from Public Places. No activity or entertainment occurring on the premises shall be visible at any time from any public place, and no entertainer shall be visible from any public place during the hours of his or her employment, or apparent hours of such employment, on the premises.
    5. Signs. A sign at least two feet by two feet, with letters at least one inch high shall be conspicuously displayed in the public area(s) of the premises stating the following:THIS ADULT CABARET IS REGULATED BY THE CITY OF LAKEWOOD. ENTERTAINERS ARE: (A) NOT PERMITTED TO ENGAGE IN ANY TYPE OF SEXUAL CONDUCT; (B) NOT PERMITTED TO APPEAR SEMI-NUDE OR NUDE, EXCEPT ON STAGE; (C) NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT PAYMENTS, TIPS OR GRATUITIES IN ADVANCE OF THEIR PERFORMANCE; (D) NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT PAYMENTS, TIPS OR GRATUITIES DIRECTLY FROM PATRONS
    6. Business Signs. Exterior signs and any interior sign or notice visible to the public may announce the name of the business and the nature of the business by the terms “adult entertainment,” “adult theater” or “adult use establishment” but shall not contain any representation of the human body or make any statement pertaining to the human body, whether of entertainers, patrons or the public.
    7. Price List. There shall be posted and conspicuously displayed in all areas of the adult cabaret where members of the public are admitted a list of any and all types of entertainment, performances, dances or conduct or other services provided on the premises for which a fee or charge is or may be paid. Such list shall further indicate the specific fee or charge in dollar amounts for each entertainment listed. It shall be unlawful for any entertainer, manager or other person to charge, request or demand any fee or charge in excess of the amount so posted. All payments for such entertainment, performances, dances or conduct or other services shall be paid in accordance with this section.
    8. Record-Keeping Requirements. 
        a. All papers, records, and things required to be kept pursuant to this chapter shall be open to inspection by the City Manager or designee during the hours when the licensed premises are open for business, upon two working days’ written notice. The purpose of such inspections shall be to determine whether the papers, records, and things meet the requirements of this chapter.
        b. Each adult entertainment business shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the name, address, and age of each person employed or otherwise retained or allowed to perform on the premises as an adult entertainer, including independent contractors and their employees. This information shall be open to inspection by the Clerk during hours of operation of the business upon 24 hours’ notice to the licensee.
    9. Inspections. In order to ensure compliance with this chapter all areas of licensed adult cabarets which are open to members of the public shall be open to inspection by agents and employees of the City during the hours when the premises are open for business. The purpose of such inspections shall be to determine if the licensed premises are operated in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. It is hereby expressly declared that unannounced inspections are necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.
E. It is unlawful for any adult cabaret to be operated or otherwise open to the public between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m.
F. This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit:
    1. Plays, operas, musicals, or other dramatic works that are not obscene;
    2. Classes, seminars and lectures which are held for serious scientific or educational purposes and which are not obscene; or
    3. Exhibitions, performances, expressions or dances that are not obscene.
    These exemptions shall not apply to the sexual conduct defined in LMC 5.16.010, or the sexual conduct described in RCW 7.48A.010 (2)(b)(ii) and (iii).
G. Whether or not activity is obscene shall be judged by consideration of the following factors:
    1. Whether the average person, applying contemporary community standards, would find that the activity taken as a whole appeals to a prurient interest in sex; and
    2. Whether the activity depicts or describes in a patently offensive way, as measured against community standards, sexual conduct as described in RCW 7.48A.010 (2)(b); and
    3. Whether the activity taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. [Ord. 183 § 1, 2, 1998; Ord. 178 § 1, 1998; Ord. 171 § 1, 1998.]

5.16.060 Business license fees and renewals.
A. Annual License Fees. Annual license fees shall be in accordance with LMC 3.20.010, the fee schedule, at least one copy of which shall be kept on file in the Office of the Lakewood City Clerk. There shall be no proration of license fees, and all licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire at 12:00 a.m. (midnight) on December 31st of the year issued.
B. Renewal of License. All business licenses shall be renewed on or before February 28th of the tax year following the year of issuance or renewal of the current license if the business is to be continued. Application for renewal shall be made on forms prescribed by the City Manager or designee. Each application for renewal shall be accompanied by the license renewal fee for the ensuing tax year as prescribed by an annual resolution of the City Council establishing fees and charges. Applications for renewal shall be processed hereafter by the City commencing during December of each tax year for the ensuing tax year. Although the City shall endeavor to mail renewal notices for the next year to persons who possess valid licenses at the end of the current year, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to submit to the City the appropriate applications and fees for license renewal, regardless of whether or not renewal notices are sent out or received.
C. Late Penalty. A late penalty shall be charged on all applications for renewal of a license not renewed by February 28th, or by the next business day after February 28th if February 28th falls on a weekend or holiday. This penalty shall be computed as and assessed at 100 percent of the cost of the applicable license fee, which shall be added to the prescribed license renewal fee. This late penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty or consequence stemming from failure to obtain or maintain an appropriate license.
D. Cancellation of Delinquent License. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection C of this section, if an application for the renewal of an adult cabaret business license is received by the City more than 90 calendar days past the due date, the business license (renewal) application shall be considered a new license application, with any rights, privileges or expectations related to a license renewal being canceled, so that all applicable code requirements and regulations must be met as if the business had not operated in the past. It is provided, however, that if a license application is approved after having been canceled because of more than 90 calendar days delinquency, the additional penalty percentage of the license fee (100 percent) shall be paid prior to issuance of the license. [Ord. 288 § 4, 2002; Ord. 245 § 3, 2000; Ord. 171 § 1, 1998.]

5.16.070 Liquor regulations.
Any license issued pursuant to this chapter for any business in which any liquor is consumed shall be subject to the rules or regulations of the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board relating to the sale or use of intoxicating liquor, regardless of whether the liquor is provided pursuant to a liquor license or banquet permit. No liquor shall be allowed in any adult cabaret establishment without either a valid liquor license or banquet permit issued by or under the authority of the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the applicable rules and regulations of the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board, the rules and regulations of the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board shall control. [Ord. 171 § 1, 1998.]

5.16.080 Grounds for suspension or revocation, notice and order and appeal.
A. General Business Licensing Provisions Referenced. The provisions of Chapter 5.02 LMC shall apply to licensing issues under this chapter to the extent that those provisions are not in specific conflict with the provisions hereof. [Ord. 585 § 13, 2014; Ord. 548 § 11, 2012; Ord. 171 § 1, 1998.]

5.16.090 Violation a misdemeanor.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. [Ord. 171 § 1, 1998.]

5.16.100 Nuisance declared.
A. Public Nuisance. Any adult cabaret operated, conducted, or maintained in violation of this chapter or any law of the City of Lakewood or the state of Washington shall be, and the same is, declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The City Attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of any other remedies set forth in this chapter, commence an action to enjoin, remove or abate such nuisance in the manner provided by law and shall take such other steps and apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such public nuisance, and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult cabaret contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
B. Moral Nuisance. Any adult cabaret operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of Chapter 7.48A RCW, Moral Nuisance, shall be, and the same is declared to be, unlawful and a public and moral nuisance and the City Attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of any other remedies set forth herein, commence an action or actions, to abate, remove and enjoin such public and moral nuisance, or impose a civil penalty, in the manner provided by Chapter 7.48A RCW. [Ord. 171 § 1, 1998.]

5.16.110 Additional enforcement.
The remedies found in this chapter are not exclusive, and, the City may seek any other legal or equitable relief, including but not limited to enjoining any acts or practices which constitute or will constitute a violation of any business license ordinance or other regulations herein adopted. [Ord. 171 § 1, 1998.]

5.16.120 Severability.
If any portion of this chapter, or its application to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any other portion thereof, and its application to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected. [Ord. 171 § 1, 1998.]

Chapter 5.20 PANORAMS, PREVIEWS, PICTURE ARCADES AND PEEP SHOWS

Sections:
5.20.005     Purpose.
5.20.010     Definitions.
5.20.020     Applicability.
5.20.030     Panoram premises license required.
5.20.040     Panoram owner’s license required.
5.20.045     Panoram manager’s license required.
5.20.050     Panoram device license required.
5.20.060     License fees – Terms – Assignment – Renewals.
5.20.070     License application – Report by City departments.
5.20.080     Inspection of panoram premises.
5.20.090     Issuance of licenses.
5.20.100     Suspension or revocation of licenses – Notice – Summary suspension.
5.20.110     Appeal and hearing.
5.20.120     Premises regulations.
5.20.130     Violation a misdemeanor.

5.20.005 Purpose.
This chapter is intended to provide general protection of the general public, health, safety, and welfare of the citizenry of the City through the regulation of the operations of panoram premises. The regulations set forth herein are intended to prevent health and safety problems in and around panoram premises and to prevent dangerous and unlawful conduct in and around panoram premises. [Ord. 53 § 3, 1996.]

5.20.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
“City” means the City of Lakewood, Washington, and also means, where consistent with the context, the City Manager or designee or other appropriate representative of the City, including the law enforcement department/agency of the City or representative(s) thereof.
“Panoram,” “preview,” “picture arcade” or “peep show” means any device which, for payment of a fee, membership fee, or other charge, is used to view, exhibit or display a film, videotape, or videodisc. All such devices are denominated in this chapter by the terms “panoram” or “panoram device.” The terms panoram and panoram device as used in this chapter do not include games which employ pictures, views or video displays, or state regulated gambling devices.
“Panoram premises” means any premises or portion of any premises on which any panoram device is located and to which members of the public are admitted. The term panoram premises as used in this chapter does not include movie or motion picture theater auditoriums capable of seating more than five people.
“Panoram station” means the portion of any panoram premises on which a panoram device is located and where a patron or customer would ordinarily be positioned while watching the panoram device.
“Person” means and includes but is not limited to natural persons of either sex, firms, corporations, partnerships or associations. [Ord. 53 § 3, 1996.]

5.20.020 Applicability.
This chapter shall constitute the exclusive means of licensing “panorams,” “previews,” “picture arcades,” or “peep shows” and no other City licensing provisions shall apply to the subject matter licensed under this chapter. [Ord. 53 § 3, 1996.]

5.20.030 Panoram premises license required.
A. It is unlawful to display, exhibit, expose or maintain upon any premises to which members of the public are admitted any panoram device without a valid and current license for such premises, to be designated a “panoram premises license.”
B. A separate license is required for each panoram premises and the same shall at all times be conspicuously posted and maintained therein.
C. The City shall prescribe the form of such license, number the same, and shall indicate thereon the number of panoram devices which may be operated thereunder, and the location of the licensed panoram premises. [Ord. 53 § 3, 1996.]

5.20.040 Panoram owner’s license required.
It is unlawful to own and exhibit or display for public use, or to place with another, by lease or otherwise, for public use, exhibit or display, any panoram device without a valid and current license to be designated a “panoram owner’s license.” The City shall prescribe the form of such license and shall number the same. [Ord. 53 § 3, 1996.]

5.20.045 Panoram manager’s license required.
It is unlawful to operate or manage any panoram business, device or operation without a valid and current license to be designated a “panoram manager’s license.” The City shall prescribe the form of such license and shall number the same. [Ord. 79 § 7, 1996.]

5.20.050 Panoram device license required.
A. It is unlawful to exhibit or display for public use any panoram device upon any panoram premises without first having obtained a license for each such panoram device, to be designated a “panoram device license.”
B. Panoram device licenses shall be issued for specific panoram premises only and shall not be transferable.
C. The current panoram device license for each panoram device shall be securely attached to such panoram device in a conspicuous place.
D. The City shall prescribe the form of such license and number the same. [Ord. 53 § 3, 1996.]

5.20.060 License fees – Terms – Assignment – Renewals.
Each license required herein shall expire one year from the date of issuance by the City, unless renewed. Upon renewal, each license shall be valid for an additional year from the date of expiration, unless suspended, revoked, or closed. License fees shall be in accordance with LMC 3.20.010, the fee schedule, at least one copy of which shall be kept on file in the Office of the Lakewood City Clerk. [Ord. 548 § 2, 2012; Ord. 288 § 5, 2002; Ord. 245 § 4, 2000; Ord. 87 § 3, 1996; Ord. 79 § 3, 1996; Ord. 53 § 3, 1996.]

5.20.070 License application – Report by City departments.
A. Any person seeking a panoram premises, panoram owner’s or panoram device license shall file a written application with the City on a form provided by the City for that purpose.
    1. The applicant himself must prepare and sign the application. If the applicant is a partnership, a partner must sign and the names of the partners in full shall be given with their current residences. If the applicant is a corporation, an authorized officer thereof must sign and the names and current residences of all of the officers and directors or trustees of the corporation shall be given together with the location of the principal office or place of business of such corporation. All corporations must designate an agent to receive service for said corporation.
    2. The City Manager or designee, upon presentation of such application and before acting upon the same, shall refer such application to the law enforcement department/agency of the City, which shall make a full investigation as outlined in subsection C of this section, and to the departments by the City and to other municipal jurisdictions in the vicinity, and the Tacoma-Pierce County Health Department, which shall investigate and provide information to the City Manager or designee concerning compliance of the premises and devices sought to be licensed with this and all other applicable City and state health, zoning, building, fire and safety ordinances and laws.
B. The following information shall accompany each application for a license:
    1. Panoram premises license:
        a. The name, address and telephone number of each person applying for the license;
        b. The name, address and telephone number of each person holding an ownership, leasehold or interest in the panoram premises;
        c. The name, address and telephone number of the manager or other person responsible for the operation of the premises;
        d. The address of the premises;
        e. The number of panoram devices to be located on the premises;
        f. A sketch or drawing sufficient to show the layout of the premises, including all information necessary to determine whether the premises complies with the provisions of this chapter.
    2. Panoram device license:
        a. The name, address and telephone number of each person applying for the license;
        b. The name, address and telephone number of each person holding an ownership, leasehold or other interest in the panoram device;
        c. The name, address and telephone number of each person responsible for the operation of the panoram;
        d. The address at which the panoram device is be located;
        e. A description, including make, model and serial number of the device.
    3. Panoram owner’s license:
        a. The name, address and telephone number of each person applying for the license;
        b. The name, address and telephone number of each person holding an ownership, leasehold or other interest in each panoram device;
        c. A list of all panoram devices and premises at which panoram devices are located together with a description, including make, model and serial number of all panoram devices.
    4. Panoram manager’s license:
        a. The name, address and telephone number of each person applying for the license.
C. The investigation by the law enforcement department/agency of the City shall include a review of all criminal records of the applicant. Further, the investigation shall consist of fingerprinting and photographing the applicant, a full investigation of the truth of the statements in the application, and all other matters which might tend to aid in the determination of whether to grant the license. The law enforcement department/agency of the City shall then inform the City Manager or designee as to the results of his investigation and his recommendation as to the disposition of said application.
D. Applicants shall also provide proof of identity including showing at least two identification cards satisfactory to the City, at least one of which shall be a picture identification card such as a current state of Washington driver’s license or valid state of Washington identification card. [Ord. 79 § 4, 1996; Ord. 53 § 3, 1996.]

5.20.080 Inspection of panoram premises.
A. Applicants for any license authorized to be issued under this chapter shall allow the premises and devices sought to be licensed to be inspected by authorized inspectors from the City, and the Tacoma-Pierce County Health Department, for the purpose of determining whether they comply with this chapter.
B. Licensees operating premises and devices licensed under this chapter shall hold those areas upon the premises which are accessible to the public and the devices therein open for routine regulatory inspections by the City during normal business hours. [Ord. 53 § 3, 1996.]

5.20.090 Issuance of licenses.
A. After the investigation by the law enforcement department/agency of the City herein, the City Manager or designee shall approve or deny all applications for licenses required hereunder.
B. No license shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of this title to the following persons:
    1. Any applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager who knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a license, or in any report or record required to be filed with the City;
    2. Any person who is not 18 years of age at the time of the application;
    3. Any person who has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, excluding minor traffic violations, if:
        a. The felony or misdemeanor for which he was convicted directly relates to the license sought; and
        b. The time elapsed since the felony is less than 10 years; or
        c. The time elapsed since the misdemeanor is less than three years.
    This section shall not preclude the fact of any prior conviction of a felony or misdemeanor from being considered;
    4. Any person who has had a license revoked within a period of one year prior to the date of making application for a license hereunder;
    5. Any person who is not qualified under any specific provision of this title for any particular license for which application is made;
    6. Any person who at the time of application is in default in the payment of any sum due the City for any license;
    7. Any person whose license is under suspension or revocation at the time of application for a license;
    8. Any partner, corporate officer, director, or stockholder who does not meet the qualifications of this section.
No license shall be issued unless the premises where the activity is to be conducted complies with the requirements of all governmental agencies, including, but not limited to, federal, state, city and county resolutions relating to buildings, fire, health, sanitation, zoning, taxation, public safety, and all other requirements and conditions specifically set forth in other sections of this title. The mere filing of an application for a license shall not give the applicant any right to engage in the activity covered thereby.
C. The decision of the City Manager or designee regarding issuance of any license shall be rendered within 30 days of the date of filing of the application. [Ord. 53 § 3, 1996.]

5.20.100 Suspension or revocation of licenses – Notice – Summary suspension.
A. After an investigation and upon the recommendation of either the City, or the Tacoma-Pierce County Health Officer, the City Manager or designee shall, upon 30 days’ notice, temporarily or permanently suspend or revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter where one or more of the following conditions exist:
    1. The license was procured by fraud or false representation of material fact in the application or in any report or record required to be filed with the City Manager or designee; or
    2. The building, structure, equipment or location of the business for which the license was issued does not comply with the requirements or fails to meet the standards of this chapter;
    3. Any person, or any of his servants, agents, or employees, who has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, excluding minor traffic violations, if:
        a. The felony or misdemeanor of which he was convicted directly relates to the license held under this chapter; and
        b. The time elapsed since the felony is less than 10 years; or
        c. The time elapsed since the misdemeanor is less than three years.
B. If the City Manager or designee finds that any condition set forth in subsection A of this section exists, and that such condition constitutes a threat of immediate serious injury or damage to person or property, the City Manager or designee shall immediately suspend any license issued under this chapter pending a hearing on the decision of the City Manager or designee to suspend or revoke the license, in which event the licensee shall be entitled to a hearing in accordance with LMC 5.20.110. The notice of immediate suspension of license given pursuant to this subsection shall set forth the basis for the action of the City Manager or designee and the facts supporting the finding of the City Manager or designee regarding the condition found to exist that constitutes a threat of immediate serious injury or damage to person or property. [Ord. 53 § 3, 1996.]

5.20.110 Appeal and hearing.
A. Any person aggrieved by the action of the City Manager or designee in refusing to issue or renew any license under this chapter or in temporarily or permanently suspending or revoking any license issued under this chapter shall have the right to appeal such action to the City’s Hearing Examiner.
B. The decision of the Hearing Examiner on an appeal from a decision of the City Manager or designee shall be based upon a preponderance of the evidence. The burden of proof shall be on the City Manager or designee. [Ord. 585 § 14, 2014; Ord. 53 § 3, 1996.]

5.20.120 Premises regulations.
The City shall not license any panoram premises which do not conform to the following requirements, and shall revoke or suspend the license of any panoram premises, and the license of any operator thereof, which do not maintain conformity with the following requirements:
A. The interior of every panoram station shall be visible from a continuous main aisle and shall not be obscured by any curtain, door, wall, or other enclosure.
B. The licensee shall not permit any doors to public areas on the premises to be locked during business hours in compliance with the applicable provisions of the City of Lakewood Building Code, Uniform Fire Code, and National Fire Protection Association Code.
C. The licensee shall maintain illumination generally distributed in all parts of the premises available for use by the public, in compliance with the applicable provisions of the City of Lakewood Building Code, Uniform Fire Code, and National Fire Protection Association Code at all times when the premises are open or when any member of the public is permitted to enter and remain therein.
D. The licensee shall not permit more than one person to occupy a panoram station at any time and public notices to this effect shall at all times be conspicuously posted and maintained on the panoram premises. [Ord. 53 § 3, 1996.]

5.20.130 Violation a misdemeanor.
Any person violating any of the provisions in this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. [Ord. 53 § 3, 1996.]

Chapter 5.32 PUBLIC DANCES, CABARETS, DANCE HALLS AND TEENAGER DANCES

Sections:
5.32.010     Definitions.
5.32.020     License required.
5.32.030     License fees.
5.32.040     Hours of closing.
5.32.050     Age limits.
5.32.060     Employees and attendants.
5.32.070     Intoxicated persons prohibited.
5.32.080     Lighting.
5.32.090     Parking lots.
5.32.100     Duty of preserving order.
5.32.110     Employment of law enforcement officers.
5.32.120     Smoking prohibited.
5.32.130     Duty of public dance halls.
5.32.140     Teenager dances – Prohibited activity.
5.32.150     Adjustment and/or waiver fee.

5.32.010 Definitions.
“Cabaret” as used in this chapter shall mean any restaurant, barroom, tavern, cocktail lounge or other facility where food and/or beverages are available for purchase and where dancing occurs regardless of whether such dancing is to live entertainment or prerecorded transmissions.
“Dance halls” as used in this chapter shall mean any facility where public dances are held.
“Public dances” as used in this chapter shall mean any dance or ball where the general public may gain admission with or without the payment of a fee. As used in this section, public dances shall include but not be limited to those dances sponsored by private clubs where members of the private clubs are permitted to bring guests.
“Teenager” as used in this chapter shall mean any person over the age of 12 and under the age of 18.
“Teenager dance” as used in this chapter shall mean any dance or ball where attendance is limited to teenagers regardless of whether or not an admission fee is charged. [Ord. 116 § 1, 1997; Ord. 79 § 5, 1996; Ord. 53 § 6, 1996.]

5.32.020 License required.
A. No person, group or society shall conduct any activity defined in LMC 5.32.010 without first obtaining a valid license.
B. School sponsored dances shall be exempt from the licensing requirements of this chapter. For the purposes hereof, “school” means an educational institute or facility certified to be a school by the Washington State Board of Education, accredited by the Commission on Colleges – Northwest Association of Schools and Colleges or accredited by another nationally recognized accrediting body, or as otherwise specifically provided pursuant to state statute. It is provided, however, that even though school sponsored dances are exempt from the requirement of obtaining a license pursuant to this chapter, the provisions of LMC 5.32.040 shall nevertheless apply, so that, unless a special permit is obtained from the City Manager or designee, school sponsored dances shall not continue beyond 2:00 a.m. Furthermore, the regulatory provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to: Lighting (LMC 5.32.080); Parking lots (LMC 5.32.090); Duty of preserving order (LMC 5.32.100); and Employment of law enforcement officers (LMC 5.32.110), shall apply to school sponsored dances. [Ord. 116 § 2, 1997; Ord. 53 § 6, 1996.]

5.32.030 License fees.
All required license fees shall be in accordance with LMC 3.20.010, the fee schedule, at least one copy of which shall be kept on file in the Office of the Lakewood City Clerk.
In the event that the type of license that applies to a particular business is unclear, or that more than one license could apply, the City Manager or designee shall determine which of the possible licenses shall be applied; provided, that the decision of the City Manager or designee regarding the applicable license may be appealed by the person or persons operating the business to the City Council, which appeal must be filed with the City Clerk within 14 days of the date of the notice of the decision to the person or persons operating the business. [Ord. 288 § 8, 2002; Ord. 116 § 3, 1997; Ord. 79 § 6, 1996; Ord. 53 § 6, 1996.]

5.32.040 Hours of closing.
A. Teenager dances shall be discontinued by the hour of 12:00 midnight unless a special permit is obtained from the City Manager or designee to conduct teenager dances after the hour of 12:00 midnight.
B. All public dances shall be discontinued and all public dance halls shall be closed by the hour of 2:00 a.m., and shall remain closed until 6:00 a.m. on the same day, unless a special permit is obtained from the City Manager or designee to conduct a dance beyond the hour of 2:00 a.m.
C. All cabarets shall be closed between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. [Ord. 53 § 6, 1996.]

5.32.050 Age limits.
A. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to attend any public dance without the escort of his or her parent, guardian, or other responsible adult.
B. No person over the age of 18 years shall be permitted to attend any teenager dance unless said person is the sole escort or guest of a person properly admitted to a teenager dance. It shall be unlawful and constitute a violation of this chapter for any person who is not eligible for admittance to a teenager dance, to remain around or about the premises where such dance is being held. [Ord. 53 § 6, 1996.]

5.32.060 Employees and attendants.
No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed at any public dance or in any dance hall. No prostitute or person of immoral character or person afflicted with any venereal, contagious or infectious disease shall be employed in or knowingly be permitted to take part in any public dance or be employed in any dance hall. [Ord. 53 § 6, 1996.]

5.32.070 Intoxicated persons prohibited.
No persons maintaining, conducting or carrying on any public dance or having charge or control thereof; nor any person employed in and about such a place where said public dance is being held; nor any person employed in and about a public dance hall shall allow or permit any person who is intoxicated or incapacitated by the use of intoxicating liquor and/or drugs, as defined by RCW 70.96A, to enter, be, or remain in, or to dance at any function licensed pursuant to this chapter. [Ord. 53 § 6, 1996.]

5.32.080 Lighting.
All buildings, halls, rooms, pavilions or other places in which public dances are carried on, as well as the halls, corridors, and rooms leading thereto or connected therewith, shall at all times, while open to the public, be well lighted. [Ord. 53 § 6, 1996.]

5.32.090 Parking lots.
All parking lots used in conjunction with any cabaret, public dance or dance hall shall at all times while open to the public be well lighted and such parking lots shall at all times be kept in a clean, sanitary condition. [Ord. 53 § 6, 1996.]

5.32.100 Duty of preserving order.
The burden of preserving order in any cabaret, dance hall or at any public dance is upon the licensee, and if any cabaret, dance hall or public dance, or any parking lot used in conjunction with any cabaret, dance hall or public dance is not being operated in accordance with the rules and regulations prescribed in the code, the license shall be subject to revocation and the licensee or other individual responsible subject to such other punishment as the law and this code provide. [Ord. 53 § 6, 1996.]

5.32.110 Employment of law enforcement officers.
In the event it becomes necessary to secure the services of one or more law enforcement officers to properly enforce these rules and regulations and to maintain order in a cabaret, dance hall or public dance, all expense for such service shall be borne by the licensee, and it is his duty to secure the services of such officer or officers as are deemed by the City to be necessary to preserve order and enforce the rules and regulations prescribed in this chapter and the state law. [Ord. 53 § 6, 1996.]

5.32.120 Smoking prohibited.
No person shall be permitted to smoke, or carry in his or her hand a lighted cigar, cigarette or pipe while on the dance floor. [Ord. 53 § 6, 1996.]

5.32.130 Duty of public dance halls.
Each holder of a license to operate a public dance hall shall ensure that all individuals holding public dances and/or teenager dances in said facility are duly licensed. A breach of this section shall constitute grounds for revocation of the public dance hall license. [Ord. 53 § 6, 1996.]

5.32.140 Teenager dances – Prohibited activity.
No teenager shall be allowed to leave a dance and return to said dance during the hours of the dance unless said teenager is accompanied by a duly authorized chaperon or law enforcement officer. [Ord. 53 § 6, 1996.]

5.32.150 Adjustment and/or waiver fee.
The City Manager or designee may in his discretion waive or adjust the fees required in this chapter where the fee appears to be an undue burden upon a charitable or nonprofit organization. [Ord. 53 § 6, 1996.]

Chapter 5.35 MASSAGE BUSINESSES

Sections:
5.35.010     Definitions.
5.35.020     Business registration.
5.35.030     Penalties.
5.35.040     Additional enforcement.
5.35.050     License for business required.
5.35.060     License for massage practitioners.
5.35.070     License for managers.
5.35.080     License – Expiration – Due date.
5.35.090     License fees.
5.35.100     License applications.
5.35.130     Transfer of licenses and change of location.
5.35.240     Standards of safety and sanitation.
5.35.250     Standards of conduct/operation.
5.35.260     Internal warning systems prohibited.

5.35.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
“City” means the City of Lakewood, Washington.
“City Manager” means the City Manager of the City of Lakewood, Washington.
“Conviction” means an adjudication or conviction of guilt and occurs at such time as a plea of guilty has been accepted or a verdict of guilty has been filed, notwithstanding the pendency of any future proceeding including but not limited to sentencing or disposition, post-trial or post-fact finding motions, and appeals. “Conviction” also means a bail forfeiture and includes all instances in which a plea of nolo contendere is the basis for the conviction and all proceedings in which the sentence has been deferred or suspended.
“Genitals” means genitals, pubic area, anus, or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of female.
“Manager” means any person who manages, directs, administers, or is in charge of, the affairs and/or conduct of any portion of any activity involving massage practitioners occurring at any place offering massage.
“Massage” means the treatment of a human body by another by the external manipulation or pressure of soft tissue. Massage includes rubbing, kneading, touching, stroking, tapping or any other manipulations with or without the aids of superficial heat, cold, water, lubricants, or salts, and including the use of equipment, machinery or appliances.
“Massage business” means the operation of a business providing massages.
“Massage practitioner” means a person engaged in the practice of massage. [Ord. 80 § 1, 1996.]

5.35.020 Business registration.
Unless otherwise specified, the general business registration provisions contained in Chapter 5.02 LMC, including those procedures and processes governing the denial or revocation of any license issued under this chapter and any appeals therefrom, shall apply to this chapter, in addition to the provisions hereof of this chapter. [Ord. 610 § 39, 2015; Ord. 80 § 1, 1996.]

5.35.030 Penalties.
A. Criminal Penalty. Any person violating any of the terms of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, be punished by a jail sentence of up to 90 days, or a fine of up to $1,000, or both such jail sentence and fine, except as indicated in subsection C of this section.
B. Civil Penalty. In addition to any other penalty provided in this section or by law, any person who violates any provision of any business license ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $250.00 per violation to be directly assessed by the City Manager or designee. All civil penalties assessed will be enforced and collected with the procedure specified under this chapter.
C. Violation of LMC 5.35.050 and/or 5.35.060. . Any person who violates LMC 5.35.050 and/or 5.35.060 shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a jail sentence of up to 364 days, or a fine of up to $5,000, or both. It is the City of Lakewood’s intention that a conviction under this section shall be a predicate offense for subsequent prosecution in accord with RCW 18.130.190(7)(a) and (7)(b). [Ord. 610 § 40, 2015; Ord. 80 § 1, 1996.]

5.35.040 Additional enforcement.
Notwithstanding the existence or use of any other remedy, the City may seek legal or equitable relief to enjoin any acts or practices which constitute or will constitute a violation of any provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 80 § 1, 1996.]

5.35.050 License for business required.
It is unlawful to conduct, operate or maintain a massage business unless such establishment or premises is licensed as hereinafter provided. [Ord. 80 § 1, 1996.]

5.35.060 License for massage practitioners.
It is unlawful for any person to perform a massage or represent himself or herself as a massage practitioner without first applying for, receiving and being in possession of a current, valid Washington State massage practitioner’s license. [Ord. 302 § 1, 2003; Ord. 80 § 1, 1996.]

5.35.070 License for managers.
It is unlawful for any person to manage a massage business without first applying for and receiving a massage manager license. It is provided, however, that if the person who will be serving as the manager of the massage business will also be working in the massage business as a licensed massage practitioner and has a valid massage practitioner’s license pursuant to LMC 5.35.060, and the business has a valid business license pursuant to LMC 5.35.050, said person shall not be required to pay the license fee for the massage manager license as that fee is identified in LMC 5.35.090. [Ord. 107 § 1, 1996; Ord. 80 § 1, 1996.]

5.35.080 License – Expiration – Due date.
A. Expiration. Each license issued or renewed under the provisions of this chapter shall expire one year from the date of issuance by the City, unless renewed. Upon renewal, each license shall be valid for an additional year from the date of expiration, unless suspended, revoked, or closed. Any additional rules and regulations and conditional licenses imposed or stipulated to pursuant to LMC 5.02.150 shall remain in full force and effect unless expressly terminated in writing.
B. Due Date. All license fees required by LMC 5.35.090, and pursuant to the City of Lakewood fee resolution, are payable to the City at least four weeks prior to the opening of any massage business, or the performance of any massage.
C. Failure to Renew. Failure to renew shall invalidate the license and all privileges granted to the licensee. [Ord. 548 § 4, 2012; Ord. 80 § 1, 1996.]

5.35.090 License fees.
A. Amount of Fee. Applicants granted a license under this chapter shall pay to the City the following fees prior to the issuance of their license in accordance with LMC 3.20.010, the fee schedule, at least one copy of which shall be kept on file in the Office of the Lakewood City Clerk. [Ord. 288 § 9, 2002; Ord. 245 § 5, 2000; Ord. 87 § 4, 1996; Ord. 80 § 1, 1996.]

5.35.100 License applications.
A. Massage Business. Any person who does not possess a current, valid Washington State massage practitioner’s license who seeks to operate or conduct a massage business must first apply, receive and possess a City of Lakewood massage business license. All applications for a massage business license or license renewal shall be submitted in the name of the person or entity proposing to manage or maintain such massage business on the business premises, shall be signed by such person or his or her legally authorized agent, and notarized or certified as true under penalty of perjury. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the City Manager or designee, which shall require the following information:
    1. The name, residence address, residence telephone number, date and place of birth, driver’s license number, and social security number of the applicant if the applicant is an individual or tax identification number if the applicant is a corporation or other entity;
    2. The business name, address and telephone number of the establishment;
    3. The names, addresses, telephone numbers and social security numbers of any partners, corporate officers, or shareholders who own 10 percent or more of the business, or other persons who have a substantial interest or management responsibilities in connection with the business, specifying the interest or management responsibility of each. For the purpose of this subsection “substantial interest” shall mean ownership of 10 percent or more of the business, or any other kind of contribution to the business of the same or greater size;
    4. The name of the landlord or property owner of the property on which the business is situated.
    5. Persons who possess a valid, current Washington State massage practitioner’s license shall further obtain a City of Lakewood general business license prior to conducting such business activities within the City. Persons who possess a valid, current Washington State massage practitioner’s license who are employees of a currently licensed massage business are exempt from the requirement of obtaining a City of Lakewood general business license.
B. Massage Manager. Any person who does not possess a current, valid Washington State massage practitioner’s license who seeks to manage the activities of a massage business must apply for, receive and possess a City of Lakewood massage manager’s license. All applications for a massage manager’s license or license renewal shall be signed by the applicant and notarized or certified to be true under penalty of perjury. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the City Manager or designee, which shall require, at a minimum, the following information:
    1. The applicant’s name, residence address, residence telephone number, date and place of birth, driver’s license number and social security number;
    2. A letter, dated no more than 30 days prior to the date of submission of the application, from the owner of the business indicating intent to employ the applicant on a specified date;
    3. Written proof that the applicant is 18 years of age or older as provided for in this section;
    4. The mailing address and street address of all places within the City of Lakewood at which the massage manager will provide services. The massage manager shall notify the City Manager or designee, in writing, of any changes in, or additions to, the location of such services within 14 days of any such change or addition.
C. Background Checks. All applications for massage business or massage manager licenses submitted pursuant to this chapter will be submitted to a background check in accordance with the procedures of the City or its law enforcement agency. [Ord. 302 § 2, 2003; Ord. 80 § 1, 1996.]

5.35.130 Transfer of licenses and change of location.
Massage Business. No massage business license issued under this chapter shall be transferable from one person or entity to another person or entity. Upon the sale or transfer of an interest greater than 50 percent in a massage business, a license shall become null and void. A new application shall be made by any person desiring to operate or maintain the establishment and shall include a release of interest statement from the previous licensee and a signed lease or rental agreement for the establishment. [Ord. 302 § 5, 2003; Ord. 300 § 15, 2003; Ord. 80 § 1, 1996.]

5.35.240 Standards of safety and sanitation.
Every manager, massage practitioner, massage owner and any employee or agent of such an establishment shall comply at a minimum with the following health and sanitary requirements:
A. Each room or enclosure where massage services are performed on patrons shall be provided with adequate lighting in accordance with the building code, and in addition, at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts shall be provided in each room or enclosure where services are performed and shall be in operation when such services are performed.
B. The premises shall have equipment for disinfecting and cleaning nondisposable instruments and materials used in administering massage services. Such materials and instruments shall be cleaned after each use.
C. Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times.
D. Each massage patron shall be furnished with an individual clean towel. Towels shall not be reused until they have been washed and sanitized. There shall be adequate storage facilities for towel and mat storage.
E. All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, sauna baths, steam or bath areas shall have surfaces which may be readily cleaned. They shall be covered with single-service towels when in use.
F. Oils, creams, lotions or other preparations used in administering massages shall be kept in clean containers or cabinets.
G. Dressing, locker and toilet facilities shall be provided upon request for all patrons served at any given time. Upon the request of a patron, the licensee shall provide the patron with facilities to lock or secure personal property. Male and female patrons shall not simultaneously use common shower and/or bathtub, dressing, toilet and massage room facilities.
H. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use.
I. Each massage practitioner shall wash his or her hands in hot running water using soap or disinfectant before and after administering a massage.
J. No person shall consume food or alcoholic beverages in massage work areas.
K. A person suffering from infectious or contagious disease(s) transmittable by touch shall not be treated by any licensed massage business or massage practitioner. A massage practitioner who is suffering from infectious or contagious disease(s) shall not administer massage services.
L. All massage establishments shall continuously comply with all applicable building, fire and health ordinances and regulations.
M. All plumbing shall be installed according to the City’s plumbing code and shall be free of potential cross-connections. All toilet facilities shall be available as required in the City’s plumbing code, applicable to places of assembly.
N. All exercise equipment and appliances shall be routinely checked for possible structural weaknesses and shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary manner at all times.
O. Any facilities using ultraviolet exposure rooms in their establishment shall post maximum exposure time. [Ord. 302 § 6, 2003; Ord. 300 § 16, 2003; Ord. 80 § 1, 1996.]

5.35.250 Standards of conduct/operation.
A. Owner/Manager Requirements. The following standards of conduct and operation shall be adhered to by the owner, proprietor, manager, or person in charge of any massage business:
    1. Any person who is employed to give a massage must be at least 18 years of age and be validly licensed as a massage practitioner pursuant to this chapter and state law.
    2. At all times during the hours a massage business is open for business, and/or during the presence of patrons, at least one validly licensed massage practitioner must be on the premises.
    3. Any person who is employed by a massage business must present documentation that he or she has attained the age of 18 years when an inspection pursuant to this chapter is conducted. Proper documentation shall be described in LMC 5.35.100.
    4. Provide that all doors in such premises, excluding doors in the office and storage rooms, unless such doors provide access to service areas, are so equipped that they may not be fastened shut so as to prevent reasonable access by such authorities who announce their authority to enter prior to inspection.
B. All Licenses. The following standards of conduct and operation shall be adhered to by all licensees:
    1. All licensees shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, including all safety and sanitation requirements and the City’s building, fire and zoning codes;
    2. All licensees shall allow any police officer, the City Manager or his or her designee, or a representative from the Tacoma-Pierce County Health Department or the Lakewood Fire District entry to the premises during the hours the massage business is open for business, upon presentation of proper identification, for purposes of inspecting the premises;
    3. Maintain business receipts showing the date of service(s) given, the type of service(s) rendered and the name and city license number of the employee rendering the service(s). These business receipts shall be retained for a period of three years after the date of the service(s), and shall be open to inspection by the City Manager or designee and the law enforcement officers of the City of Lakewood;
    4. Massage practitioners shall maintain in good standing a valid, current Washington State massage practitioner’s license;
    5. Post in a prominent place a list of all services offered with a brief description of what the service entails along with the costs of such service(s). All business transactions with the customers must be conducted in accordance with said posted list;
    6. Not distribute or consume any alcoholic beverages and/or controlled substances on licensed premises; and
    7. Not allow any unlicensed massage.
C. Minors. It shall be unlawful for the owner, manager, or any massage practitioner, or any employee or agent to admit anyone under the age of 18 years of age and permit them to remain in or about such premises, unless such person is accompanied by or presents the written consent of his or her parent or legal guardian.
D. Prostitution. It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager, massage practitioner, or any employee or agent to knowingly harbor, admit, receive or permit to be or remain in or about such premises any prostitute or any person under the influence of any narcotic or dangerous drug or to perform or allow to be performed any act, massage or manipulation in which contact is made with another’s genital areas either by hand, body or by any mechanical device or object, whether it is covered or uncovered; clothed or unclothed, in whole or in part.
E. Clothing Required. It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager, massage practitioner, or any employee or agent to disrobe or be partially disrobed in the presence of another while in any facility defined in this chapter.
F. Supervision/Inspection. The owner or manager shall have the premises supervised at all times when open for business. Rooms and stalls used for purpose of massage shall be constructed in such a manner as to permit inspection. [Ord. 302 § 7, 2003; Ord. 80 § 1, 1996.]

5.35.260 Internal warning systems prohibited.
Any business required to be licensed under this chapter shall not install any device that is designed as an internal warning system and no persons shall use any device for alerting persons in other portions of the building. [Ord. 80 § 1, 1996.]

Chapter 5.56 SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS

Sections:
5.56.010     Regulation of solicitors and peddlers.
5.56.020     Solicitor or peddler defined.
5.56.030     General licensing regulations referenced.
5.56.040     License fee, term and limitations.
5.56.050     Exemptions.
5.56.060     Restrictions on soliciting.
5.56.070     Contents of license application.
5.56.080     Investigation by law enforcement official.
5.56.090     Bond required.
5.56.100     Alternate form of employer’s bond.
5.56.110     Orders taken by solicitors or peddlers.
5.56.120     Carrying license required.
5.56.130     Immediate disclosure of nature of business required.
5.56.140     Misrepresentation of facts.
5.56.150     Receipt – Contents – Notice of cancellation.
5.56.160     Peddling flags, emblems or insignia of United States, Washington State, county, City or fraternal organizations prohibited.
5.56.170     Sale of prize packages prohibited.
5.56.180     Use of motor vehicle – Liability insurance required.
5.56.190     Unlawful to blockade streets while peddling.

5.56.010 Regulation of solicitors and peddlers.
The City Council finds that the public health, safety and welfare requires that the citizens of the City be provided with information relating to persons and organizations who solicit and peddle within the City, that such activities be regulated, and that the citizens of the City be protected from deceptive and dishonest practices. [Ord. 173 § 1, 1998.]

5.56.020 Solicitor or peddler defined.
A “solicitor” or “peddler” is defined as any person, either as a principal or agent, who goes from place to place within the City, and who:
A. Sells, takes orders for, or offers to sell, any goods, wares or merchandise whether or not collecting in advance for such goods, wares or merchandise; and/or
B. Sells, takes orders for, or offers to sell services, whether or not collecting in advance for such services; and/or
C. Seeks contributions or donations to private causes, as opposed to tax-exempt charities; or
D. Seeks opinions, preferences or other information for commercial purposes. [Ord. 173 § 1, 1998.]

5.56.030 General licensing regulations referenced.
The licensing regulations applicable to solicitors and peddlers as set forth in this chapter shall be in addition to and supplemented by the general licensing provisions of Chapter 5.02 LMC, to the extent that the provisions of Chapter 5.02 LMC are not in specific conflict with the provisions hereof. The provisions of Chapter 5.02 LMC are thus incorporated herein by this reference as if fully set forth. [Ord. 173 § 1, 1998.]

5.56.040 License fee, term and limitations.
A. Any person seeking to engage in business as a solicitor or peddler shall file a written application for such license with the City on a form provided by the City Manager or designee.
B. The fee for a solicitor or peddler license shall be in accordance with LMC 3.20.010, the fee schedule, at least one copy of which shall be kept on file in the Office of the Lakewood City Clerk.
C. Each license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire one year from the date of issuance by the City, unless renewed. Upon renewal, each license shall be valid for an additional year from the date of expiration, unless suspended, revoked, closed, or invalidated by a change in business as defined in LMC 5.02.040. Any additional rules and regulations and conditional licenses imposed or stipulated to pursuant to LMC 5.02.150 shall remain in full force and effect unless expressly terminated in writing.
D. The number of solicitors or peddlers who are permitted to solicit or peddle for any one activity, company, entity or sponsor during any 30-day period of time shall be limited to not more than 10 licensed individuals. [Ord. 548 § 9, 2012; Ord. 288 § 16, 2002; Ord. 173 § 1, 1998.]

5.56.050 Exemptions.
The licensing and bonding requirements applicable to solicitors and peddlers shall not apply to:
A. Newspaper carriers, whether subscriptions are taken or not;
B. Any person selling or delivering, door-to-door or on an established route, milk or milk products, bakery goods, or laundry and dry cleaning services;
C. Persons who are soliciting donations for organizations exempt from taxation under 26 U.S.C. Sections 501(c)(3) and (c)(4); provided, that the solicitation is managed and conducted solely by officers and members of such organizations who are unpaid for such services. Such officers or members must be able to show satisfactory proof of such tax exempt status, and their office or membership;
D. All persons or businesses exempt from business licensing requirements pursuant to LMC 5.02.050;
E. Bona fide candidates, campaign workers and political committees campaigning on behalf of candidates or on ballot issues and persons soliciting signatures of registered voters on petitions to be submitted to any governmental agency. [Ord. 173 § 1, 1998.]

5.56.060 Restrictions on soliciting.
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the following time and location restrictions:
A. No peddler or solicitor shall engage or attempt to engage in the business of peddling at any home, residence, gated residential complex, apartment complex or business that prominently displays a “No Peddlers” or “No Solicitors” sign or any other similar sign that communicates the desire of the occupants, managers or operators to not be contacted by peddlers or solicitors; and
B. No peddler or solicitor shall engage in the business of peddling between the hours of 8:00 p.m. or one-half hour after sunset, whichever occurs earlier, and 9:00 a.m. [Ord. 173 § 1, 1998.]

5.56.070 Contents of license application.
The application for a solicitor or peddler license shall require the following information:
A. Name, description and date of birth of the applicant;
B. Permanent home address and phone number, and local address and phone number of the applicant;
C. A brief description of the nature of the business and of the goods to be sold or services to be offered;
D. If employed by another, the address and name of the employer and a statement of the exact relationship between the applicant and the employer;
E. The length of time for which the right to do business is requested;
F. The place of manufacture or production of goods to be offered for sale, the present location of such goods and the proposed method of delivery;
G. A copy of a current, valid Washington State driver’s license or Washington State identification card, or other similar photo identification containing the current, valid name, address and date of birth of the applicant. The copy thereof shall be provided along with the application form to the representative of the City who receives the license application, and the original of such photo-identification shall be shown to said City representative;
H. Three two-inch by two-inch color photographs of the applicant taken within six months of the date of application showing only the full face;
I. A statement as to any convictions of crimes or violations of municipal ordinances during the past five years, to include the date, the nature of the offense and the penalty assessed therefor;
J. A statement that a license, if granted, will not be used or represented as an endorsement by the City for solicitations thereunder.
K. The application shall be sworn to, declared or certified under penalty of perjury by each applicant. [Ord. 173 § 1, 1998.]

5.56.080 Investigation by law enforcement official.
Prior to the issuance of any solicitor or peddler license:
A. The Police Chief or designee shall investigate the applicant as specified in LMC 5.02.090 or as otherwise appropriate, to assess any known dangers or risks that could stem from the applicant going door to door in the neighborhoods of the City. The Police Chief or designee shall submit a written report to the City Manager or designee stating his/her recommendation as to approval or disapproval of the license application.
B. If the Police Chief or designee recommends disapproval, his/her report(s) shall specify the reasons for such recommendation. [Ord. 173 § 1, 1998.]

5.56.090 Bond required.
Every applicant shall file with the City before a license shall be issued, a bond in the amount of $1,000 executed by the applicant as principal and a surety company authorized to do business in the state, running in favor of the City, conditioned that any person who may suffer any loss or damage by reason of any malfeasance, misfeasance, or deceptive practice in the conduct of such solicitation or peddling shall have the right to institute an action for recovery against the licensee and the surety upon such bond. The bond shall further require that the principal shall fully comply with all provisions of state law and City ordinances regulating the business of solicitors or peddlers, or business in general, and that all moneys paid as a down payment or donated will be accounted for and applied according to the representation of the solicitor or peddler and further that the property ordered or sold will be delivered or the services will be performed according to the undertaking of the solicitor or peddler. Any person injured by the licensee’s/principal’s failure to account for moneys received, deliver the goods ordered or sold, or perform the services promised, shall have in his or her own name, a right of action on such bond against both the principal and surety. [Ord. 173 § 1, 1998.]

5.56.100 Alternate form of employer’s bond.
In the place of the bond required at LMC 5.56.090, any person employing solicitors or peddlers shall file with the City before a license shall issue to any of such person’s employees, a bond in the amount of $5,000 executed by the employer as principal and a surety company authorized to do business in the state as a surety, running in favor of the City, conditioned that any person who may suffer any loss or damage by reason of any malfeasance, misfeasance, or deceptive practice in the conduct of such solicitation or peddle shall have the right to institute an action for recovery against the licensee and the surety upon such bond. Such bond shall further require that the employer and all employees and agents of the employer, shall fully comply with all provisions of state law and City ordinances regulating the business of solicitors or peddlers, or business in general, and that all moneys paid as a down payment or donated will be accounted for and applied according to the representation of the solicitor or peddler and further that the property ordered or sold will be delivered or the services will be performed according to the undertaking of the solicitor or peddler. Any person injured by the licensee’s/principal’s failure to account for moneys received, deliver the goods ordered or sold, or perform the services promised, shall have in his or her own name, a right of action on such bond against both the principal and surety. [Ord. 173 § 1, 1998.]

5.56.110 Orders taken by solicitors or peddlers.
All orders or donations taken by licensed solicitors or peddlers shall be written in duplicate, with one copy to be given to the purchaser or contributor. The order or donation shall contain the name and address of the solicitor or peddler, and in the case of an order, its complete terms, the amount of any prepayment, and a statement of the purchaser’s right of rescission pursuant to state law. [Ord. 173 § 1, 1998.]

5.56.120 Carrying license required.
The solicitor’s or peddler’s license shall be carried at all times when soliciting or peddling in the City and shall be exhibited by such solicitor or peddler whenever requested to do so by a police officer, any City official, or any persons solicited or peddled. [Ord. 173 § 1, 1998.]

5.56.130 Immediate disclosure of nature of business required.
In addition to complying with the provisions of LMC 5.56.110, each person engaged in peddling or soliciting for the sale of goods or services at the residence of a prospective buyer, shall at the outset disclose to the prospective buyer his or her name and the company or product he or she represents, and if requested so to do, shall immediately leave the premises. It is unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to make any assertion, representation or statement of fact which misrepresents the purposes for his or her call, or to use any plan, scheme, or ruse which misrepresents such purpose. [Ord. 173 § 1, 1998.]

5.56.140 Misrepresentation of facts.
It is unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to make or cause to be made, directly or indirectly, for the purpose of selling or procuring an order for the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise, services, or anything of value, any assertion, representation, or statement of fact which is untrue, deceptive or misleading. [Ord. 173 § 1, 1998.]

5.56.150 Receipt – Contents – Notice of cancellation.
Every sale made or order taken by a peddler or solicitor required to be licensed by this chapter shall be evidenced by a signed receipt, contract, or other signed memorandum of the transaction which shall be given to the purchaser. Such receipt, contract, or memorandum shall state the date and terms of the transaction, the amount of any payment made, the name and address of the peddler or solicitor, and in immediate proximity to the space reserved in the contract for the signature of the buyer or on the front page of the receipt if a contract is not used and in bold face type of a minimum size of 10 points, the following notice:NOTICE TO BUYER
YOU, THE BUYER, MAY CANCEL THIS TRANSACTION AT ANY TIME PRIOR TO MIDNIGHT OF THE THIRD BUSINESS DAY AFTER THE DATE OF THIS TRANSACTION. SEE THE ATTACHED NOTICE OF CANCELLATION FORM FOR AN EXPLANATION OF THIS RIGHT.
The seller must furnish each buyer, at the time he or she signs any sales contract or otherwise buys or agrees to buy goods or services from the seller, a completed form in duplicate, captioned “NOTICE OF CANCELLATION,” which shall be attached to the contract, receipt, or memorandum and easily detachable, and which shall contain in 10-point bold type the following information and statements in the same language, e.g., Spanish, as that used in such contract, receipt or memorandum:NOTICE OF CANCELLATION
(enter date of transaction)
• YOU MAY CANCEL THIS TRANSACTION, WITHOUT ANY PENALTY OR OBLIGATION, WITHIN THREE BUSINESS DAYS FROM THE ABOVE DATE.
• IF YOU CANCEL, ANY PROPERTY TRADED IN, ANY PAYMENTS MADE BY YOU UNDER THE CONTRACT OR SALE, AND ANY NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENT EXECUTED BY YOU WILL RETURNED WITHIN 10 BUSINESS DAYS FOLLOWING RECEIPT BY THE SELLER OF YOUR CANCELLATION NOTICE, AND ANY SECURITY INTEREST ARISING OUT OF THE TRANSACTION WILL BE CANCELED.
• IF YOU CANCEL, YOU MUST MAKE AVAILABLE TO THE SELLER AT YOUR RESIDENCE, IN SUBSTANTIALLY AS GOOD CONDITION AS WHEN RECEIVED, ANY GOODS DELIVERED TO YOU UNDER THIS CONTRACT OR SALE; OR YOU MAY IF YOU WISH, COMPLY WITH THE INSTRUCTIONS OF THE SELLER REGARDING THE RETURN SHIPMENT OF THE GOODS AT THE SELLER’S EXPENSE AND RISK.
• IF YOU MAKE THE GOODS AVAILABLE TO THE SELLER AND IF THE SELLER DOES NOT PICK THEM UP WITHIN 20 DAYS OF THE DATE OF YOUR NOTICE OF CANCELLATION, YOU MAY RETAIN OR DISPOSE OF THE GOODS WITHOUT ANY FURTHER OBLIGATION. IF YOU AGREE TO RETURN THE GOODS TO THE SELLER AND FAIL TO DO SO, THEN YOU REMAIN LIABLE FOR THE FULL PERFORMANCE OF THE CONTRACT.
• TO CANCEL THIS TRANSACTION, MAIL OR DELIVER A SIGNED AND DATED COPY OF THIS CANCELLATION NOTICE OR ANY OTHER WRITTEN NOTICE, OR SEND A TELEGRAM TO,
(Name of Seller)
AT NOT LATER THAN MIDNIGHT
(Address of Seller’s Place of Business)
OF,
(Date)
I HEREBY CANCEL THIS TRANSACTION.
(Buyer’s signature) (Date)
The sending of any such notice of cancellation within the specified period shall operate to cancel the purchase made or contract entered into, and the seller shall thereupon, without request, refund to the buyer any deposit or payment made, and in accordance with such notice of cancellation may reclaim from the buyer at the place of delivery any goods received by the buyer under such purchase or contract. [Ord. 173 § 1, 1998.]

5.56.160 Peddling flags, emblems or insignia of United States, Washington State, county, City or fraternal organizations prohibited.
It is unlawful to peddle or give, and no peddler’s license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall authorize the peddling, or the giving, with the request for a donation in connection therewith, of any flag, emblem, badge, shield or other insignia of the United States, state of Washington, county or City, or any fraternal organization. [Ord. 173 § 1, 1998.]

5.56.170 Sale of prize packages prohibited.
No peddler’s license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall authorize the selling of prize packages or the disposition of any article or thing in any form, by chance or lot, nor shall it permit misrepresentation of the quantity, quality or origin of any article or thing so peddled. [Ord. 173 § 1, 1998.]

5.56.180 Use of motor vehicle – Liability insurance required.
It is unlawful for anyone to use a motor vehicle for peddling, or for the owner of any motor vehicle to permit such vehicle to be used for peddling, unless such owner maintains public liability and property damage insurance covering the use and operation of such vehicle while peddling, in the amounts hereinafter provided, and no peddler’s license shall be issued for peddling with any motor vehicle unless the owner of the motor vehicle to be so used has filed with the City a policy or policies of public liability insurance providing coverage for personal injury to or death of any one person in the amount of at least $10,000, and subject to the aforesaid limit of any one person injured or killed, of at least $20,000 for personal injury to or death of two or more persons in any one accident, and for damage to property in the amount of at least $5,000 resulting from any one accident. Such policy or policies must contain an endorsement providing for 10 days’ notice to the City in the event of any change or cancellation.
It is unlawful to operate or permit to be operated any motor vehicle for peddling unless there shall accompany such vehicle a valid and subsisting certificate from the insurer setting forth the make, type and motor number or identification number of the vehicle and the name of the company providing the public liability insurance herein required and the insurance policy number or numbers. [Ord. 173 § 1, 1998.]

5.56.190 Unlawful to blockade streets while peddling.
It is unlawful for any person, either selling, or offering for sale, any article, by peddling or soliciting in any place, to obstruct or cause to be obstructed, the passage of any sidewalk, street, avenue, alley or any other public place, by causing people to congregate at or near the place where any article is being sold or offered for sale. [Ord. 173 § 1, 1998.]

Chapter 5.60 RENTAL HOUSING LICENSING

Sections:
5.60.005     Declaration of purpose.
5.60.010     Definitions.
5.60.020     Business license – Fee.
5.60.025     Scope.
5.60.050     Employment of law enforcement officers.
5.60.060     Duty to comply with all local, state and federal laws and regulations – License revocation.
5.60.070     Reimbursement for transitional costs.
5.60.080     Inspection and certificate of compliance required.
5.60.100     Unlawful to rent noncompliant rental units.
5.60.110     Rule making.
5.60.120     License denial, suspension or revocation.
5.60.130     Immediate health and safety threats.
5.60.140     No warranty by City.
5.60.150     Penalties.
5.60.160     Consistency with Chapter 59.18 RCW.

5.60.005 Declaration of purpose.
The City of Lakewood finds that the imposition of a residential rental inspection program will protect the public health, safety, and welfare of tenants by encouraging the proper maintenance of residential rental housing, by identifying and requiring correction of substandard housing conditions, and by preventing conditions of deterioration and blight that could adversely impact the quality of life in Lakewood. [Ord. 644 § 2, 2016.]

5.60.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words or phrases have the meaning prescribed below:
“Accessory dwelling unit” or “ADU” means a housing unit that is accessory to a single-household dwelling and meets the requirements of LMC 18A.70.313 for accessory dwellings.
“Certificate of inspection” means an unsworn statement, declaration, verification, or certificate made in accordance with the requirements of RCW 9A.72.085 by a qualified inspector that states that the landlord has not failed to fulfill any substantial obligation imposed under RCW 59.18.060 that endangers or impairs the health or safety of a tenant, including (1) structural members that are of insufficient size or strength to carry imposed loads with safety, (2) exposure of the occupants to the weather, (3) plumbing and sanitation defects that directly expose the occupants to the risk of illness or injury, (4) not providing facilities adequate to supply heat and water and hot water as reasonably required by the tenant, (5) providing heating or ventilation systems that are not functional or are hazardous, (6) defective, hazardous, or missing electrical wiring or electrical service, (7) defective or hazardous exits that increase the risk of injury to occupants, and (8) conditions that increase the risk of fire.
“Director” means the City Manager or designee assigned with the enforcement of this chapter.
“Nonowner managers,” as used in this chapter, means any person(s) hired or engaged for the purpose of providing management services for any residential housing unit within the City of Lakewood, where the manager(s) has/have no ownership in the residential housing unit being managed.
“Owner” means any person who, alone or with others, has title or interest in any building, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof, and including any person who as agent, or executor, administrator, trustee, or guardian of an estate has charge, care, or control of any building. This definition includes, without limitation, the owner, lessor, or sublessor of the rental unit or the property of which it is a part, and in addition means any person designated as representative of the owner, lessor, or sublessor including, but not limited to, an agent, a resident manager, or a designated property manager.
“Qualified inspector” means: a United States Housing and Urban Development certified inspector; a Washington State licensed home inspector; an American Society of Home Inspectors certified inspector; a private inspector certified by the National Association of Housing and Redevelopment Officials, the American Association of Code Enforcement, or other comparable professional association as approved by the local municipality; a municipal code enforcement officer; a Washington licensed structural engineer; or a Washington licensed architect.
“Rental-housing complex,” as used in this chapter, means any complex of five or more residential units on one property or on adjacent property owned by the same person or persons, or business entity, or multiples thereof or combinations thereof, or five or more residential rental properties located within the City of Lakewood not on adjacent properties but owned, in whole or in part, by the same owner(s).
“Rental-housing complex owners,” as used in this chapter, means the individual or individuals, partnership(s), corporation(s) or any combination thereof owning or having an ownership interest in any residential housing unit within the City of Lakewood.
“Rental unit” means a residential housing unit occupied or rented by a tenant or available for rent by a tenant.
“Residential housing unit” means all dwelling units on a contiguous quantity of land managed by the same landlord as a single, rental complex. This definition includes, but is not limited to, any structure or part of a structure in the City of Lakewood that is used or may be used as a home, residence or sleeping place by one person or by two or more persons maintaining a common household, including but not limited to single-family residences and units of multiplexes and apartment buildings.
“Shelter” means a facility with overnight sleeping accommodations, owned, operated, or managed by a nonprofit agency or governmental entity, the primary purpose of which is to provide temporary shelter for the homeless in general or for specific populations of the homeless.
“Tenant” means a person occupying or holding possession of a building or premises pursuant to a rental agreement.
“Transitional housing” means residential housing units owned, operated, or managed by a nonprofit agency or governmental entity in which supportive services are provided to individuals or families that were formerly homeless, with the intent to stabilize them and move them to permanent housing within a period of not more than 24 months.
“Unit unavailable for rent” means a residential housing unit that is not offered or available for rent as a rental unit, and that prior to offering or making the unit available as a rental unit, the owner is required to obtain a residential rental business license for the building in which the unit is located and comply with applicable administrative regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. [Ord. 644 § 3, 2016; Ord. 468 § 1, 2008; Ord. 255 § 1, 2001; Ord. 219 § 1, 1999.]

5.60.020 Business license – Fee.
Each multi-housing complex in the City, as defined herein, shall obtain and maintain in good order a rental-housing complex license issued by the City in accordance with the procedures of this title.
A. The fee for a rental-housing complex license shall be in accordance with LMC 3.20.010, the fee schedule, at least one copy of which shall be kept on file in the Office of the Lakewood City Clerk.
B. Each license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire one year from the date of issuance by the City, unless renewed. Upon renewal, each license shall be valid for an additional year from the date of expiration, unless suspended, revoked, closed, or invalidated by a change in business as defined in LMC 5.02.040. Any additional rules and regulations and conditional licenses imposed or stipulated to pursuant to LMC 5.02.150 shall remain in full force and effect unless expressly terminated in writing. [Ord. 548 § 10, 2012; Ord. 288 § 17, 2002; Ord. 255 § 1, 2001; Ord. 219 § 1, 1999.]

5.60.025 Scope.
The provisions of this chapter apply to all residential housing units, with the exception of:
A. Rental housing units occupied by owner or by parent or child of owner;
B. Units unavailable for rent;
C. Any facility such as a hotel, motel, condominium, resort, or any other facility or place offering three or more lodging units to guests for periods of less than 30 days; provided, that if any guest resides for a period of 30 days or more, then such facility shall be subject to this chapter;
D. Housing accommodations in retirement or nursing homes;
E. Housing accommodations in any hospital, state-licensed community care facility, convent, monastery or other facility occupied exclusively by members of a religious order, or an extended medical care facility;
F. Rental units that a government unit, agency or authority owns, operates or manages, or that are specifically exempted from municipal regulation by state or federal law or administrative regulation. This exception does not apply once the governmental ownership, operation or management is discontinued;
G. Newly constructed rental units with satisfactory certificate of occupancy and no code violations for 10 years from the date of the certificate of occupancy;
H. Rental units:
    1. That receive funding or subsidies from the federal, state or a local government;
    2. That are inspected at least every three years as a requirement of the funding or subsidy;
    3. That provide a copy of the inspection to the City; and
    4. For which the Director determines that the inspection is substantially equivalent to the inspection required by this chapter;
I. Accessory dwelling units;
J. Shelters and transitional housing;
K. Housing units which may be exempt from inspection as may otherwise be provided by law. [Ord. 644 § 4, 2016.]

5.60.050 Employment of law enforcement officers.
In the event it becomes necessary for the City to require that a licensee secure the services of one or more law enforcement officer(s) to properly enforce the applicable laws, rules and regulations and to maintain order in the rental-housing complex, all expense for such service shall be borne by the licensee, and it is his duty to secure the services of such officer or officers at a level prescribed by the City and as are deemed by the City to be necessary to preserve order and enforce the rules and regulations prescribed in this title, the City Code and state law. Failure to comply with this requirement, if imposed by the City, will result in revocation of the business license in the manner prescribed by the City Code. [Ord. 255 § 1, 2001; Ord. 219 § 1, 1999.]

5.60.060 Duty to comply with all local, state and federal laws and regulations – License revocation.
All persons licensed pursuant to this chapter must comply with all local, state and federal regulations. Violation of this section shall constitute grounds for revocation of license. Additionally, the provisions of Chapter 5.02 LMC shall apply to the extent not in conflict herewith. [Ord. 255 § 1, 2001; Ord. 219 § 1, 1999.]

5.60.070 Reimbursement for transitional costs.
In the event that a rental-housing complex is closed by the City or any agency acting on behalf of or in coordination with the City stemming from enforcement of the provisions of this chapter or any applicable health, building, fire, housing or life-safety code, or other serious violations, it shall be a prerequisite condition for the license to be reinstated and/or the rental-housing complex to be allowed to reopen that the operator of the rental-housing complex reimburse the City for any transitional costs and/or tenant relocation costs incurred by the City that are directly attributable to such closure. For the purposes hereof, “transitional costs and/or tenant relocation costs” include but are not limited to tenant travel costs and temporary hotel vouchers or other expenses incurred to procure alternate housing following tenant displacement for a reasonable time to alleviate the impacts of displacement, the amounts of which costs shall be as determined in the discretion of the City Manager or designee. [Ord. 468 § 2, 2008; Ord. 255 § 1, 2001.]

5.60.080 Inspection and certificate of compliance required.
A. Rental-housing complex owners are required to provide a certificate of inspection as a business license condition during the year such is required by the City. A certificate of inspection shall be required no more than once every five years.
B. Proof of an inspection by a government agency or other qualified inspector within the previous 24 months will satisfy the requirement for a certificate of inspection.
C. The Director is hereby authorized to adopt administrative procedures consistent with this chapter and Chapter 59.18 RCW. [Ord. 644 § 5, 2016.]

5.60.100 Unlawful to rent noncompliant rental units.
It shall be unlawful to rent a rental unit, or to allow a tenant to continue to occupy a rental unit that does not satisfy the requirements of LMC 5.60.080. The Director may notify the owner that until a certificate of compliance is provided, it is unlawful to rent or to allow a tenant to continue to occupy a rental unit. [Ord. 644 § 6, 2016.]

5.60.110 Rule making.
A. The Director is authorized to adopt, publish and enforce rules, regulations and forms consistent with this chapter for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter.
B. The Director or designee shall maintain information related to the implementation of the City of Lakewood rental housing safety program. No less than annually the Director shall present current information regarding the effectiveness of the program to the Lakewood City Council. [Ord. 644 § 7, 2016.]

5.60.120 License denial, suspension or revocation.
A. If an application for a business license by an entity subject to regulation under this chapter is denied, suspended or revoked, no reapplication for a license will be considered by the City until correction of any and all deficiencies on which the denial, suspension, or revocation was based.
B. In the event that a property subject to regulation under this chapter is closed by the City or any agency acting on behalf of or in coordination with the City stemming from enforcement of the provisions of this chapter or any applicable health, building, fire, housing or life-safety code, or other serious violations, it shall be a prerequisite condition for the license to be reinstated or the property to be allowed to reopen that the operator of the property reimburse the City for any transitional costs or tenant relocation costs incurred by the City that are directly attributable to such closure. For the purposes hereof, “transitional costs and/or tenant relocation costs” include but are not limited to those items set forth in RCW 59.18.085, tenant travel costs and temporary hotel vouchers or other expenses incurred to procure alternate housing following tenant displacement for a reasonable time to alleviate the impacts of displacement, whether incurred by the tenant, the City or third parties.
C. All such license application denials, suspensions or revocations shall be in writing. Appeals of actions taken under this chapter, except as provided by LMC 5.60.130 or 5.60.150, shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5.02 LMC. [Ord. 644 § 8, 2016.]

5.60.130 Immediate health and safety threats.
Nothing in this chapter shall limit the City’s remedies as allowed by this code or law nor shall anything in this chapter be construed as a limitation on the City’s ability to inspect properties, obtain warrants and take any other such proper action, whether criminal, civil, administrative or otherwise for property-related conditions that may constitute an immediate health or safety threat. [Ord. 644 § 9, 2016.]

5.60.140 No warranty by City.
By enacting and undertaking to enforce this chapter, neither the City, its agents or employees, nor the City Council warrant or guarantee the safety, fitness or suitability of any dwelling in the City or any unit inspected under this chapter. Owners and occupants shall take whatever steps they deem appropriate to protect their interest, health, safety and welfare. [Ord. 644 § 10, 2016.]

5.60.150 Penalties.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter or any rules or regulations adopted by the Director pursuant to this chapter may be punished by an infraction of $150.00 per day for the first 10 days that the violation or failure to comply exists and $500.00 per day for each day thereafter. Each person is guilty of a separate violation for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person. No part of this fine may be reduced, modified or suspended except upon a showing that the violation has been remedied or with the consent of the Director.
B. Any person who knowingly submits or assists in the submission of a falsified certificate of compliance, or knowingly submits falsified information upon which a certificate of compliance is issued, in addition to the penalties provided in subsection A of this section shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor and must be punished by a fine of not more than $5,000. [Ord. 644 § 11, 2016.]

5.60.160 Consistency with Chapter 59.18 RCW.
The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted in a manner that is consistent with the provisions of Chapter 59.18 RCW, and in particular, RCW 59.18.125. [Ord. 644 § 12, 2016.]

Title 6 ANIMALS

Chapters:
6.02         Animal Control – General Provisions
6.04         Animal Control
6.06         Licensing of Dogs and Cats
6.10         Potentially Dangerous and Dangerous Dogs
6.14         Exotic Animals

Chapter 6.02 ANIMAL CONTROL – GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:
6.02.010     Definitions.
6.02.020     Authorized agents may perform duties.
6.02.030     Authority to pursue.
6.02.040     Notice of impounding animal.
6.02.050     Hindering an animal control officer.
6.02.060     Interference with impounding.
6.02.070     Redemption of dogs.
6.02.080     Redemption of cats or other animals.
6.02.085     Mandatory spay/neuter for impounded dogs and cats – Deposit – Refund – Exception.
6.02.086     Animal waste/owner responsibility.
6.02.090     Injured or diseased animals.
6.02.100     Duties upon injury or death to an animal.
6.02.110     Poisoning of animals.
6.02.120     Abatement of nuisances.
6.02.130     Penalty for violation.

6.02.010 Definitions.
As used in this title, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
“Adult” means any animal over the age of seven months.
“Animal” means and includes female, spayed female, male and neutered male animals, excepting any goat, horse, mule, cattle, swine, ass, or other livestock, and excepting any dog or cat.
“Animal control agency” means that animal control organization authorized by the City of Lakewood to enforce its animal control provisions.
“Animal control officer” means any individual employed, contracted or appointed by the City of Lakewood for the purpose of enforcing this title or any other state or local codes or regulations relating to animal control, animal licensing, and/or animal impounding.
“Animal shelter” means the animal control facility authorized by Pierce County or such other shelter as may be authorized by the City.
“At large” means off the premises of the owner or keeper of the dog, cat, or animal, and not under restraint by leash or chain by a competent person.
“Cat” means and includes female, spayed female, male and neutered male cats.
“Competent person” means a person who is able to sufficiently care for, control, and restrain his/her dog, cat, or other animal, and who has the capacity to exercise sound judgment regarding the rights and safety of others.
“Court” means the court which has jurisdiction over the animal control matters involved, and could refer to either a court of limited jurisdiction or the Pierce County Superior Court unless a specific court is indicated.
“Dangerous dogs” means any dog that (1) inflicts severe injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property, (2) kills a domestic animal without provocation while the dog is off the owner’s property, or (3) has been previously found to be potentially dangerous because of injury inflicted on a human, the owner having received notice of such and the dog again aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans.
“Dog” means and includes female, spayed female, male and neutered male dogs.
“Dog guide” means a dog that is trained for the purpose of guiding blind persons or a dog that is trained for the purpose of assisting hearing impaired persons.
“Humane trap” means a live animal box enclosure trap designed to capture and hold an animal without injury.
“Impound” means to receive into the custody of the animal shelter, or into the custody of authorized agent or representative.
“Infraction” means a civil (noncriminal) violation with penalties as defined in LMC 1.48.010.
“Juvenile” means any animal from weaning to seven months of age.
“Misdemeanor” means a criminal offense with a maximum penalty of 90 days in jail or a fine of $1,000 or both.
“Owner” means any person, firm, or corporation owning, having an interest in, or having control or custody or possession of any dog, cat, or animal.
“Potentially dangerous dog” means any dog that when unprovoked: (1) inflicts bites on a human or a domestic animal either on public or private property, or (2) chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds or private property in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or any dog with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked to cause injury or otherwise to threaten the safety of humans or domestic animal on any public or private property.
“Securely enclosed and locked” means a pen or structure which has secure sides and a secure top. If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, then the sides must be embedded in the ground no less than one foot.
“Service animal” means an animal of any type that has been trained at a recognized school or training facility for the purpose of assisting or accommodating a disabled person’s sensory, mental or physical disability.
“Unconfined” means not securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure upon the premises of the person owning, harboring or having the care of the animal. [Ord. 360 § 2, 2004; Ord. 319 § 1, 2003; Ord. 313 § 1, 2003; Ord. 205 § 1, 1999; Ord. 40 § 1, 1996.]

6.02.020 Authorized agents may perform duties.
Wherever a power is granted to or a duty imposed upon the City Manager or to the City’s law enforcement agency, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by such person or persons as are authorized or delegated by City Manager or by the appropriate representative(s) of the City’s law enforcement agency. [Ord. 40 § 1, 1996.]

6.02.030 Authority to pursue.
Those employees or agents of the City charged with the duty of seizing dogs, cats, or other animals running at large may pursue such dogs, cats, or other animals onto City-owned property, vacant property, and unenclosed private property, and seize, remove, and impound the same. [Ord. 40 § 1, 1996.]

6.02.040 Notice of impounding animal.
Upon the impoundment of any dog, cat, or other animal under the provisions of this title, the responsible animal control employee or agent shall immediately notify the owner, if the owner is known, of the impounding of such dog, cat, or other animal, and of the terms upon which said animal can be redeemed. The impounding authority shall retain said dog, cat, or other animal for 48 hours following actual notice to the owner. The notifying of any person over the age of 18 who resides at the owner’s domicile shall constitute actual notice to the owner. If the owner of said dog, cat, or other animal so impounded is unknown, then said responsible animal control employee or agent shall make a reasonable effort to locate and notify the owner of the impounding of said dog. [Ord. 40 § 1, 1996.]

6.02.050 Hindering an animal control officer.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder, delay, or impede any responsible animal control employee, agent or law enforcement officer who is enforcing the provisions of this title as herein provided. [Ord. 40 § 1, 1996.]

6.02.060 Interference with impounding.
It is unlawful for any person to willfully prevent or hinder the impounding of any dog, cat, or other animal, or to remove, by force or otherwise, any dog, cat, or other animal from the animal shelter without authority of the person in charge of the animal shelter, or without payment of all lawful charges against such dog, cat, or other animal, or to willfully resist or obstruct any animal control employee or agent in the performance of any official animal control duty. [Ord. 40 § 1, 1996.]

6.02.070 Redemption of dogs.
The owner of any dog impounded under this chapter may redeem said dog within 48 hours from time of impounding by paying to the animal control agency a redemption fee of $50.00 for the first time impounded within any 12-month period. A redemption fee of $75.00 for any subsequent impound within any 12-month period shall be collected. If a dog is wearing a current pet license at the time of the first such impound, no redemption fee shall be collected. In addition to the redemption fee, the redeemer shall pay, as a boarding charge for the caring and keeping of such dog, the sum of $5.50 per day for each day, including the first and last days, that the dog is retained by the impounding authority. This boarding charge will be collected for all dogs retained by the impounding authority, including dogs wearing a current pet license at the time of their first impound within any 12-month period. The redemption fee shall be paid to the City of Lakewood. It is provided, however, that if the dog is not currently licensed, the owner must obtain a valid, current license for the dog prior to redemption, and that prior to the redeemed dog being released to the owner, said owner must show a receipt or other satisfactory proof that all redemption fees and/or licensing fees have been paid in full. If such dog is not redeemed by the owner within 48 hours, then any person may redeem it within the next 48 hours by complying with the above provision, and in case such dog is not redeemed at the end of such time, it may be humanely destroyed or otherwise disposed of within the discretion of the animal control agency. [Ord. 270 § 1, 2001; Ord. 260 § 1, 2001; Ord. 149 § 1, 1997; Ord. 40 § 1, 1996.]

6.02.080 Redemption of cats or other animals.
The owner of any cat or other animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter may redeem it within 48 hours from the time of impounding by paying to the animal control agency a redemption fee of $15.00. In addition to the redemption fee, the redeemer shall pay, as a boarding charge for the caring and keeping of such cat or animal, the sum of $4.00 per day for each day, including the first and last days, that the cat or other animal is retained by the impounding authority. If such cat or other animal is not redeemed by the owner within 48 hours, it may be humanely destroyed or otherwise disposed of at the discretion of the animal control agency; provided, however, that any cat or other animal so impounded less than two months of age, at the discretion of the animal control agency, may be humanely destroyed or otherwise disposed of at any time after impounding. [Ord. 40 § 1, 1996.]

6.02.085 Mandatory spay/neuter for impounded dogs and cats – Deposit – Refund – Exception.
A. Mandatory Spay/Neuter – Deposit. No unaltered dog or cat that is impounded more than once in any 12-month period may be redeemed by any person until the sum of $35.00 is deposited with the animal control agency to cover the cost of spaying or neutering the animal.
B. Refund. The alteration deposit shall be refunded upon a showing of proof of alteration from a licensed veterinarian.
C. Exception. The alteration deposit shall not be required if the owner or other person redeeming the animal provides a written statement from a licensed veterinarian that the spay or neuter procedure would be harmful to the animal. [Ord. 260 § 2, 2001; Ord. 40 § 1, 1996.]

6.02.086 Animal waste/owner responsibility.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having charge of any animal to permit, either willfully or by failure to exercise due care, such animal to commit a public nuisance by defecating in any area of the City other than the premises of the owner or person having charge or control of the animal, unless said owner or person having charge takes immediate steps to remove and properly dispose of said feces.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having charge of any animal to take said animal off the private property of said person without having in the possession of the owner or person having charge of the animal, a proper means of disposal for the feces of the animal.
C. “Disposal” is defined, for the purpose of this section, as the removal of feces by means of a bag, scoop or other device and an eventual disposal in a trash receptacle, by burying or by other means of lawful disposal.
D. Violation of this section shall constitute a civil infraction punishable by a fine in an amount not to exceed $75.00 for the first offense, a fine in an amount not to exceed $125.00 for the second offense and a fine in an amount not to exceed $250.00 for the third and all subsequence offenses. [Ord. 360 § 1, 2004.]

6.02.090 Injured or diseased animals.
Any dog, cat, or other animal suffering from serious injury or disease may be humanely destroyed by the animal control agency; provided, that the animal control agency shall immediately notify the owner, if the owner is known, and if the owner is unknown, make a reasonable effort to locate and notify the owner. [Ord. 40 § 1, 1996.]

6.02.100 Duties upon injury or death to an animal.
The operator of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury or death to a dog, cat, or other animal, shall immediately stop the vehicle at or as near to the scene of the accident as possible, and return thereto, and shall give to the owner or other competent person having custody of the animal, the name and address of the operator of the vehicle and the registration number of the vehicle involved in the accident. If the owner or other competent person is not the person at the scene of the accident, the operator shall take reasonable steps to locate the owner or custodian of the said animal and shall supply the information hereinabove required. If the animal is injured to the extent that it requires immediate medical attention and there is no owner or custodian present to look after it, the operator of said vehicle shall immediately report the situation to the law enforcement agency for the City of Lakewood. This code section will be enforced separately from traffic violations and compliance with this section is not an admission of fault for the accident. [Ord. 360 § 3, 2004; Ord. 40 § 1, 1996.]

6.02.110 Poisoning of animals.
No person shall place or expose or cause to be placed or exposed in any yard or lot of vacant or enclosed land, or on any exposed place or public place, or on any street, alley, or highway, or other place where the same may be taken internally by a child, person, or by any dog, cat, domestic animal, or fowl, any poisonous substance which, if taken internally, may cause death or serious sickness. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the killing by poison of any dog, cat, domestic animal, or fowl in a lawful and humane manner by its owner or by a duly authorized agent of such owner or by a person acting pursuant to instructions from a duly constituted public authority. [Ord. 40 § 1, 1996.]

6.02.120 Abatement of nuisances.
Any person convicted of a misdemeanor or infraction for violating any of the provisions of this title in the keeping or maintenance of any nuisance as herein defined shall, in addition to any fine or imprisonment imposed by the Court in such action, be ordered to forthwith abate and remove the nuisance; and if the same is not done by the offender within 24 hours, the same shall be abated and removed under the direction the officer authorized by the order of said Court, which order of abatement shall be entered upon the docket of the Court and made a part of the judgment in the action. Any such person shall be liable for all costs and expenses of abating the same when the nuisance has been abated by any officer or authorized representative of the City or the animal control agency, which costs and expenses shall be taxed as part of the costs of the prosecution against the party, liable to be recovered as other costs are recovered; and in all cases where the officer or representative is authorized by the Court, shall abate any nuisance and he/she shall keep an account of all expenses attending the abatement; and in addition to the other powers herein given to collect the costs and expenses, the City may bring suit for the same in any Court of competent jurisdiction against the person keeping or maintaining the nuisance so abated. [Ord. 205 § 2, 1999; Ord. 40 § 1, 1996.]

6.02.130 Penalty for violation.
A person who violates any of the provisions of LMC 6.02.050, 6.02.060, 6.02.110 and 6.02.120 shall, upon conviction thereof, be found guilty of a misdemeanor. [Ord. 40 § 1, 1996.]

Chapter 6.04 ANIMAL CONTROL

Sections:
6.04.010     Animals at large on public property.
6.04.020     Animals at large on private property.
6.04.025     Livestock at large.
6.04.030     Confinement of female dogs and cats in heat.
6.04.040     Dogs chasing vehicles on public roads.
6.04.045     Confinement of animal in a motor vehicle.
6.04.050     Dogs jumping and/or threatening pedestrians.
6.04.055     Dog bite.
6.04.060     Penalty for violation.
6.04.070     Animals injuring humans or domestic animals.
6.04.080     Animals injuring private or public property.
6.04.090     Disturbing noises.
6.04.091     Noise nuisance – Notice.
6.04.092     Confinement – Restriction of a noise nuisance animal – Violation.
6.04.100     Sale or transfer of animals in public places prohibited.
6.04.110     Penalty for violation – Misdemeanor.

6.04.010 Animals at large on public property.
It is unlawful for the owner or person having control or custody of any dog, cat, or other animal to allow such dog, cat, or other animal to be at large on any public street, sidewalk or right-of-way, or in any park, or to enter any public beach, pond, fountain, or stream therein, or upon any public playground or school ground or in any public building. Any dog, cat or other animal, entering or trespassing upon such property may be seized and impounded. This section shall not apply to any area of the City designated as an “off leash” area. [Ord. 319 § 2, 2003; Ord. 40 § 2, 1996.]

6.04.020 Animals at large on private property.
It is unlawful for the owner or person having control or custody of any dog, cat, or other animal to allow such dog, cat, or other animal to enter or trespass upon private property without the express permission of the owner or caretaker of such property. Any such dog, cat, or other animal may be seized and impounded. [Ord. 40 § 2, 1996.]

6.04.025 Livestock at large.
No person owning or in control of any livestock is to allow such livestock to enter or trespass upon private property without the express permission of the owner or caretaker of such property. Any such livestock may be seized and impounded. [Ord. 149 § 12, 1997.]

6.04.030 Confinement of female dogs and cats in heat.
Every female dog and cat in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure in such a manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into contact with a male of the species, except for planned breeding. Any dog or cat not so confined when in heat, whether or not such dog or cat is licensed, may be seized or impounded. [Ord. 40 § 2, 1996.]

6.04.040 Dogs chasing vehicles on public roads.
It is unlawful for the owner or other person having control of any dog to allow such dog to chase, run after, or jump at vehicles lawfully using the public road, street, avenues, alleys and ways. Any such dog may be seized and impounded. [Ord. 40 § 2, 1996.]

6.04.045 Confinement of animal in a motor vehicle.
No owner or person shall confine any animal in a motor vehicle in such a manner that places it in a life or health threatening situation by exposure to a prolonged period of extreme heat or cold, without proper ventilation or other protection from such heat or cold. In order to protect the health and safety of such animal, an animal control officer or law enforcement officer who has probable cause to believe that this section is being violated shall have the authority to enter such motor vehicle be any reasonable means under the circumstances after making a reasonable effort to locate the owner or person in control of the motor vehicle. [Ord. 149 § 13, 1997.]

6.04.050 Dogs jumping and/or threatening pedestrians.
It is unlawful for the owner or other person having control of any dog to allow such dog to frequently or habitually snarl at, growl at, jump upon, or threaten persons upon the public sidewalks, roads, streets, alleys, or public places. Any such dog may be seized and impounded. [Ord. 40 § 2, 1996.]

6.04.055 Dog bite.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any dog which bites any person while not on the property of the dog’s owner, and where the bite was not provoked by the person so bit. Such dog may be seized and impounded for the protection of the public. The Municipal Court or other court of competent jurisdiction may order the dog destroyed if the court finds that such dog represents a continuing threat of serious harm to any persons. [Ord. 149 § 14, 1997.]

6.04.060 Penalty for violation.
Violation of any of the provisions of LMC 6.04.010, 6.04.020, 6.04.025, 6.04.030, 6.04.040, 6.04.045, 6.04.050, 6.04.090, or 6.04.100 shall constitute a civil infraction punishable by a fine in an amount not to exceed $75.00 for the first offense, a fine in an amount not to exceed $125.00 for the second offense and a fine in an amount not to exceed $250.00 for the third and all subsequent offenses. Each day during which a violation of any of the above sections occurs constitutes a separate infraction. [Ord. 319 § 3, 2003; Ord. 205 § 3, 1999; Ord. 40 § 2, 1996.]

6.04.070 Animals injuring humans or domestic animals.
It is unlawful for the owner or other person having control or custody of any dog, cat, or other animal to allow such dog, cat, or other animal to cause injury to a human or domestic animal which is acting in a lawful manner. Any such dog, cat, or other animal may be seized and impounded. [Ord. 40 § 2, 1996.]

6.04.080 Animals injuring private or public property.
It is unlawful for the owner or other person having control or custody of any dog, cat, or other animal to allow such dog, cat, or other animal to damage or destroy any property or thing of value upon the private property of another, or upon any public property. Any such dog, cat, or other animal may be seized and impounded. [Ord. 40 § 2, 1996.]

6.04.090 Disturbing noises.
It is unlawful for the owner or other person having control or custody of any dog, cat, or other animal to allow such dog, cat, or other animal to habitually howl, yelp, bark, or make other noises which unreasonably disturb another person. Any such dog, cat, or other animal may be seized and impounded. Prior to seizure and impound, the following must occur:
A. The owner or other person responsible for the animal shall be notified that other persons are complaining about the noises and/or are being unreasonably disturbed; and
B. An animal control officer shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owner or other person responsible for the animal, in person, by telephone or through the mail, that a noise nuisance complaint has been received, and shall discuss possible corrective measures. [Ord. 149 § 2, 1997; Ord. 40 § 2, 1996.]

6.04.091 Noise nuisance – Notice.
A. If a noise nuisance complaint arising under this chapter is not corrected within a reasonable time period, an animal control officer may declare there to be an animal noise nuisance, and the animal control officer shall cause the animal owner or other person responsible for the animal to be served with a written notice of animal noise nuisance. The notice of animal noise nuisance shall include the following:
    1. The description of the animal(s) involved.
    2. The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) or other person(s) responsible for the animal(s).
    3. The facts and circumstances upon which the declaration of animal noise nuisance is based.
    4. The availability of a hearing, including the process set forth herein below.
    5. Any restrictions on the animal(s).
B. If the owner(s) or other person(s) responsible for the animal(s) wish to object to the declaration of animal noise nuisance, the owner(s) or other person(s) responsible for the animal(s) may appeal to the Hearing Examiner.
C. During the pendency of any such hearings or appeals, any restrictions included in the notice of animal noise nuisance, including confinement, shall remain in effect. [Ord. 585 § 22, 2014; Ord. 299 § 1, 2003; Ord. 149 § 15, 1997.]

6.04.092 Confinement – Restriction of a noise nuisance animal – Violation.
Following the exhaustion of hearings and appeals, the animal(s) involved in the noise nuisance case shall be confined as stated in the notice of animal noise nuisance, or as directed/ordered in the decision of the director of the animal control agency or designee, or the Hearing Examiner of the City of Lakewood, which may include the requirement that the animal(s) involved in the noise nuisance case shall be removed from the City of Lakewood. Any person to fails to comply with the requirements and/or restrictions provided in any such hearings and appeals shall constitute a violation of this chapter, punishable as provided in LMC 6.04.110. [Ord. 149 § 16, 1997.]

6.04.100 Sale or transfer of animals in public places prohibited.
It is unlawful to sell, barter or otherwise transfer for the purpose of changing ownership any animal in an area open to the public unless such activity is licensed pursuant to business licensing regulations of the City. [Ord. 40 § 2, 1996.]

6.04.110 Penalty for violation – Misdemeanor.
A person who violates any of the provisions of LMC 6.04.055, 6.04.070, or 6.04.092 shall, upon conviction thereof, be found guilty of a misdemeanor. [Ord. 319 § 4, 2003; Ord. 205 § 4, 1999; Ord. 149 § 3, 1997; Ord. 40 § 2, 1996.]

Chapter 6.06 LICENSING OF DOGS AND CATS

Sections:
6.06.010     Licenses required.
6.06.020     Purchase of license.
6.06.023     Licensing of six or more animals.
6.06.025     Service animal, dog guide license fee waiver.
6.06.030     Fees.
6.06.040     Late payment penalty.
6.06.050     License not transferable.
6.06.060     Penalty for violation.
6.06.070     Dogs at large deemed nuisance.
6.06.080     Impounding dogs at large.
6.06.090     Conditions of release.
6.06.100     Owner of dog at large – Penalty.

6.06.010 Licenses required.
It is unlawful for any person to own, keep, or have control of a dog or cat over the age of eight weeks, whether confined or not, within the corporate boundaries of the City without having a current license tag attached to the collar or harness which is worn by the dog or cat. Any dog or cat which is off the premises of its owner must have a current license, regardless of its age. If any dog and/or cat which is required to be licensed is found without a current license, it may be seized and impounded by the animal control agency or the law enforcement agency of the City. Additionally, such seizure and impoundment will not preclude the issuance of a criminal complaint. Hunting dogs, during a controlled hunt, need not wear a license tag. [Ord. 149 § 4, 1997; Ord. 40 § 3, 1996.]

6.06.020 Purchase of license.
Except as waived in LMC 6.06.025, all dog or cat licenses shall be obtained by paying the required license fee in the amounts and within the time limits as provided in this chapter to the City or to such other agency as the City authorizes to issue licenses and collect license fees. The license shall remain in force until December 31st of the year of issuance. There is no prorating of any license fee. Renewal licenses shall retain the original expiration period whether renewed prior to, on or after their respective expiration periods. The applicant shall be furnished with such license and metal tag. The tag shall be attached to a collar or harness which will be worn by the dog or cat at all times. The shape of the tag shall not be the same two consecutive years. [Ord. 313 § 2, 2003; Ord. 270 § 2, 2001; Ord. 149 § 5, 1997; Ord. 40 § 3, 1996.]

6.06.023 Licensing of six or more animals.
A. The following definitions shall apply to this section:
    “Adult dog” and “adult cat” mean any dog or cat past the age of seven months.
    “Animal” means any nonhuman mammal, bird, reptile, or amphibian.
    “Animal shelter” means any facility operated by the Humane Society for Tacoma and Pierce County or its authorized agents, for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or of state law.
    “Commercial kennel or cattery” means any premises wherein a person(s) engages in the business of boarding, breeding, letting for hire, selling, bartering, or giving away dogs and/or cats. All dogs and/or cats over the age of seven months shall be included as part of the kennel for payment of fees.
    “Enforcement agency” means the law enforcement agency of the City of Lakewood or such organization as designated by ordinance of the City of Lakewood.
    “Enforcement officer” means any law enforcement officer of the City of Lakewood designated to enforce the provisions of this title.
    “Foster shelter/kennel/cattery” means any premises where at least six or more adult dogs and/or cats are kept and a person(s) provides temporary housing and care of owner released dogs/cats for the purpose of placing them into a permanent home.
    “Grooming parlor” means any place or establishment, public or private, where animals are bathed, clipped, or combed for a consideration.
    “Hobby kennel or cattery” means any premises where at least six but less than 20 adult dogs and/or cats are kept for hunting, breeding, for exhibition, organized events, field working or obedience trials. Any person(s) keeping more than 10 dogs and/or cats must provide kennel facilities. Any person(s) or premises which exceeds the numbers or engages in practices beyond the definition herein for a hobby kennel or cattery, as determined by the enforcement agency, shall be subject to penalties and/or be required to purchase the appropriate license. Note: The occasional selling of offspring shall not be construed as a commercial venture. All dogs and cats over the age of seven months shall be included as part of the kennel for payment of fees.
    “Humane officer” is any person designated by the City of Lakewood as a law enforcement officer, qualified to perform such duties under the laws of this state.
    “Impounding authority” means giving the authority to impound animals and handle and care for impounded animals.
    “Jurisdictional licensing agent” means any organization appointed by the City of Lakewood.
    “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, or unincorporated association.
    “Pet shop” means any person or establishment that acquires animals (dogs, cats, birds, fish, rodents, reptiles, primates, insects, and any/or all others) bred by others, whether as owner, agent, or on consignment, sells or boards any species of animals and offers to sell such animals to the public.
    “Premises” includes a private house or dwelling.
    “Private kennel/cattery” means any premises where at least six, but less than 20, altered adult dogs and/or cats are kept as pets and not used for any other purpose than companionship for their owners. All pets are to be altered.
    “Temporary” as used in this chapter means less than 60 days.
B. License Requirements – Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, maintain, or have six or more dogs and/or cats, or operate a commercial kennel or cattery, foster shelter/kennel/cattery, hobby kennel, grooming parlor, private kennel/cattery, or pet shop, within the City of Lakewood without any applicable license.
C. Exemptions. The Humane Society for Tacoma and Pierce County is designated by the City of Lakewood as the animal control authority and is exempt from the licensing requirements of this chapter.
D. Transfer of License. If there is any change in ownership of any commercial kennel or cattery, foster shelter/kennel/cattery, hobby kennel, grooming parlor, private kennel/ cattery or pet shop, the new owner may have the current permit transferred to his or her name upon the payment of required fees in accordance with LMC 3.20.010, the fee schedule, at least one copy of which shall be kept on file in the Office of the Lakewood City Clerk. The transfer will be deemed approved if not rejected within 30 days from the date of the application.
E. Grounds for Denial. A permit or license may be denied, suspended, or revoked for any of the grounds set forth in Chapter 5.02 LMC.
F. Application – Generally. Application for a permit to establish a new license under the provisions of this chapter may be made at any time.
G. Application – Required Information. Any person applying for a license as required by this chapter shall submit to the City of Lakewood the following information:
    1. The name and address of the person(s) having the facility;
    2. The name and address of the person(s) having the supervision of the facility;
    3. The address or location of the facility;
    4. The maximum number of dogs and/or cats or combination thereof which such facility will contain;
    5. The name and address of the person designated by the applicant as agent for the service of legal process or notice;
    6. A written statement issued by the City of Lakewood Community Development Department that such commercial kennel or cattery, foster shelter/kennel/cattery, hobby kennel, grooming parlor, private kennel/cattery, or pet shop is in compliance with applicable zoning codes of the City;
    7. A statement by the applicant giving permission for inspection of the facilities at any reasonable time;
    8. A statement or permit from the Tacoma-Pierce County Health Department to ensure that adequate provisions for sanitary facilities can be provided;
    9. If the applicant is a pet store, a list of all species of animals, i.e., dogs, cats, birds, reptiles, primates, insects, fish, rodents, and any/or all others, that are to be sold;
    10. The name and address of the licensed veterinarian who cares for the applicant’s sick or injured animals. [Ord. 610 § 57, 2015.]

6.06.025 Service animal, dog guide license fee waiver.
Dog guides and service animals, as defined in LMC 6.02.010, must be licensed as required in LMC 6.06.010 but shall be exempt from payment of fees for such a license. An animal control officer may review a license fee waiver under this section by reasonable inquiry and investigation. It is unlawful to falsely claim or misrepresent facts in order to obtain a fee waiver under this section. [Ord. 313 § 3, 2003.]

6.06.030 Fees.
The annual license fees for the ownership, keeping, or having control of dogs and/or cats in the City shall be as set forth in the City of Lakewood fee schedule. [Ord. 260 § 3, 2001; Ord. 149 § 6, 1997; Ord. 40 § 3, 1996.]

6.06.040 Late payment penalty.
A. Any person who fails to obtain a license by February 28th, each year, for renewal licenses, shall pay a late payment penalty of $2.00 per license, in addition to the license fee.
B. No late payment penalty shall be charged on new license applications. [Ord. 270 § 3, 2001; Ord. 260 § 4, 2001; Ord. 149 § 7, 1997; Ord. 40 § 3, 1996.]

6.06.050 License not transferable.
Dog or cat licenses as provided for in this chapter shall be nontransferable. A person may use a license for another dog or cat that he/she owns, if the dog or cat for which it was issued is no longer owned by such a person. It is unlawful for any person to give, sell, exchange, or otherwise transfer a dog or cat license to another person, even if it is to be used for the same dog or cat for which it was originally issued. [Ord. 40 § 3, 1996.]

6.06.060 Penalty for violation.
Violation of any of the provisions of LMC 6.06.010, 6.06.020, 6.06.025 or 6.06.030 shall constitute a civil infraction punishable by a fine in an amount not to exceed $250.00; provided, that if the person presents evidence of a valid license to the Court, the charge shall be dismissed upon payment of court costs in the amount of $25.00. [Ord. 313 § 4, 2003; Ord. 205 § 5, 1999; Ord. 149 § 8, 1997; Ord. 40 § 3, 1996.]

6.06.070 Dogs at large deemed nuisance.
Whenever, at any place within the corporate boundaries of the City, four or more dogs are found to be roaming or running at large together, they constitute a public nuisance, which shall be terminated in the manner provided in this chapter; provided, however, that this section through LMC 6.06.100 shall not apply to dogs belonging to one owner who are roaming or running at large on property of their owner. [Ord. 40 § 3, 1996.]

6.06.080 Impounding dogs at large.
The employees or agency authorized by the City to enforce animal control laws shall impound dogs constituting the public nuisance described by LMC 6.06.070. Upon impounding the dogs, the employees or agency shall ascertain whether any of them are licensed, and if so, shall as soon as practicable notify the person to whom the licenses were issued that the dog or dogs have been impounded and can be redeemed. Any dog impounded pursuant to LMC 6.06.070 through 6.06.100 shall be held 48 hours. If not redeemed by its owner within that time, it shall be held an additional 48 hours, during which time any person may redeem it. In case any such dog is not redeemed within 96 hours, it shall be humanely destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the impounding agency. [Ord. 149 § 9, 1997; Ord. 40 § 3, 1996.]

6.06.090 Conditions of release.
The impounding agency is authorized to refuse to release any dog and/or cat to its owner unless satisfied that the animal is licensed and that the owner has taken steps to assure that the dog and/or cat will not again roam or run at large in the manner described in LMC 6.06.070. In exercising the authority granted by LMC 6.06.070 through 6.06.100, the agency may impose reasonable conditions which must be satisfied by an owner as conditions precedent to the release of any dog and/or cat, including conditions assuring that dogs and/or cats will be confined and that female dogs and/or cats which have run at large while in heat will be spayed. [Ord. 40 § 3, 1996.]

6.06.100 Owner of dog at large – Penalty.
Any person who owns or is charged with the custody of any dog which roams or runs at large in the manner described in LMC 6.06.070, whether or not the dog is impounded, is guilty of a misdemeanor. [Ord. 40 § 3, 1996.]

Chapter 6.10 POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS AND DANGEROUS DOGS

Sections:
6.10.005     Dangerous Dogs – Potentially Dangerous Dogs.
6.10.010     Declaration of dogs as dangerous or potentially dangerous – Procedure.
6.10.015     Appeal of declaration of potentially dangerous or dangerous dog.
6.10.020     Permits and fees.
6.10.025     Owner requirements – Dog declared potentially dangerous.
6.10.027     Owner requirements – Dog declared dangerous.
6.10.030     Confinement of dogs.
6.10.040     Notification of status of potentially dangerous dog.
6.10.050     Penalty for violation.
6.10.070     Dog declared dangerous or potentially dangerous by another jurisdiction.

6.10.005 Dangerous Dogs – Potentially Dangerous Dogs.
In compliance with state law, Chapter 16.08 RCW, which is adopted in its entirety by reference, the following provisions apply to the keeping of dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs within the City of Lakewood. [Ord. 577 § 1, 2014.]

6.10.010 Declaration of dogs as dangerous or potentially dangerous – Procedure.
A. The City of Lakewood may find and declare an animal dangerous or potentially dangerous if an animal control officer has probable cause to believe that the animal falls within the definitions set forth in RCW 16.08.070(1). The finding must be based upon:
    1. The written complaint of a citizen who is willing to testify that the animal has acted in a manner which causes it to fall within the definition of RCW 16.08.070(1) or 16.08.070(2); or
    2. Dog bite reports filed with the animal control agency; or
    3. Actions of the dog witnessed by any animal control officer or law enforcement officer; or
    4. Other substantial evidence.
B. The declaration shall be in writing and shall be served on the owner in one of the following methods:
    1. Certified mail to the owner’s last known address; or
    2. Personally; or
    3. If the owner cannot be located by one of the first two methods, by publication in a newspaper of general circulation.
C. The declaration shall state at least:
    1. The description of the animal.
    2. The name and address of the owner of the animal, if known.
    3. The whereabouts of the animal if it is not in the custody of the owner.
    4. The facts upon which the declaration of dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is based.
    5. The availability of a hearing in case the person objects to the declaration.
    6. The restrictions placed on the animal as a result of the declaration of dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog.
    7. The penalties for violation of the restrictions, including the possibility of destruction of the animal, and imprisonment or fining of the owner.
D. Upon the issuance of a declaration, the owner shall be notified in writing that he or she is entitled to an opportunity to meet with the City Manager or designee, at which meeting the owner may give, orally or in writing, any reasons or information as to why the dog should not be declared dangerous or potentially dangerous. The timing, conduct of the meeting and the ensuing issuance of any orders shall conform with RCW 16.08.080(3). [Ord. 577 § 2, 2014; Ord. 360 § 4, 2004; Ord. 40 § 4, 1996.]

6.10.015 Appeal of declaration of potentially dangerous or dangerous dog.
A. The owner of the animal may appeal the declaration of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog by filing an appeal of the declaration to Municipal Court.
B. The owner must submit a written notice of appeal within 20 calendar days of service of the declaration. The notice shall be filed with the Clerk of the Municipal Court. No fee shall be required for the filing of the notice of appeal.
C. At the hearing, the burden shall be on the City to prove, by a preponderance of evidence, that the animal is a “dangerous dog,” or a “potentially dangerous dog,” as defined in RCW 16.08.070 and that the exclusion contained in RCW 16.08.090(3) does not apply.
D. During the entire appeal process, it shall be unlawful for the owner appealing the declaration of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog to allow or permit such dog to be outside the proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and under physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal.
E. In those instances where the animal has been impounded, the owner shall be responsible for the costs of redemption, boarding, and veterinary fees prior to release, excepting in those cases where the animal control authority failed to meet its burden of proof. In lieu of payment of these expenses, the owner may obtain the release of the animal by posting with the City a bond, cash, or alternate security approved by the City or the Municipal Court for such costs which have been incurred and are likely to be incurred pending appeals. If such costs have not been paid and the animal control authority meets its burden of proof, the Municipal Court may enter a monetary judgment for such costs. [Ord. 577 § 3, 2014.]

6.10.020 Permits and fees.
A. Following a declaration of potentially dangerous dog and the exhaustion of the appeal therefrom, the owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall obtain a permit for such dog from the animal control agency, and shall be required to pay the fee for such permit in the amount of $250.00. In addition, the owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall pay an annual renewal fee for such permit in the amount of $250.00.
B. Following a declaration of dangerous dog and the exhaustion of the appeal therefrom, the owner of a dangerous dog shall obtain a permit for such dog from the animal control agency, and shall be required to pay the fee for such permit in the amount of $500.00. In addition, the owner of a dangerous dog shall pay an annual renewal fee for such permit in the amount of $500.00.
C. Should the owner of a dog subject to the provisions of this chapter fail to obtain a permit for such dog from the animal control agency or to appeal the declaration of potentially dangerous dog or dangerous dog, the animal control agency is authorized to seize and impound such dog and, after notification to the owner, hold the dog for a period of no more than five days before destruction of such dog by the animal control agency. [Ord. 577 § 4, 2014; Ord. 40 § 4, 1996.]

6.10.025 Owner requirements – Dog declared potentially dangerous.
Following the declaration of a potentially dangerous animal and the exhaustion of the appeal therefrom, the owner of the dog shall be required to:
A. Register the dog with the City of Lakewood and pay the initial registration fee set forth in LMC 6.10.020. The annual registration renewal fee is due on the anniversary date of the initial registration.
B. Keep the dog securely indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. The pen or structure shall have a locking door with a padlock, secure sides, a concrete floor or if the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, then the sides must be embedded in the ground no less than one foot, and a secure top attached to the sides, and shall provide protection for the dog from the elements.
C. Keep the dog muzzled and on a substantial leash not to exceed eight feet in length and under the control of a competent person while off the owner’s property. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal.
D. Conspicuously display a sign on the owner’s property warning of the presence of a potentially dangerous dog, posted and visible from all streets and public rights-of-way adjacent thereto, clearly stating “Warning, Potentially Dangerous Dog,” with letter size not smaller than two and one-half inches in height. In addition, the sign shall conspicuously display a warning symbol that informs children of the presence of a potentially dangerous dog.
E. Implant a microchip in the dog for permanent identification. This information must be on record with the microchip company and the offices of the Humane Society for Tacoma and Pierce County. [Ord. 577 § 5, 2014.]

6.10.027 Owner requirements – Dog declared dangerous.
When a dog is declared dangerous by a law enforcement officer or animal control officer, except where inconsistent with this section, the owner of the dog shall be required to abide by the conditions set forth in LMC 6.10.025. The following conditions shall also apply:
A. Possess a surety bond in the sum of at least $250,000, payable to any person injured by the dog, or possess a liability insurance policy, such as homeowners’ insurance, in the amount of at least $250,000, insuring the owner for any personal injuries inflicted by the dog.
B. Conspicuously display a sign on the owner’s property warning of the presence of a dangerous dog, posted and visible from all streets and public rights-of-way adjacent thereto, clearly stating “Warning, Dangerous Dog,” with letter size not smaller than two and one-half inches in height. In addition, the sign shall conspicuously display a warning symbol that informs children of the presence of a dangerous dog. [Ord. 577 § 6, 2014.]

6.10.030 Confinement of dogs.
Following a declaration of dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog and the exhaustion of the appeal therefrom, it shall be unlawful for the person owning or harboring or having care of such dog to allow and/or permit such dog to:
A. Be unconfined on the premises of such person; or
B. Go beyond the premises of such person unless such dog is securely leashed and humanely muzzled or otherwise securely restrained. [Ord. 577 § 7, 2014; Ord. 149 § 10, 1997; Ord. 40 § 4, 1996.]

6.10.040 Notification of status of potentially dangerous dog.
The owner of a dog that has been classified as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall immediately notify the animal control agency when such dog:
A. Is loose or unconfined; or
B. Has bitten or otherwise injured a human being or attacked another animal; or
C. Is sold or given away or dies; or
D. Is moved to another address; or
E. Is removed from the City of Lakewood.
Prior to a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog being sold or given away, the owner shall provide the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner to the animal control agency. The owner shall comply with all of the requirements of this chapter. [Ord. 577 § 8, 2014; Ord. 40 § 4, 1996.]

6.10.050 Penalty for violation.
A. Excepting those circumstances where the provisions of Chapter 16.08 RCW provides a different penalty, any person who violates a provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be found guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. Any dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by an animal control upon the commission of any act identified in RCW 16.08.100(1) or as may otherwise be allowed by law.
C. Any person violating this chapter shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food, veterinary expenses for identification or certification of the breed of the animal or boarding and veterinary expenses necessitated by the seizure of any dog for the protection of the public, and such other expenses as may be required for the destruction of any such dog.
D. Any dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog which attacks a human being or domestic animal may be ordered destroyed when, in the Court’s judgment, such dog represents a continuing threat of serious harm to human beings or domestic animals. [Ord. 577 § 9, 2014; Ord. 40 § 4, 1996.]

6.10.070 Dog declared dangerous or potentially dangerous by another jurisdiction.
A. Any person desiring to bring a dog to live in the City which has been previously declared to be potentially dangerous, dangerous, vicious, or similar designation in another jurisdiction, under the provisions of Chapter 16.08 RCW or comparable local ordinance, must notify the animal control authority prior to moving the dog to the City. The person must provide all information requested by the animal control authority and must comply with all restrictions imposed by the animal control authority. There is no right to bring into the City a dog that has been the subject of a declaration or similar process in another jurisdiction and the animal control authority will determine whether such a dog will be licensed and permitted to reside in the City.
B. Except to the extent inconsistent with this section, an appeal from the decision of the animal control authority under this section may be appealed in the manner set forth in LMC 6.10.015. At the hearing, the burden shall be upon the City to demonstrate the validity of the prior declaration or similar process. [Ord. 577 § 10, 2014.]

Chapter 6.14 EXOTIC ANIMALS

Sections:
6.14.010     Purpose and intent.
6.14.020     Definitions.
6.14.030     Possession unlawful.
6.14.040     Chapter limitations.
6.14.050     Violation – Penalty.
6.14.060     Euthanasia in exigent circumstances.

6.14.010 Purpose and intent.
It is the intent of the City of Lakewood to preserve the public peace and safety by prohibiting the possession or maintenance of exotic animals other than in the case of certain limited exceptions. [Ord. 105 § 1, 1996.]

6.14.020 Definitions.
“Animal control authority” means a person or entity authorized by statute or contract to enforce the animal control laws of the City.
“Animal control officer” means:
    1. Any individual employed, contracted with, or appointed by the animal control authority for the purpose of aiding in the enforcement of this chapter or any other law relating to the licensure, control, or seizure and impoundment of animals;
    2. Any state or local law enforcement officer; or
    3. Any other official whose duties in whole or in part include the seizure and impoundment of any animal.
“Director” means director, executive or chief administrative officer of the animal control authority.
“Exotic animal” means any of the following:
    1. Venomous species of snakes capable of inflicting serious physical harm or death to human beings;
    2. Nonhuman primates and prosimians;
    3. Bears;
    4. Nondomesticated species of felines, including but not limited to cougars, bobcats and lynx;
    5. Nondomesticated species of canines and their hybrids, including wolf and coyote hybrids;
    6. The order crocodilia, including alligators, crocodiles, caiman, and gavials;
    7. Any other nondomesticated animal that, either by behavior observed by an animal control officer or by complaints from a neighbor or other person in the vicinity of where the exotic animal has been kept, has demonstrated a dangerous propensity or conduct that poses a threat to the public welfare.
“Nondomesticated species” means species of animals that are not commonly considered tame and not generally accustomed to living among humans and being raised by humans as pets or as livestock. [Ord. 105 § 1, 1996.]

6.14.030 Possession unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person to possess or maintain an exotic animal within City of Lakewood, except as provided in LMC 6.14.040. [Ord. 105 § 1, 1996.]

6.14.040 Chapter limitations.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the private ownership of exotic animals as pets. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any facility possessing or maintaining exotic animals as defined in this chapter which is owned, operated or maintained by any city, county, state or the federal government, including but not limited to public zoos, nor shall it apply to museums, laboratories and research facilities maintained by scientific or educational institutions, nor to private or commercial activities such as circuses, fairs, or zoological parks which are otherwise regulated by law, nor to any recognized program engaged in the training of exotic animals as defined in this chapter for use as service animals by disabled citizens.
B. Breeding, or allowing the reproduction of, exotic animals as defined in this chapter is prohibited; provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to any governmental facility possessing or maintaining exotic animals nor shall it apply to private or commercial activities as set forth in subsection A of this section. [Ord. 105 § 1, 1996.]

6.14.050 Violation – Penalty.
Any person possessing or maintaining an exotic animal in City of Lakewood in violation of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 and/or by incarceration in jail not to exceed 90 days. [Ord. 105 § 1, 1996.]

6.14.060 Euthanasia in exigent circumstances.
A. An exotic animal possessed or maintained in violation of this chapter may be subject to impoundment and euthanasia by the animal control authority if any of the following exigent circumstances is deemed to exist by the director of the animal control authority or designee:
    1. The exotic animal presents an imminent likelihood of serious physical harm to the public and there is no other reasonably available means of abatement. For the purposes hereof, if an exotic animal wanders or runs loose in the City, it shall be presumed that the exotic animal presents an imminent likelihood of serious physical harm to the public and there is no other reasonably available means of abatement; or
    2. There is no reasonable basis to believe that the violation can be or in good faith will be corrected and after reasonable search or inquiry by the animal control authority no facility as authorized by local, state or federal law is available to house the exotic animal; or
    3. The exotic animal suffers from a communicable disease injurious to other animals or human beings; provided, that this section shall not apply if the animal is under treatment by a licensed veterinarian and may reasonably be expected to recover without infecting other animals or human beings.
B. After an exotic animal has been impounded, as provided above, the director of the animal control authority or designee shall provide notice to the person who had possessed or maintained the exotic animal of the exigent circumstances deemed to exist that warranted the impoundment and euthanasia of the exotic animal. The person who had possessed or maintained the exotic animal or another person with an ownership interest in the exotic animal may appeal the determination to the City Manager; provided, that the appeal must be filed with the City Manager within 15 days of the notice of impoundment referred to hereinabove. [Ord. 105 § 1, 1996.]

Title 7 RESERVED

Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY

Chapters:
8.16         Public Nuisances
8.22         Graffiti
8.26         Junk and Nuisance Vehicles
8.32         Litter Control
8.36         Noise Control
8.40         Property Maintenance
8.44         Smoking in Public Places
8.52         Vegetation
8.60         Watercraft Regulations
8.68         Fireworks
8.76         Park Code
8.80         Emergency Management

Chapter 8.16 PUBLIC NUISANCES

Sections:
8.16.010     Nuisances affecting public health.
8.16.020     Yard maintenance.
8.16.030     Vacant lot or building.
8.16.040     Statutes incorporated by reference.
8.16.050     Authority for enforcement.
8.16.060     Serving of orders.
8.16.070     Contents of order.
8.16.080     Inspections.

8.16.010 Nuisances affecting public health.
The following specific acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are declared to be nuisances: the erecting, maintaining, using, placing, depositing, causing, allowing, leaving, or permitting to be or remain in or upon any private lot, building, structure, or premises, or in or upon any street, avenue, alley, park, parkway, or other public or private place in the City, any one or more of the following places, conditions, things or acts to the prejudice, danger, or annoyance of others:
A. Privies, vaults, cesspools, sumps, pits, wells or cisterns or like places which are not securely protected from flies or rats;
B. Filthy, littered or trash-covered premises, including all buildings and structures thereon and areas adjacent thereto;
C. Tin cans, bottles, glass, cans, ashes, small pieces of scrap iron, wire, metal, articles, bric-a-brac, broken stone or cement, broken crockery, broken glass, broken plaster and all other trash or abandoned material unless the same are kept in covered bins or metal receptacles approved by the City; provided, that any such receptacles approved by the Pierce County Health Officer or designee shall be deemed approved by the City;
D. Trash, litter, rags, debris, accumulations of empty barrels, boxes, crates, packing cases, mattresses, bedding, excelsior, packing hay, straw, or other packing material, lumber not neatly piled, scrap iron, tin and other metal not neatly piled which provides harborage for rodents, or other pests;
E. Any unsightly and dangerous building, billboard or structure;
F. All places used or maintained as junkyards or dumping grounds, or for the wrecking, disassembling, repair or rebuilding of automobiles, trucks, tractors or machinery of any kind, or for the storing or leaving of worn out wrecked or abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors or machinery of any kind or of any of the parts thereof, or for the storing or leaving of any machinery or equipment used by contractors or builders or by other persons, which places are kept or maintained so as to provide harborage for rodents excluding properly zoned and licensed wrecking yards, junkyards or machinery being used;
G. Garbage disposed of in any manner other than provided in the Sanitary Code;
H. Garbage cans which are not impervious to rodent gnawing or do not have tight-fitting lids;
I. Any putrid, unsound or unwholesome bones, meat, hides, skins or the whole or any part of any dead animal, fish or fowl, butchers’ trimmings and offal, or any waste vegetable or animal matter in any quantity, garbage human excreta or other offensive substance; provided, nothing in this subsection shall prevent the temporary retention of waste in a manner approved by the City Manager;
J. Blackberry vines or any tall grass or weeds over two feet in height which is rodent infested;
K. Grass clippings, cut brush or cut weeds which may create a fly or rodent harborage;
L. Nests, colonies, hives or apiaries of bees, Africanized honey bees, yellow jacket, hornets or wasps which are not in full compliance with Chapter 15.60 RCW or Chapter 16-602 WAC; and
M. Any accumulation of combustible, explosive or flammable substances which are stored in a way that poses a threat or danger to life or property. [Ord. 32 § 1, 1996.]

8.16.020 Yard maintenance.
Every occupant of a dwelling unit located in the City shall keep the yard space thereof reasonably neat and clean and free of uncut grass, weeds, blackberry vines, bushes and debris, so as to prevent rodent, insect or other pest infestation, and so as to prevent a fire hazard. [Ord. 32 § 2, 1996.]

8.16.030 Vacant lot or building.
Every owner of a vacant lot or building located in close proximity to another occupied dwelling unit shall keep the premises reasonably neat and clean and free of uncut grass, weeds, blackberry vines, bushes and debris, so as to prevent rodent, insect or other pest infestation, and so as to prevent a fire hazard. [Ord. 32 § 3, 1996.]

8.16.040 Statutes incorporated by reference.
The following statutes are incorporated in this chapter by reference:
RCW 9.66.010 Public nuisance.
RCW 9.66.020 Unequal damages.
RCW 9.66.030 Maintaining or permitting nuisance.
RCW 9.66.040 Abatement of nuisance.
RCW 9.66.050 Deposit of unwholesome substance. [Ord. 32 § 4, 1996.]

8.16.050 Authority for enforcement.
Whenever any declared nuisance, source of filth or cause or probable cause of injury to health shall be found to exist on any private or public property, the City Manager or designee shall have the power and authority to order verbally and/or in writing the owner or occupant or user thereof, by appropriate action, at the expense of such owner, occupant, or user to correct and remove such nuisance, source of filth or cause or probable cause of injury to health within such time as the City Manager or designee may order. In the event of the refusal or failure to remove such nuisance within said time, the City Manager or designee may cause such nuisance to be abated at the expense of such person or persons, which cost may be recovered by the City from such person or persons in an action brought in the name of the City to recover the same in any court of competent jurisdiction. The City Manager or designee is also authorized to file a lien against the property on which the nuisance was abated in the amount of the City’s costs in abating the nuisance, and to enforce said lien against the property. In any such abatement by the City, the City shall also be entitled to interest accruing at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the time of the expenditure of funds by the City for such abatement. The authority for enforcement provided herein shall be in addition to and as an alternative to the authority of the City to prosecute violations of City Codes as misdemeanors, gross misdemeanors or infractions. [Ord. 181 § 1, 1998; Ord. 32 § 5, 1996.]

8.16.060 Serving of orders.
A. Any order described in LMC 8.16.050 required to be served on a person, owner, agent or occupant of a premises, shall be deemed to have been served under any of the following conditions:
    1. Such order is delivered to such person by any authorized representative of the City Manager or designee;
    2. Such order is mailed (by registered mail) to the owner, representative of the owner, or the last known occupant of the premises;
    3. Such order, properly signed, is posted by an authorized representative of the City Manager or designee upon any portion of such premises visible from a public place.
B. If the whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the City Manager or designee in the exercise of reasonable diligence and the City Manager or designee shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the order shall be served by publishing the same twice, once each week for two consecutive weeks, in the official newspaper of the City. [Ord. 32 § 6, 1996.]

8.16.070 Contents of order.
The order shall contain, among other things, the following information:
A. Name of owner or other persons interested;
B. Street address and legal description of the premises;
C. General description of the premises considered a nuisance;
D. A statement or list of items in violation of this chapter;
E. A reasonable time for correction of the violation;
F. A copy of the order shall be filed with County Auditor, which filing shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens orders provided by law. [Ord. 32 § 7, 1996.]

8.16.080 Inspections.
The City Manager or designee and all inspectors or employees of the City shall at all reasonable times have and be granted access to any premises, dock, building, storeroom, warehouse or residence for the purpose of inspecting same and of ascertaining whether the provisions of this chapter have been complied with. [Ord. 32 § 8, 1996.]

Chapter 8.22 GRAFFITI

Sections:
8.22.010     Declaration of policy – Findings.
8.22.020     Definitions.
8.22.030     Graffiti deemed nuisance.
8.22.040     Writing graffiti prohibited – Penalties.
8.22.050     Possession of graffiti implements prohibited – Penalties.
8.22.060     Allowing graffiti to remain prohibited – Penalties.
8.22.070     Graffiti removal.
8.22.080     Graffiti removal – by City.
8.22.090     Summary abatement of graffiti by City authorized – Procedure.
8.22.100     Use of public funds for graffiti removal.
8.22.110     City costs enforceable – Debt – Lien.
8.22.120     Action against parent for graffiti violation by minor.
8.22.130     Rewards for graffiti information.

8.22.010 Declaration of policy – Findings.
City Council finds that graffiti on public and private buildings, structures and personal property creates a condition of blight within the City that can result in the deterioration of property values, business opportunities and enjoyment of life for persons using that property, surrounding property and the community.
The presence of graffiti is inconsistent with the City’s goals of maintaining property, preventing crime and preserving aesthetic standards. The continued presence of graffiti is a visual symbol of disorder that demoralizes and erodes feelings of safety in our neighborhoods. It contributes to neighborhood decline by inviting crime and leading to a climate of intimidation; and reduces commerce, tax revenues and community pride.
While it is appropriate to request that courts require offenders convicted of graffiti crimes to restore the property they defaced, obtaining convictions is difficult because graffiti offenses can be committed quickly and secretively without any witnesses.
Therefore, prompt removal of graffiti from public and private property is in the public interest. The purpose of graffiti enforcement under this chapter is to promote the health, safety and welfare of the general public. [Ord. 533 § 2, 2011.]

8.22.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:
“Graffiti” means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property by any graffiti implement. Any graffiti authorized by a person responsible for a property is prohibited if it is otherwise recognized and deemed a public nuisance by law.
“Graffiti implement” means any aerosol paint container, felt tip marker, graffiti stick or paint stick, gum label, brush, roller, or etching tool or any other device or substance capable of scarring or marking any natural or manmade surface, including but not limited to glass, metal, concrete, or wood; and any piece, design, or scrapbook or drawings illustrating graffiti marks or signs.
“Graffiti nuisance property” means property upon which graffiti exists and where, after the City issues a notice to abate the nuisance pursuant to the procedures in Chapter 8.16 LMC for public nuisances, the graffiti has not been abated by the deadline set by the City.
“Private contractor” means any person or entity the City contracts with to remove graffiti.
“Property” means real or personal property, whether public or private, including but not limited to buildings, structures, walls, signs, poles, bridges, roads, sidewalks, fences, gates, motor vehicles, rocks, trees and other natural features. [Ord. 533 § 2, 2011.]

8.22.030 Graffiti deemed nuisance.
Graffiti is determined to adversely impact public health, safety and welfare and is deemed a public nuisance. [Ord. 533 § 2, 2011.]

8.22.040 Writing graffiti prohibited – Penalties.
It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any natural or manmade surface on any public property or private property. Any person who violates this section is guilty of a gross misdemeanor pursuant to LMC 9.03.050, which incorporates RCW 9A.48.090 and 9A.48.105 by reference. [Ord. 533 § 2, 2011.]

8.22.050 Possession of graffiti implements prohibited – Penalties.
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any graffiti implement, in a manner or under circumstances demonstrating his or her intent to paint, spray, chalk, etch, or otherwise apply graffiti. Any person who violates this section is guilty of a gross misdemeanor. [Ord. 533 § 2, 2011.]

8.22.060 Allowing graffiti to remain prohibited – Penalties.
It shall be unlawful for any person with responsibility for a property to allow a graffiti nuisance property to exist for more than seven days after the City issues a notice to abate the nuisance pursuant to the procedures in Chapter 8.16 LMC for public nuisances. Any person who violates this section has committed a civil infraction punishable by a fine in the amount of $500.00 per violation. Each day a graffiti nuisance property is allowed to exist shall constitute a separate violation. [Ord. 533 § 2, 2011.]

8.22.070 Graffiti removal.
In addition to and as an alternative to the authority of the City to prosecute violations as gross misdemeanors, misdemeanors or infractions, whenever the City determines that graffiti exists that is visible to any person utilizing any public road, parkway, alley, sidewalk or other right-of-way within the City, the City may issue a notice to abate the nuisance pursuant to the procedures in Chapter 8.16 LMC for public nuisances. [Ord. 533 § 2, 2011.]

8.22.080 Graffiti removal – by City.
Upon failure of persons to comply with the notice by the designated date, the City is authorized to cause the graffiti to be abated by City forces or by private contractor, and the City or its private contractor is authorized to enter upon the premises for such purposes using any lawful means. All reasonable efforts to minimize damage from such entry shall be taken by the City, and any paint used to obliterate or cover graffiti shall be as close as practicable to background color(s). If the City provides for the removal of the graffiti, the City shall not authorize nor undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive area than the area where the graffiti is located, unless the City determines that a more extensive area is required to be repainted or repaired in order to avoid an aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community. All aspects of graffiti removal are at the discretion of the City including, but not limited to, the method of and material used for repair.
Property owners may consent in advance to City entry onto private property for graffiti removal purposes. [Ord. 533 § 2, 2011.]

8.22.090 Summary abatement of graffiti by City authorized – Procedure.
A. Public Property. Graffiti found upon a right-of-way, public easement or other public property may be abated summarily by the City without prior notice by removal, disposal or destruction at the City’s discretion.
B. Threat to Public. Graffiti found to constitute an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare or to the environment may be abated summarily by the City without prior notice by removal, disposal or destruction at the City’s discretion. [Ord. 533 § 2, 2011.]

8.22.100 Use of public funds for graffiti removal.
Whenever the City becomes aware of or is notified and determines that graffiti is located on publicly or privately owned property visible from premises open to the public, the City is authorized, in its discretion, to use public funds for the removal of graffiti in a manner consistent with this chapter. [Ord. 533 § 2, 2011.]

8.22.110 City costs enforceable – Debt – Lien.
Any and all costs incurred by the City in the abatement of the graffiti nuisance as provided in this chapter shall constitute a debt owed to the City by the property owner or person in charge or control of the property, and shall, at the City’s discretion, be enforceable as a lien against the property upon which such nuisance existed. This remedy is in addition to all other legal remedies including legal remedies available for the enforcement of debts. [Ord. 533 § 2, 2011.]

8.22.120 Action against parent for graffiti violation by minor.
The parent(s) or guardian(s) legally responsible for any minor child under the age of 18 years who commits a graffiti offense in violation of this chapter shall be liable to the owner of such property for restitution in criminal offenses and/or in a civil action at law for damages. This section shall in no way limit the amount of recovery against the parent(s) or guardian(s) for their own common law negligence. [Ord. 533 § 2, 2011.]

8.22.130 Rewards for graffiti information.
The City may offer a reward not to exceed $300.00 for information leading to the identification and apprehension of any person who willfully damages or destroys any public or private property by the use of graffiti. The actual amount awarded (not to exceed $300.00) shall be determined in the discretion of the Chief of Police. In the event of damage to public property, the offender or the parents of any unemancipated minor must reimburse the City for any reward paid. In the event of multiple contributors of information, the reward amount shall be divided by the City in the manner it deems appropriate. Claims for rewards under this section shall be filed with the Chief of Police in the manner specified by the City. No claim for a reward shall be allowed unless the City investigates and verifies the accuracy of the claim and determines that the requirements of this section have been satisfied. [Ord. 533 § 2, 2011.]

Chapter 8.26 JUNK AND NUISANCE VEHICLES

Sections:
8.26.010     Purpose.
8.26.020     Definitions.
8.26.030     Storage of certain vehicles and components prohibited.
8.26.040     Public nuisance declared.
8.26.050     Responsible parties.
8.26.060     Violation – Penalty.
8.26.070     Exemptions.
8.26.080     Abatement and removal of junk and nuisance vehicles on private property.
8.26.090     Junk and nuisance vehicle removal by City.
8.26.100     Summary abatement of junk and/or nuisance vehicles by City authorized – Procedure.
8.26.110     Use of public funds for junk and nuisance vehicle removal.
8.26.120     City costs enforceable – Debt – Lien.

8.26.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to preserve the character and safety of the City’s neighborhoods by eliminating junk and other nuisance vehicles from public and private property that constitute blight to the community. This chapter provides procedures for the removal of junk vehicles as authorized by RCW 46.55.240. [Ord. 545 § 2, 2012.]

8.26.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:
“Apparently inoperable” means a vehicle that meets any of the following criteria:
The vehicle is:
    1. Covered or partially covered by moss, leaves, needles or other vegetation; or has grass or other vegetation growing up around the vehicle; or other circumstances exist that support a reasonable belief that the vehicle has not been moved for 30 days or more;
    2. Has any visibly damaged, missing, or broken major components, including but not limited to any of the following: windows, windshields, headlights, taillights, mirrors, body panels, hoods, doors, bumpers, trunk lids, driver’s seats, steering wheels, grill covers, radiators, or any major mechanical or electrical equipment; or
    3. For any other reason appears in such a condition as to not be legally operable on a public road.
“Junk vehicle” means a vehicle meeting at least three of the following requirements:
    1. Is three years old or older; or
    2. Is extensively damaged, such damage including but not limited to any of the following: broken window or windshield; or missing wheels, tires, motor, transmission or other parts; or
    3. Is apparently inoperable; or
    4. Has an approximate fair market value equal only to the approximate value of the scrap in it.
“Landowner” means an owner of private property, or a person in possession or control of private property.
“Vehicle” means any device capable or designed to be capable of moving upon a roadway, off-road, or on or across the water, whether motorized or not, and in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported, and shall include but not be limited to motor vehicles, trailers, recreational, utility, and sporting vehicles, boats, and campers designed or intended to be mounted on trucks or vehicle chassis, or parts or components thereof. [Ord. 545 § 2, 2012.]

8.26.030 Storage of certain vehicles and components prohibited.
No person owning, leasing, renting, occupying, being in possession or having charge of any property in the City, including vacant lots, shall retain or store, except if permitted by any other City ordinance, any of the following:
A. One or more junk, wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, or apparently inoperable vehicles; or
B. Body parts, engines or drive-train parts, wheels, tires, or any other parts, assemblies or components of automobiles and other vehicles. [Ord. 545 § 2, 2012.]

8.26.040 Public nuisance declared.
All junk vehicles identified as such by a law enforcement officer or code enforcement officer as defined in LMC 8.26.020, and found on private or public property, are declared to constitute a public nuisance subject to removal, impoundment and disposal. It is unlawful for any individual, firm, entity, or corporation to allow, cause to allow or place a junk vehicle on any premises. [Ord. 545 § 2, 2012.]

8.26.050 Responsible parties.
The City may take enforcement action for violations under this chapter to the landowner of record, tenant, or other person with responsibility or control of the property, and/or the person in possession or with responsibility or control of the vehicle, and/or the vehicle’s last known registered owner of record. [Ord. 545 § 2, 2012.]

8.26.060 Violation – Penalty.
A. Any violation of this chapter is a civil infraction punishable by a fine in the amount of $500.00 per violation. Each day a violation of this chapter is allowed to exist shall constitute a separate violation.
B. In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each day a violation of this chapter is allowed to exist shall constitute a separate violation. [Ord. 545 § 2, 2012.]

8.26.070 Exemptions.
The following are exempt from the prohibitions of this chapter:
A. A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or
B. A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a properly licensed dismantler, repair business, or vehicle dealer, and is fenced according to the provisions of RCW 46.80.130 as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified; or
C. A vehicle that is an individual’s or family’s sole source of transportation; provided, that all the following shall apply:
    1. The vehicle exists and is maintained in such a condition as to be immediately legally operable on public roads and highways;
    2. The vehicle is currently registered to an occupant of the property it is located on; and
    3. The burden of proof that the vehicle meets these criteria shall be on the owner, occupant, or person with responsibility for or control of the property. [Ord. 545 § 2, 2012.]

8.26.080 Abatement and removal of junk and nuisance vehicles on private property.
In addition to and as an alternative to the penalties specified in this chapter, whenever the City determines that junk and/or nuisance vehicle violations exist, the City may issue a notice to abate the nuisance pursuant to the procedures in Chapter 8.16 LMC for public nuisances to a responsible party; provided, that the following additional provisions shall be followed:
A. The person(s) designated by the City Manager with duties of enforcement of this chapter shall give notice to the last registered owner of record of the vehicle and to the property owner of record that a hearing may be requested but that, if no hearing is requested, the vehicle will be removed and impounded;
B. If a request for a hearing is received, the City shall provide a written notice giving the time, location and date of a hearing on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle, or part thereof as a public nuisance, which notice shall be mailed, by certified mail with return receipt requested to the owner of the property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owner of record unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership;
C. The owner of the property on which the vehicle, or component thereof, is located may appear in person at the hearing or present a written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle or item on the property, with his or her reasons for the denial and, if it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle or item was placed on the land without the consent of the owner, and that the owner has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, then the City Hearing Examiner shall not assess costs of administration or removal against the property upon which the vehicle or item is located;
D. After notice has been given of the intent of the City to dispose of the vehicle and, after a hearing, if requested, the vehicle shall be removed at the request of a law enforcement officer with notice to the Washington State Patrol and to the Department of Licensing that the vehicle has been wrecked. [Ord. 545 § 2, 2012.]

8.26.090 Junk and nuisance vehicle removal by City.
Upon failure of persons to comply with the notice by the designated date where the City is authorized to cause the junk and/or nuisance vehicle to be abated by City forces or by private contractor, the City or its private contractor is authorized to enter upon the premises for such purposes using any lawful means. All reasonable efforts to minimize damage from such entry shall be taken by the City. Property owners may consent in advance to City entry onto private property for junk and/or nuisance vehicle removal purposes. [Ord. 545 § 2, 2012.]

8.26.100 Summary abatement of junk and/or nuisance vehicles by City authorized – Procedure.
Junk and/or nuisance vehicles found to constitute an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare or to the environment may be abated summarily by the City without prior notice by removal, disposal or destruction at the City’s discretion. [Ord. 545 § 2, 2012.]

8.26.110 Use of public funds for junk and nuisance vehicle removal.
In the abatement of a junk and/or nuisance vehicle from publicly or privately owned property, the City is authorized, in its discretion, to use public funds in a manner consistent with this chapter. [Ord. 545 § 2, 2012.]

8.26.120 City costs enforceable – Debt – Lien.
Any and all costs incurred by the City in the abatement of the junk and/or nuisance vehicle, as provided in this chapter, shall constitute a debt owed to the City by the property owner and/or person in charge or control of the property or vehicle, and shall, at the City’s discretion, be enforceable as a lien against the person or the property upon which such nuisance existed. This remedy is in addition to all other legal remedies available for the enforcement of debts. [Ord. 545 § 2, 2012.]

Chapter 8.32 LITTER CONTROL

Sections:
8.32.010     Declaration of purpose.
8.32.020     Definitions.
8.32.030     Enforcement.
8.32.040     Littering prohibited – Penalties.
8.32.050     Notice to public contents of chapter.
8.32.060     Litter receptacles – Distribution – Placement – Violations – Penalties.
8.32.070     Litter bags – Violations – Penalties.
8.32.080     Removal of litter – Responsibility.
8.32.090     Coordination with the Department of Ecology.
8.32.100     Violations – Penalties.
8.32.900     Statutes adopted by reference.

8.32.010 Declaration of purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and to control and remove litter and garbage from the City to the maximum practical extent possible. The intent of this chapter is to add to and to coordinate existing litter control and removal efforts of private and public entities and individuals, and not to terminate or supplant such efforts. [Ord. 314 § 1, 2003; Ord. 38 § 1, 1996.]

8.32.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context indicates otherwise, the following words shall have the meanings set forth below:
“Litter” means and includes all types of garbage, refuse, trash, and waste material;
“Litter bag” means a bag, sack, or other container made of any material which is large enough to serve as a receptacle for litter inside the vehicle of any person, and is not limited to the state approved litter bag but must be similar in size and capacity;
“Litter receptacle” means an appropriately sized and shaped litter storage and collection receptacle intended to be used for the purpose of containing litter deposited therein, and includes but is not limited to those containers approved by the Department of Ecology as to standards as to size, shape, capacity, and color and bearing the state anti-litter symbol;
“Person” means any industry, public or private corporation, copartnership, association, firm, individual or other entity whatsoever;
“Public place” means any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings. “Public place” also means any area that is used or held out for use by the public whether owned or operated by public or private interests, and shall include lakes, rivers, streams and other waterways;
“Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. “Vehicle” also means any boat, ship, vessel, barge, or other floating craft. [Ord. 38 § 1, 1996.]

8.32.030 Enforcement.
City law enforcement officers, code enforcement officers, and those employees otherwise duly delegated and vested with enforcement authority all shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and all rules and regulations adopted hereunder. In addition, mailing by certified mail, of such citations, complaints, informations or notices or other process to the last known place of residence of a person charged, or as otherwise provided by applicable court rules, shall be deemed as personal service upon that person. The City shall also have the authority to contract with the Department of Ecology for purposes of providing litter control/enforcement services and personnel reasonably necessary to carry out the enforcement provisions of state law. Additionally, litter violations on private property may also be deemed a nuisance subject to abatement as provided in Chapter 8.16 LMC, or such other process as is provided in the City Code. [Ord. 181 § 8, 1998; Ord. 38 § 1, 1996.]

8.32.040 Littering prohibited – Penalties.
A. No person shall throw, drop, deposit, discard, or otherwise dispose of litter upon any public property in the City or upon private property in the City not owned by him or her or in the waters of this City whether from a vehicle or otherwise, including but not limited to any public highway, public park, beach, campground, forest land, recreational area, trailer park, highway, road, street, or alley except:
    1. When such property is designated by the City for the disposal of garbage and refuse, and such person is authorized to use such property for such purpose;
    2. Into a litter receptacle in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried away or deposited by the elements upon any part of said private or public property or waters.
B. Except as provided in RCW 70.93.060(4) and 7.80.120(1)(a), any person discarding, throwing or dropping litter from any motor vehicle shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
C. Any person discarding, throwing or dropping litter upon public or private property shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
D. Any person who owns property within the City, or who has control or custody of property within the City, shall keep the premises thereof free from litter. Any person failing this duty shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
E. Any person allowing a litter can, garbage can or a similar receptacle, to overflow or who fails to keep litter or garbage within a closed lidded container shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
F. Any person who deposits, abandons or discards any vehicle or motor vehicle parts, fluids or accessories, upon any public property or upon the private property of another without permission shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor.
G. Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section, in the sound discretion of any court in which conviction is obtained, may be directed by the judge to pick up and remove from any public place or any private property with prior permission of the legal owner upon which it is established by competent evidence that such person has deposited litter, any or all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of the execution of sentence. In the sound discretion of the court, any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section may be sentenced to perform work in the City work crew in lieu of or in addition to any jail time imposed thereunder. [Ord. 314 § 1, 2003; Ord. 38 § 1, 1996.]

8.32.050 Notice to public contents of chapter.
Pertinent portions of this chapter, or pertinent notices, may be posted along the public streets and highways of the City and at all entrances to City parks, recreational areas, at all public beaches, and at all other public places in the City where persons are likely to be informed of the existence and content of this chapter and the penalties for violating its provision. [Ord. 181 § 9, 1998; Ord. 38 § 1, 1996.]

8.32.060 Litter receptacles – Distribution – Placement – Violations – Penalties.
A. Litter receptacles shall be of an appropriate size and design pursuant to standards adopted by the City or by the State Department of Ecology, and shall bear an anti-litter symbol as designed and adopted by the State Department of Ecology, or other suitable identification as a litter receptacle.
B. Litter receptacles of the appropriate size and design, pursuant to City or state standards, shall be placed along the public streets and highways of this City and shall further be placed at all parks, drive-in restaurants, gasoline service stations, tavern parking lots, shopping centers, grocery store parking lots, parking lots of major industrial firms, boat launching areas, beaches and bathing areas and at such other public places within the City as may be specified by rule or regulation adopted by the City Manager, or designee.
C. It shall be the responsibility of any persons owning or operating any establishments or public places in which such litter receptacles are required by this section to procure and place such receptacles at their own expense on the premises.
D. Any person who fails to place such litter receptacles on the premises in the numbers required by rule or regulation of the City, violating the provisions of this section or rules or regulations adopted thereunder, shall be subject to a fine of $20.00 for each day of violation. [Ord. 38 § 1, 1996.]

8.32.070 Litter bags – Violations – Penalties.
The owner of any vehicle who fails to keep and use a litter bag in his or her vehicle shall be guilty of a violation of this section and shall be subject to penalties as provided in this chapter. The City encourages use of the standard litter bag designed and distributed by the State Department of Ecology. [Ord. 38 § 1, 1996.]

8.32.080 Removal of litter – Responsibility.
Responsibility for the removal of litter from receptacles placed on private or public property which is used by the public shall remain the responsibility of the owner or operator of such property. [Ord. 38 § 1, 1996.]

8.32.090 Coordination with the Department of Ecology.
The City shall coordinate with and shall support the efforts of the State Department of Ecology in accomplishing local anti-litter efforts; shall, together with the Department of Ecology, encourage, organize and coordinate all voluntary local anti-litter campaigns seeking to focus the attention of the public on the programs of the state and City to control and remove litter; and to investigate the availability of, and to apply for funds available from any private or public source to be used in programs to control and remove litter. [Ord. 38 § 1, 1996.]

8.32.100 Violations – Penalties.
Every person convicted of a violation of this chapter for which no penalty is specially provided for shall be punished by a fine of not more than $50.00 for each violation. [Ord. 314 § 1, 2003; Ord. 38 § 1, 1996.]

8.32.900 Statutes adopted by reference.
The following statutes are incorporated in this chapter by reference:
RCW 7.80.120(1)(a) Monetary penalties and restitution.
RCW 70.93.030 Definitions.
RCW 70.93.060(4) Potentially dangerous litter. [Ord. 314 § 1, 2003.]

Chapter 8.36 NOISE CONTROL

Sections:
8.36.010     Noise control.

8.36.010 Noise control.
A. General Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to cause, or for any person in possession of property to allow to originate from the property, sound that is a public disturbance noise.
B. Public Disturbances. The following sounds are public disturbance noises in violation of this chapter:
    1. The frequent, repetitive or continuous sounding of any horn or siren attached to a motor vehicle, except as a warning of danger or as specifically permitted or required by law.
    2. The creation of frequent, repetitive or continuous sounds in connection with the starting, operation, repair, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle, motorcycle, off-highway vehicle or internal combustion engine within a residential district, so as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace and comfort of owners or possessors of real property.
    3. Yelling, shouting, whistling or singing on or near public streets, particularly between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. or at any time and place as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace and comfort of owners or possessors of real property.
    4. The creation of frequent, repetitive or continuous sounds which emanate from any building, structure, apartment or condominium, which unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace and comfort of owners or possessors of real property, such as sounds from musical instruments, audio sound systems, band sessions or social gatherings.
    5. Sound from motor vehicle audio sound systems, such as tape players, radios and compact disc players, operated at a volume so as to be audible greater than 50 feet from the vehicle itself.
    6. Sound from audio equipment, such as loud speakers, amplification equipment, tape players, radios and compact disc players, operated at a volume so as to be audible greater than 50 feet from the source and not operated upon the property of the operator or with the knowledge, permission or consent of the owner or legal occupant of the property, and if operated on the property of the operator or with the knowledge, permission or consent of the owner or legal occupant of the property, than so as to be audible greater than 50 feet from the boundary of the property. For the purposes hereof, any sound, music or other noise emanating from fixed or portable audio equipment of or in a business shall be presumed to be with the knowledge, permission or consent of the owner or legal occupant of the property, which presumption may be rebutted by reasonable evidence to the contrary.
    7. The squealing, screeching or other such sounds from motor vehicle tires in contact with the ground or other roadway surface because of rapid acceleration, braking or excessive speed around corners or because of such other reason; provided, that sounds which result from actions which are necessary to avoid danger shall be exempt from this section.
    8. Sounds originating from construction sites, including but not limited to sounds from construction equipment, power tools and hammering between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends.
    9. Sounds originating from residential property relating to temporary projects for the maintenance or repair of homes, grounds and appurtenances, including but not limited to sounds from lawnmowers, powered hand tools, snow removal equipment and composters between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends.
C. Exclusion. This chapter shall not apply to community events such as parades or regularly scheduled events at parks, such as public address systems for baseball games or park concerts between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. This chapter shall not apply to fireworks lawfully discharged within the City.
D. Penalty. Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of up to $250.00; provided, that the penalty for a second or subsequent violation within a two-year period shall be a civil penalty of up to $500.00. [Ord. 199 § 1, 1999; Ord. 44 § 1, 1996.]

Chapter 8.40 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE

Sections:
8.40.010     Definitions.
8.40.020     Duty to maintain property.
8.40.030     Declaration of public nuisance.
8.40.040     Enforcement – Penalty.
8.40.050     Third-party liability.

8.40.010 Definitions.
The definitions set forth herein shall apply to this chapter:
“Junk” means discarded, broken or disabled material including, but not limited to: furniture; appliances; toys; or other items that are not in functioning condition.
“Litter” means discarded waste materials, including but not limited to: paper wrappings; packaging materials; discarded or used bottles; and discarded or used cans.
“Owner” means any person owning property, as shown on the real property records of Pierce County or on the last assessment role for taxes, and shall also mean any lessee, tenant or other person having control or possession of the property.
“Property” means land and any buildings or structures located thereon.
“Trash” means waste food products and other household garbage. [Ord. 46 § 1, 1996.]

8.40.020 Duty to maintain property.
A. No person owning, or responsible for any property by virtue of leasing, renting, occupying, or being in possession or having charge of any property in the City, including vacant lots, shall maintain or allow to be maintained on such property, except as may be permitted by any other City ordinance, any of the following conditions visible from any public street or alley, or from any other private property:
    1. Junk, trash, litter, boxes, discarded lumber, salvage materials, or other similar materials in any front yard, side yard, rear yard or vacant lot;
    2. Attractive nuisances dangerous to children, including but not limited to abandoned, broken or neglected equipment, machinery, refrigerators and freezers, excavations, wells or shafts;
    3. Broken or discarded furniture, household equipment and furnishings in any front yard, side yard, rear yard or vacant lot;
    4. Shopping carts in any front yard, side yard, rear yard or vacant lot of any property;
    5. Dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees, or any other vegetation to include a majority of vegetation (other than vegetation located in flower beds) which is dangerous to public health, safety and welfare, located in any front yard, side yard, rear yard, or upon any vacant lot;
    6. Vehicle parts or other articles of personal property which are discarded or left in a state of partial construction or repair in any front yard, side yard, rear yard or vacant lot;
    7. Vehicles or vehicle bodies which are up on blocks and have not been moved for a period of 30 days;
    8. Utility trailers or unmounted camper tops located in any front yard except in the driveway;
    9. Any accumulation of weeds, brambles, berry vines, or other vegetation which is over-growing any structure or which exceeds an average height of 15 inches, or any accumulation of junk, litter, trash, dead organic matter, debris, offal, rat harborages, stagnant water, combustible materials and similar materials or conditions constituting fire, health or safety hazard;
    10. Dilapidation or state of filthiness or uncleanness of any dwelling or other structure which endangers health or life or which permits entrance by rats, mice or other rodents.
B. For the purposes hereof, the duty to maintain property extends to and includes the area of the public right-of-way adjacent to and between the property of the person owning, leasing, renting, occupying, being in possession or having charge of the private property and the paved roadway. The City Manager, or the designee thereof, may make exceptions subject to available budget funds as deemed necessary and appropriate under circumstances such as accident, extreme danger, or Acts of God, but in no case for routine maintenance. [Ord. 359 § 1, 2004; Ord. 112 § 1, 1997; Ord. 46 § 1, 1996.]

8.40.030 Declaration of public nuisance.
Any property found to be maintained in violation of LMC 8.40.020 is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated by rehabilitation, removal, trimming, demolition or repair. [Ord. 46 § 1, 1996.]

8.40.040 Enforcement – Penalty.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced pursuant to Chapter 8.16 LMC. In addition to being subject to abatement as a nuisance, violations of this chapter shall constitute civil infractions punishable by a fine in the amount of $500.00 per violation. Each day during which a violation occurs constitutes a separate violation. [Ord. 46 § 1, 1996.]

8.40.050 Third-party liability.
A. It is expressly the purpose of this chapter to provide for and promote the health, safety and welfare of the general public, and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this chapter.
B. It is the specific intent of this chapter to place the obligation of complying with its requirements upon the property owner or owners and no provisions nor term used in this chapter is intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the City or any of its officers and employees, for whom the implementation or enforcement of this chapter shall be discretionary and not mandatory.
C. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to be, nor shall be, construed to create or form the basis for any liability on the part of the City, or its officers, employees or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of a property owner to comply with the provisions of this chapter, or by reason or in consequence of any inspection, notice, order, certificate, permission or approval authorized or issued or done in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this chapter, or by reason of any action or inaction on the part of the City related in any manner to the enforcement of this chapter by its officers, employees or agents. [Ord. 46 § 1, 1996.]

Chapter 8.44 SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES

Sections:
8.44.010     Definitions.
8.44.020     Prohibitions – Public places.
8.44.030     Prohibitions – Restaurants.
8.44.040     Designation of smoking areas.
8.44.050     Criteria in determining smoking areas.
8.44.060     Single-room public place.
8.44.070     Duties of proprietors, employers and other persons having control.
8.44.080     City workplaces and non-City office workplaces to adopt smoking policies.
8.44.090     Unlawful to remove signs.
8.44.100     Applicable Health Board rules and regulations.
8.44.110     Penalties and enforcement.
8.44.120     Private actions.
8.44.130     Retaliation prohibited.
8.44.140     Violation – Retaliation.

8.44.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the meanings indicated unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
“City workplace” means a workplace lawfully occupied by City employees for the conduct of the business of City elected or appointed officials and under the authority of such official.
“Cocktail lounge” means that portion of an establishment holding a current and valid Class H license issued by the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board which is specifically set aside for the sale and consumption of liquor by the glass and separated by a divider from that portion of the establishment principally serving meals on a regular basis to the public.
“Employee” means any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit.
“Employer” means any person who pays another person direct or indirect monetary wages or profit in consideration for such other person providing services on the premises of the employer.
“Office workplace” means any enclosed area of a structure or portion thereof intended for occupancy by business or governmental entities which provide primarily clerical, professional, or business services of the business entity, or which provide primarily clerical, professional or business services to other business entities or to the public, at that location. “Office workplace” includes, but is not limited to, office spaces in office buildings, medical offices, libraries, museums, hospitals, and nursing homes and other entities included in the definitions of “public place” and “restaurant” in this section, but excluding:
    1. Private, enclosed offices occupied exclusively by smokers even though such offices may be visited by nonsmokers;
    2. A private home which may serve as an office workplace;
    3. Any property owned or leased by state or federal entities.
“Public meeting” includes all meetings open to the public pursuant to RCW 42.30.010 et seq.
“Public place” means any enclosed indoor area or vehicle used by and open to the public regardless of whether such building or vehicle is owned in whole or in part by a private person or entities or by the City or other public entity, and regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission to the place. It includes, but is not limited to: elevators, public conveyances, museums, concert halls, theaters, hallways, auditoriums, exhibition halls, indoor sports arenas, bowling centers, hospitals, nursing homes, medical, dental, or health care facilities, enclosed shopping centers, retail stores, retail service establishments, financial institutions, educational facilities, public meetings or hearings, public transportation facilities, ticket areas, public restrooms, libraries, restaurants, waiting areas, lobbies, and reception areas.
“Restaurant” means any building, structure, or area used as, maintained as, or advertised as, or held out to the public to be an enclosure where meals, for consideration of payment, are made available to be consumed on the premises.
“Smoke” or “smoking” includes the carrying or smoking of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, or any other lighted smoking equipment.
“Tavern” means any establishment or portion of an establishment where one can purchase and consume alcoholic beverages, but excluding any such establishment or portion of the establishment having tables and seating facilities for serving meals and where, in consideration of payment, meals are served on a regular basis to the public. [Ord. 43 § 1, 1996.]

8.44.020 Prohibitions – Public places.
No person shall smoke in a public place, City workplace, or at a public meeting except in designated smoking areas. This prohibition does not apply in the following cases:
A. Where an entire room or hall is used for a private social function and seating arrangements are under the control of the sponsor of the function and not of the proprietor or person in charge of the place;
B. Chartered buses for private hire and taxicabs which are clearly designated by the operator to permit smoking. [Ord. 43 § 1, 1996.]

8.44.030 Prohibitions – Restaurants.
Restaurants shall provide food service seating areas where smoking will not be permitted. No person shall smoke in restaurants in a “no smoking designated area.” [Ord. 43 § 1, 1996.]

8.44.040 Designation of smoking areas.
Smoking areas may be designated in public places, and City workplaces, by the proprietor or other person in charge of the place except that designated smoking areas shall not be allowed in:
A. Elevators, public conveyances, health care clinics, public meetings or libraries that are open to the public; or
B. Other places already prohibited by other rule, ordinance or regulation. [Ord. 43 § 1, 1996.]

8.44.050 Criteria in determining smoking areas.
Where smoking areas are designated, existing physical barriers and ventilation systems shall be used to minimize the toxic effect of smoke in adjacent nonsmoking areas. The size of the designated smoking area shall not be more than proportionate to the preference of the users specifically requesting the smoking area, as can be demonstrated by the proprietor or other person in charge. [Ord. 43 § 1, 1996.]

8.44.060 Single-room public place.
In the case of public places consisting of a single room, the provisions of this chapter shall be considered met if a portion of the room is reserved and posted as a designated smoking area. No public place, restaurant or City workplace, other than a cocktail lounge, tavern, or bowling center, shall be designated as a smoking area in its entirety. If a cocktail lounge, tavern, or bowling center is designated as a smoking area in its entirety, this designation shall be posted conspicuously on all entrances normally used by the public. [Ord. 43 § 1, 1996.]

8.44.070 Duties of proprietors, employers and other persons having control.
Proprietors, employers, or other persons having control of a place regulated under this chapter shall make every reasonable effort to prohibit smoking in public places, City workplaces, public meetings and no smoking areas in restaurants by:
A. Posting signs prohibiting or permitting smoking as appropriate under this chapter. Signs shall be posted conspicuously at each entrance and in prominent locations throughout the place. The boundary between a regular and smoking designated area shall be clearly designated so that persons may differentiate between the two areas;
B. Proprietors and employees of restaurants shall make every reasonable effort to inform patrons that designated nonsmoking areas are available for their preference, including but not limited to posting signs not less than three inches by eight inches in a conspicuous place in the reception area informing patrons of dining areas available for nonsmokers;
C. Requesting that persons smoke only in smoking designated areas;
D. Asking smokers to refrain from smoking upon request of a client, patron, or employee suffering discomfort from the smoke;
E. Informing the public and/or employees orally that separate smoking and nonsmoking sections are available; or
F. Any other means which may be appropriate. [Ord. 43 § 1, 1996.]

8.44.080 City workplaces and non-City office workplaces to adopt smoking policies.
A. Each non-City employer who operates a workplace in the City and the City shall, within three months of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, adopt, implement and maintain a written smoking policy which shall be conspicuously posted in all workplaces under the employer’s jurisdiction and which shall contain, at a minimum, the following provisions and requirements:
    1. Any nonsmoking employee may object to his or her employer about smoke in his or her workplace. The employer shall attempt to reach reasonable accommodation, insofar as possible, between the preferences of nonsmoking and smoking employees. However, an employer is not required by this chapter to make any expenditures or structural changes to accommodate the preferences of nonsmoking and smoking employees.
    2. If an accommodation which is satisfactory to all affected nonsmoking employees cannot be reached in any given office workplace, the preferences of nonsmoking employees shall prevail and the employer shall prohibit smoking in the workplace of the affected nonsmoking employees to the end that those employees may work in a smoke-free environment. Where the employer prohibits smoking in a non-City office workplace, the area in which smoking is prohibited shall be clearly marked with signs.
B. The smoking policy shall be announced within three weeks of adoption to all employees working in non-City office workplaces in the City workplaces as defined in LMC 8.44.010. The policy shall be posted conspicuously in all workplaces under the employer’s or official’s jurisdiction. [Ord. 43 § 1, 1996.]

8.44.090 Unlawful to remove signs.
It is unlawful for any person to remove, deface, or destroy any sign posted in compliance with this chapter. [Ord. 43 § 1, 1996.]

8.44.100 Applicable Health Board rules and regulations.
The Tacoma-Pierce County Board of Health is authorized as a part of its health district duties to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the rules and regulations of the Tacoma-Pierce County Board of Health shall apply to such enforcement to the extent that the rules and regulations are not in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 43 § 1, 1996.]

8.44.110 Penalties and enforcement.
A. Warnings and Civil Fines. When violations of this chapter occur, a warning shall first be given to the person or persons violating this chapter. Any subsequent violation shall subject the offender to a civil fine as provided for in this section.
B. Any person violating this chapter by smoking in a place in which smoking is prohibited herein or by removing, defacing or destroying any sign posted in compliance with this chapter is subject to a civil fine of up to $100.00. The law enforcement agency of the City shall enforce this section by issuing a notice of infraction to be assessed in the same manner as traffic infractions.
    1. The provisions contained in Chapter 46.63 RCW for the disposition of traffic infractions apply to disposition of infractions for violations of this subsection except as follows:
        a. The provisions in Chapter 46.63 RCW relating to the provision of records to the Department of Licensing in accordance with RCW 46.20.270 are not applicable to this chapter; and
        b. The provisions in Chapter 46.63 RCW relating to the imposition of sanctions against a person’s driver’s license or vehicle license are not applicable to this chapter;
        c. The form for the notice of infraction for a violation of this subsection shall be prescribed by rule of the Supreme Court.
    2. Any proprietor, employer, or other person intentionally violating this act by not complying with this section may be subject to a civil fine of up to $500.00, which penalty shall be assessed and recovered in a civil action brought in the name of the City of Lakewood in any court of competent jurisdiction. Each day upon which a violation occurs or is permitted to continue constitutes a separate violation. The City Manager or designee shall enforce this chapter either separately or together with the Tacoma-Pierce County Health Department by either of the following actions:
        a. Serving notice requiring the correction of any violation;
        b. Calling upon the City Attorney to maintain an action to assess and recover a civil penalty for the violation.
C. In undertaking the enforcement of this chapter, the City is assuming and undertaking only to promote the general welfare. It is not assuming, nor is it imposing on its officers and employees, an obligation for breach of which it is liable in money damages to any person who claims that such breach proximately caused injury. [Ord. 43 § 1, 1996.]

8.44.120 Private actions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting a private person or organization from bringing an action to enjoin violations of this chapter. [Ord. 43 § 1, 1996.]

8.44.130 Retaliation prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for an employer, proprietor, agency or other person having control of a place regulated under this chapter to retaliate against any member of the general public or an employee or applicant for employment of the employer, proprietor, agency or other person having control because such person seeks enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 43 § 1, 1996.]

8.44.140 Violation – Retaliation.
Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be remedied through appropriate private civil action filed in a court of competent jurisdiction against persons who commit the violations for injunctive or other appropriate relief. [Ord. 43 § 1, 1996.]

Chapter 8.52 VEGETATION

Sections:
8.52.010     Uncontrolled weeds and vegetation.

8.52.010 Uncontrolled weeds and vegetation.
A. It is unlawful for any person to permit or allow weeds or vegetation to become uncontrolled on any property within the City over which he or she has ownership, occupancy or control. “Uncontrolled weeds or vegetation” shall be defined as follows:
    1. Any undesired, uncultivated and unsightly plants growing in profusion so as to crowd out desired plant growth or disfigure a lawn; or
    2. Any vegetation growth, including but not limited to weed, grasses, bushes, hedges and trees or tree branches, which obstructs the vision of people in vehicles or on sidewalks or rights-of-way so as to interfere with the safe, full and free use of any street, sidewalk or right-of-way within the City; or
    3. Any vegetation growth that creates a fire or other safety hazard; or
    4. Any accumulation of weeds, brambles, berry vines, or other vegetation which is over-growing any structure or which exceeds an average height of 15 inches. It is provided, however, that the City Manager or designee is authorized to grant a variance from the provisions of this subsection where the accumulation of vegetation does not constitute a fire hazard, does not constitute a safety hazard and does not constitute a harborage of insects, rodents or other pests, and where, because of the unique topographical, agricultural or rural character of the property on which the accumulation is located, the accumulation of vegetation enhances the property or is not visible from any other property. The granting of any such requested variance shall be conditioned on the accumulation of vegetation not thereafter constituting a fire hazard, a safety hazard or a harborage of insects, rodents or other pests. The decision of the City Manager or designee granting or denying any such requested variance may be appealed within 14 days of the decision as follows: The decision of the City Manager or designee denying any such requested variance may be appealed to the City Council by the person or persons owning, occupying or controlling the property, and the decision of the City Manager or designee granting any such requested variance may be appealed to the City Council only by persons living or owning property in the immediate vicinity of the property on which the accumulation of vegetation is located and where the accumulation of vegetation is visible from the property of such persons.
B. Violation of this section shall be punishable by a civil fine in the amount of up to $500.00 per violation, providing that each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation. In addition to the civil fine(s), violations of this section may be abated by the City in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 8.16 LMC. [Ord. 181 § 10, 1998; Ord. 112 § 2, 1997; Ord. 45 § 1, 1996.]

Chapter 8.60 WATERCRAFT REGULATIONS

Sections:
Article I.  General Regulations
    8.60.010     Authorization.
    8.60.020     Applicability.
    8.60.030     Responsibility.
    8.60.040     Definitions.
    8.60.050     Rules of the road.
    8.60.060     Lights and shapes.
    8.60.070     Prohibiting sound and light signals.
    8.60.080     Distinctive blue light authorized for use by law enforcement vessels.
    8.60.090     Exemptions for racing motor-powered vessels.
    8.60.100     Fire extinguishers.
    8.60.110     Personal flotation devices.
    8.60.120     Equipment and numbering.
Article II. Operation Regulations
    8.60.130     Applicability.
    8.60.140     Manner of operation.
    8.60.150     Speed limits.
    8.60.160     For vessels engaged in taking off and landing – With or without water-skiers.
    8.60.170     Reckless operation.
    8.60.180     Hazardous conditions.
    8.60.190     Designated areas.
    8.60.200     Direction of travel.
    8.60.210     Water-skiers.
    8.60.220     Prevention of noise.
    8.60.230     Testing.
    8.60.235     Testing areas and times.
    8.60.240     Legal age of operation.
    8.60.250     Obstructions.
    8.60.260     Prohibited operations.
    8.60.270     Boating accident reports.
    8.60.310     Skin/scuba diving.
    8.60.320     Posting of regulations.
    8.60.330     Swimming and flotation devices.
    8.60.340     Unlawful dumping.
    8.60.350     Unsafe piers – Fresh water only.
Article III. Vessel Regulations
    8.60.360     Applicability.
    8.60.370     Safety devices.
    8.60.380     Vessel rental period.
    8.60.390     Regattas, races or aquatic events.
    8.60.400     Emergency vessels.
    8.60.410     Directing traffic emergency powers.
    8.60.420     Restricted areas.
    8.60.430     Marker and regulatory buoys.
    8.60.440     Aiding and abetting violation.
Article IV. Specific Rules for Lakes and Other Areas
    8.60.450     Class “A” lakes.
    8.60.460     Class “B” lakes.
    8.60.470     Class “C” lakes.
    8.60.480     Class “D” lakes.
Article V.  Penalties
    8.60.600     Penalties designated.

Article I. General Regulations

8.60.010 Authorization.
The City of Lakewood, in the exercise of its police powers, assumes control and jurisdiction over all lakes, rivers and all other waters within its corporate boundaries. [Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.020 Applicability.
A. Except as noted, the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all vessels which are operated within the geographical jurisdiction of the City.
B. CFR Titles 33 and 46, Chapters 79A.60 and 88.02 RCW, Chapters 352-60 and 352-67 WAC, and any subsequent amendments are hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in full herein as this subsection. [Ord. 387 § 1, 2005; Ord. 380 § 1, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.030 Responsibility.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall exonerate the owner, master or crew of any vessel from the consequences of any failure to comply with these rules or of the failure of any precaution which may be required by the ordinary practice of watercraft users, or by the special circumstances of the case.
B. In construing and complying with this chapter due regard shall be had to all dangers of navigation and collision and to any special circumstances, including the limitations of the vessels involved, which may make a departure from these rules necessary to avoid immediate danger. [Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.040 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter clearly requires otherwise, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings:
“Aquatic event” means any organized water event of limited duration.
“Authorized emergency vessel” means any designated and/or marked patrol vessel.
“Department” means the Police Department or the law enforcement agency of the City.
“Diver’s flag” means a red flag, not less than 10 inches on the hoist by 12 inches on the fly, with a white stripe of one inch crossing the red diagonally and a stiffener to make it stand out from the pole or mast, or a rigid replica of the International Code flag “A” (Alpha pennant) not less than one meter in height.
“Obstruction” means any vessel or any matter which may in any way impede navigation or endanger any vessel.
“Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association or other legal entity.
“Pier, dock or gangway” means any permanent wharf, dock, float, gridiron or other structure to promote the convenient loading or unloading of a vessel.
“Restricted or designated areas” means an area that has been marked to be used for, or closed to, certain designated purposes.
“Restricted visibility” means any condition in which visibility is restricted by fog, mist, falling snow, heavy rainstorms, sandstorms, or any other similar causes.
“SAE” means Society of Automotive Engineers as referenced in Chapter 352-67 WAC.
“Scuba diver” means any free-swimming person who uses an artificial or mechanical means to replace air.
“Skin diver” means any free-swimming person who does not use an artificial or mechanical means to replace air.
“Sunrise” means the time when the sun appears above the sensible horizon as a result of the earth’s rotation which may be shown by a sunrise chart for the general Tacoma area of Pierce County, Washington.
“Sunset” means the time when the sun disappears below the sensible horizon as a result of the earth’s rotation which may be shown by a sunrise chart for the general Tacoma area of Pierce County, Washington.
“Towboat” means any vessel engaged in towing or pushing another vessel or anything other than a vessel.
“Vessel” includes every description of floating craft, including motorized and nonmotorized watercraft, and includes nondisplacement craft used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water.
“Waters of Lakewood” means all water within the corporate boundaries of the City of Lakewood. [Ord. 380 § 2, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.050 Rules of the road.
Except as otherwise specified in this chapter, the provisions of Chapter 352-60 WAC shall apply on all waters of Lakewood, as such rules are now or may hereafter from time to time be amended or adopted; and it is further provided that sailing vessels or other vessels, while engaged in a sanctioned or authorized race, predicted log race, regatta or similar event shall be subject to the applicable rules for such event including, but not limited to, differing right-of-way rules. Additionally, except as herein otherwise specified or unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, water recreational equipment such as jet skis, water bikes and other machinery shall be considered vessels for the purposes hereof, and all rules and requirements for vessels set forth in this chapter shall apply to such equipment.
A violation of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.060 Lights and shapes.
WAC 352-60-060 and any future amendments thereto are adopted by reference as this section, “Lights and shapes.”
A violation of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 387 § 1, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.070 Prohibiting sound and light signals.
It is unlawful for the master, owner or any person in charge of any vessel, while lying at any pier or while navigating in the waters of Lakewood, unnecessarily to cause any whistle or siren to be blown or sounded, nor shall any person flash the rays of a searchlight or other blinding light onto the bridge or into the pilot house of any vessel under way for any purpose other than those authorized by law.
A violation of this section constitutes a misdemeanor crime, punishable by a fine of up to $1,000 or by a jail sentence of up to 90 days, or by both such fine and jail time. [Ord. 387 § 1, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.080 Distinctive blue light authorized for use by law enforcement vessels.
A. The use of a distinctive blue light is authorized for law enforcement vessels only, and may be displayed during the day or night, whenever the vessel may be engaged in direct law enforcement activities where identification of the law enforcement vessel is desirable or where necessary for safety reasons. This light, when used, would be in addition to prescribed lights and all signals required by law or regulations in this chapter.
B. The distinctive blue light may only be displayed by law enforcement vessels of the City’s law enforcement agency, the County Sheriff’s Department or other authorized emergency vessels.
A violation of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 387 § 1, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.090 Exemptions for racing motor-powered vessels.
The provisions of LMC 8.60.150 and 8.60.220 shall not apply to motor-powered vessels while competing in any race previously arranged, approved and announced, or while practicing for any race where the practice was previously arranged, approved and announced, or if such boats are designed and intended solely for racing, while engaged in such navigation as was previously arranged, approved and announced and as is incidental to the tuning up of the boats and engines for the race. Arrangements, approval and announcement of any race shall be conducted as stated in LMC 8.60.390. [Ord. 380 § 3, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.100 Fire extinguishers.
Fire extinguishing equipment shall be required as provided in 46 CFR Subchapter C, Subpart 25.30 and WAC 352-60-080.
A violation of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 387 § 1, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.110 Personal flotation devices.
A. Every child 12 years of age or younger shall wear a personal flotation device while on board any vessel, except while in a cabin.
B. Every person on board a recreational vessel less than 16 feet in length of open construction shall wear a personal flotation device while the vessel is underway.
C. 33 CFR Part 175, Subpart B, 46 CFR Subchapter C, Subpart 25.25 and WAC 352-60-030 and any future amendments thereto are adopted by reference as this subsection C, “Personal flotation devices.”
A violation of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 387 § 1, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.120 Equipment and numbering.
All vessels shall carry the equipment and be numbered or designated in accordance with Chapter 88.02 RCW, Chapter 308-93 WAC and applicable laws of the United States and any future amendments thereto.
A violation of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 387 § 1, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

Article II. Operation Regulations

8.60.130 Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall be applicable to all vessels operated on lakes, rivers and all other water within the corporate boundaries of the City of Lakewood. [Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.140 Manner of operation.
A. A person shall not operate a vessel in a negligent manner. For the purposes of this section, to “operate in a negligent manner” means operating a vessel in disregard of careful and prudent operation, or in disregard of careful and prudent rates of speed that are no greater than is reasonable and proper under the conditions existing at the point of operation, taking into account the amount and character of traffic, size of the lake or body of water, freedom from obstruction to view ahead, effects of vessel wake, and so as not to unduly or unreasonably endanger life, limb, property or other rights of any person entitled to the use of such waters.
B. Negligent operation of a vessel includes, but is not limited to:
    1. Not paying attention to the operation of the vessel;
    2. Failing to keep a proper lookout;
    3. Failing to follow navigation rules;
    4. Causing danger from the effects of the vessel’s wake;
    5. Bow, seat back, gunwale or transom riding, when operating in excess of five miles per hour unless seating is specifically designed for that location.
C. The operator of any vessel shall be responsible for any damage or injuries caused by the wake from the vessel.
D. A violation of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 387 § 1, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.150 Speed limits.
A. It shall be unlawful to operate a vessel at a rate of speed greater than will permit the operator in the exercise of reasonable care, to bring the vessel to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead; provided, however, it shall be unlawful to operate vessels in excess of five miles per hour, or at a speed which produces a damaging wake, within 200 feet of any shore, dock, bridge or public swimming area, or within 100 feet of swimmers or of any vessel, provided further, that it shall be unlawful to operate vessels in excess of eight miles per hour after legal sunset in waters not regulated by the five miles per hour law. (Speeds of over eight miles per hour display a wake behind the vessel.)
B. It shall be unlawful to operate a motor-powered vessel or boat at a speed in excess of 60 mph except during periods of lake congestion. These periods were assessed to be Saturdays, Sundays and holidays during the summer (Memorial Day to Labor Day). During periods of potential congestion, it shall be unlawful to operate any motor-powered vessel or boat at a speed in excess of 45 mph speed limit on the lake from sunrise to sunset. This section only applies to American Lake.
C. A violation of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 387 § 1, 2005; Ord. 380 § 4, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.160 For vessels engaged in taking off and landing – With or without water-skiers.
A. Taking off shall be done perpendicular or as near to perpendicular to shore, dock or other launching facilities, whichever shall permit the vessel and skier, if any, safe passage to open water; provided, that at no time shall the taking off angle be less than a 45-degree angle to shore, dock, or other launching facility.
B. Landing of vessels and skiers shall be done not less than at a 45-degree angle to the shore, dock, or other landing facilities.
C. At no time shall taking off or landing of water-skier give the towing vessel special privileges over any other vessels, under the rules of the road, and at no time shall such acts of skiing cause undue risk to persons or property.
D. A violation of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.170 Reckless operation.
A. It shall be unlawful to operate any vessel in a reckless manner upon any waters within the City. For the purpose of this chapter, to operate in a reckless manner means the operation of a vessel upon the waters within the City in such a manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger any persons or property. Actions that constitute prima facie evidence of reckless operation are:
    1. Operating within 100 feet of shore unless taking off or landing as provided in LMC 8.60.160, or in a designated swimming area;
    2. Overloading;
    3. Operating while under the influence of alcohol or drugs and recognizable by erratic operation;
    4. Excessive speed in violation of LMC 8.60.140 or 8.60.150;
    5. Operating in clearly dangerous areas;
    6. Operating without proper lights at night;
    7. Weaving in and out of other vessels, docks or buoys;
    8. Playing “chicken” with another vessel;
    9. Continued use or refusal to terminate use of boat after being ordered to correct an especially hazardous condition by law enforcement officer.
B. A violation of this section constitutes a misdemeanor crime, punishable by a fine of up to $1,000 or by a jail sentence of up to 90 days, or by both such fine and jail time. [Ord. 387 § 1, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.180 Hazardous conditions.
If a law enforcement officer observes any unsafe condition and determines that an “especially hazardous condition” exists, he may direct the operator to take immediate steps to correct the condition, including returning and mooring. Unsafe conditions or hazardous conditions shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
A. Insufficient personal flotation devices (PFD);
B. Insufficient firefighting devices;
C. Overload conditions;
D. Improper navigation light display;
E. Fuel leakage;
F. Fuel in bilges;
G. Improper ventilation;
H. Improper backfire flame control.
A violation of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 387 § 1, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.190 Designated areas.
It shall be unlawful to operate any vessel within 100 feet of a public or private bathing or swimming area, which is marked by buoys or some other distinguishing device.
A violation of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.200 Direction of travel.
Except as provided for in LMC 8.60.160 all vessels shall keep the closest shore on the operator’s starboard or right-hand side at all times. A violation of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.210 Water-skiers.
A. RCW 79A.60.170 and any amendments thereto are adopted and incorporated herein as this subsection A.
B. The following regulations are intended to supplement the provisions contained in RCW 79A.60.170 as adopted by subsection A of this section: It shall be unlawful to operate a vessel towing a person on water skis, aquaplane, or surfboard, inner tube, or other similar device unless the following conditions are strictly followed:
    1. The vessel shall be manned by an operator who must be attentive to the duties of operating a vessel.
    2. No vessel operator may tow or attempt to tow a water-skier on any waters of Washington State unless such craft shall be occupied by at least an operator and an observer. The observer and the operator shall not be the same person. The observer shall continuously observe the person or persons being towed and shall display a flag immediately after the towed person or persons fall into the water and during the time preparatory to skiing while the person or persons are still in the water. Such flag shall be a bright red or brilliant orange color, measuring at least 12 inches square, mounted on a pole not less than 24 inches long and displayed to be visible from every direction.
    3. No person shall engage or attempt to engage in water-skiing without wearing a personal flotation device.
    4. No vessel shall follow behind a vessel towing a person on water skis closer than 300 feet, or cross the bow of a towing boat closer than 200 feet, or pass alongside a towing boat closer than 100 feet. A vessel towing a skier is not a privileged boat, and must conform to the rules of the road.
    5. It shall be unlawful to water-ski from sunset to sunrise.
    6. It shall be unlawful to water-ski within 200 feet of any public boat launching area, or within 200 feet of any dock used for fueling any vessel, or within 200 feet of any dock or designated swimming area at a public park, or a private designated swimming area. This provision shall apply to the taking off and landing of a water-skier in any of the described areas.
C. A violation of subsections (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(5) and (B)(6) of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. A violation of subsection (B)(4) of this section constitutes a misdemeanor crime, punishable by a fine of up to $1,000 or by a jail sentence of up to 90 days, or by both such fine and jail time. [Ord. 387 § 1, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.220 Prevention of noise.
A. Every motor-powered vessel shall at all times be equipped with a functioning underwater exhaust or a properly installed and adequately maintained muffler or other similar device to reduce the sound of engine exhaust, and no person shall use a cut-out, bypass or similar device upon any motor-powered vessel or install such equipment for use on a motor-powered vessel used upon any lakes, rivers and all other waters within the corporate boundaries of the City. Nor shall a person use a muffler or pipes with pinched outlets, holes or rusted-through areas, or similar condition or defect where the result of the condition or defect does or could increase the level of noise of the motor-powered vessel over the level that would reasonably result if the motor-powered vessel were equipped with standard and/or properly maintained equipment.
B. It is unlawful for any person to operate upon any lakes, rivers and all other waters within the corporate boundaries of the City, under any condition of speed, load, acceleration, or deceleration, in such manner as to exceed noise level of 75 decibels (dB), as measured from any point on the shoreline of the body of water on which the vessel is being operated using the SAE shoreline testing procedure, and 70 dB as measured from the water or when moored. The 70 dB noise level measurement shall be done using the SAE stationary test procedure. In addition, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate upon any lakes, rivers and all other waters within the corporate boundaries of the City any motor-powered vessel between sunset and sunrise, where the noise level exceeds 60 dB as measured using the SAE shoreline test. All sound measurement will be performed to standards provided in Chapter 352-67 WAC, Vessel Sound Measurement Procedures.
C. The following types of sounds shall be exempt from this section:
    1. Sounds created by safety and protective devices where noise suppression could defeat the intent of the device;
    2. Sounds created by a warning device not operating continuously for more than five minutes;
    3. Sounds created by emergency equipment for emergency work necessary in the interest of public safety for the health, safety, and welfare of the community;
    4. Sounds created by the normal docking, undocking and water-skier pick-up and drop-off operations.
D. A violation of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 380 § 5, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.230 Testing.
A. When testing, as authorized in this chapter, the provisions of RCW 79A.60.130 shall apply to vessels designed for racing that are properly registered with the American Power Boat Association or an affiliate group, and when their registration numbers are plainly visible on the vessel. A helmet and American Power Boat Association approved jacket must be worn by the driver and mechanic if the craft is designed to carry a mechanic. Testing must be approved by and scheduled in advance with the City Manager or his designee. Testing shall be done on specific waters at specific times only. (See LMC 8.60.235 for areas open and times allowed.)
B. Vessels testing under the provisions specified in this chapter shall maintain a distance of 400 feet from the shore or another vessel while speed is in excess of five miles per hour. A vessel testing for a race must follow the rules of the road and the general rules herein. Vessel testing shall be exempt from the speed and noise limitations of LMC 8.60.150 and 8.60.220.
C. No unauthorized person shall operate a vessel or swim, or skin dive, within a testing course during permitted testing operations while an authorized vessel is in the testing course.
D. While testing, there must be an accompanying safety vessel in the water, with rescue personnel on board, to warn unauthorized vessels of the test. The safety vessel shall have on board firefighting and rescue equipment.
A violation of this section constitutes a misdemeanor crime, punishable by a fine of up to $1,000 or by a jail sentence of up to 90 days, or by both such fine and jail time. [Ord. 387 § 1, 2005; Ord. 380 § 6, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.235 Testing areas and times.
Testing areas and allowed times for registered race boats as mentioned in LMC 8.60.230 or other approved aquatic events are as follows:
A. American Lake. Tuesdays and Thursdays from 3:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. The testing course shall be located at the location approved by the City Manager or designee for applicant organizations on a time and space available basis.
B. Closures. American Lake is closed for testing from December 1st to the last day in February. [Renumbered during 2018 recodification; Ord. 380 § 8, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996. Formerly 8.60.490.]

8.60.240 Legal age of operation.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 16 to operate any vessel powered by a motor or motors generating a total horsepower in excess of 10 horsepower; except, it shall be lawful for a person under the age of 16 to operate a vessel powered by a motor or motors generating a total horsepower of more than 10 horsepower as long as he/she is under the direct supervision of a parent or legal guardian in the vessel, or under the direct supervision of a coach or instructor involved in an approved race or other aquatic event, or approved tests and/or trials in preparation therefor.
A violation of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 387 § 1, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.250 Obstructions.
When any sunken or drifting, and unattended vessel(s) or object(s) obstruct, or create a hazard to the operation of vessels on the waters of Lakewood, the City’s chief law enforcement officer or designee shall order the owner or person in charge thereof to remove or restrain the said vessel or object. Upon failure of such person to do so, or inability of the chief law enforcement officer or designee to determine the ownership of the vessel or object, the chief law enforcement officer or designee may take custody of the vessel or object and may take such reasonable steps as are needed to clear the waters of the obstruction or hazard. Expenses reasonably incurred by the chief law enforcement officer or designee in removing and relocating a vessel or other object shall be recovered from the owner thereof, as a condition precedent to restoring the vessel or object to the owner. [Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.260 Prohibited operations.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person who is under the influence, or affected by intoxicating liquor, narcotic or other drugs, to operate or be in actual physical control of any vessel. A violation of this subsection constitutes a misdemeanor crime, punishable by a fine of up to $1,000 or by a jail sentence of up to 90 days, or by both such fine and jail time.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any vessel or any person having such, in charge or in control, to authorize or knowingly permit the same to be operated by any person who is under the influence or affected by intoxicating liquor, narcotic or other drugs. A violation of this subsection constitutes a misdemeanor crime, punishable by a fine of up to $1,000 or by a jail sentence of up to 90 days, or by both such fine and jail time.
C. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any vessel, or any person having such, in charge or in control, to authorize or knowingly permit the same to be operated by any person who, by reason of physical or mental disability, is incapable of operating such vessel under the prevailing circumstances. A violation of this subsection constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC.
D. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any vessel, or any person having such, in charge or in control, to authorize or knowingly permit the same to be operated by any person who is under the legal age of operation, as specified in LMC 8.60.240. A violation of this subsection constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC.
E. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any vessel, or any person having such, in charge or in control, to load the vessel beyond its safe loading capacity. The safe loading capacity shall be determined by the manufacturer’s recommended safe load capacity as set forth in the United States Coast Guard capacity information label on the hull of the vessel, and in the absence of such label, the capacity shall be determined as follows:
The length of the vessel in feet and in tenths of feet shall be multiplied by the width of the vessel in feet and in tenths of feet, with the product thereof being divided by 15. The result reduced to the next smaller whole number shall be the maximum capacity of the vessel. A violation of this subsection constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 387 § 1, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.270 Boating accident reports.
A. The operator of any vessel involved in an accident resulting in injury or death to any person, or in damage to any property, shall immediately stop such vessel at the scene of such accident and shall give his name, address, and the name and/or number of his vessel, the name and address of the owner, to the person struck or the operator or occupants of the vessel collided with or property damaged and shall render to any person injured in such an accident, reasonable assistance. A violation of this subsection constitutes a misdemeanor crime, punishable by a fine of up to $1,000 or by a jail sentence of up to 90 days, or by both such fine and jail time.
B. The master, owner, or operator of any vessel involved in an accident within the City, and where death or personal injury requiring medical treatment or property damage in excess of $500.00 occurs, shall file a written accident report (within 48 hours of said accident) with the law enforcement agency of the City. A violation of this subsection constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 387 § 1, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.310 Skin/scuba diving.
A. Skin/scuba diving shall be prohibited within 300 feet of an active public boat ramp, public fishing pier or that area generally used and recognized as the entry or exit to any regularly established marina, yacht club, boathouse or high speed vessel lanes; provided, that in the event skin or scuba divers are engaged in an aquatic event, then the restriction shall not apply for the duration of the aquatic event. Skin-diving shall be prohibited unless the diver shall be accompanied by a vessel displaying the appropriate diver’s flag, or the diving area is marked by an adequately displayed diver’s flag.
B. Subsection A of this section shall not apply to skin/scuba diving that directly involves the repair, maintenance, survey, or other authorized activity related to an active public boat ramp, public fishing pier, or that area generally used and recognized as the entry or exit to any regularly established marina, yacht club, or boathouse.
C. It shall be illegal for vessels to approach closer than 300 feet of any diver’s flag raised from a vessels or float without reducing their speed to five miles per hour.
D. A violation of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.320 Posting of regulations.
A. The City Manager or designee shall cause to be posted at all public boat accesses within City parks, the specific rules for each body of water as set forth in this chapter.
B. Owners and proprietors of private boat access to waters in the City shall cause to be posted within 25 feet of the ramp, a copy of the specific rules as given above.
A violation of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 387 § 1, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.330 Swimming and flotation devices.
A. Swimming shall be confined to:
    1. Restricted swimming areas; or
    2. Within a distance of 100 feet from shore, unless the swimmer is accompanied by a vessel.
B. All bathers and swimmers shall confine air mattresses, inner tubes and other similar devices to within 100 feet of shore unless they are accompanied by a vessel.
C. All vessels accompanying swimmers beyond 100 feet from shore shall have a personal flotation device on board for each swimmer in addition to one for each person on board.
D. A violation of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.340 Unlawful dumping.
It shall be unlawful for any person while on any vessel on the waters of Lakewood, to throw or discard into the waters any waste, debris, refuse, oil, garbage or other fluid or solid material which may pollute the water, or which may create or aggravate any conditions deleterious to the public health.
A violation of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 387 § 1, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.350 Unsafe piers – Fresh water only.
Any pedestrian pier, gangway, dock or portion thereof leading to or on fresh water which, by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or damage, poses a risk of injury to person or damage to property is for the purpose of this section deemed unsafe. All such unsafe piers, gangways and docks are declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, demolition or removed or barricaded with proper fencing until such time as all repairing thereto shall be made. Upon notification of this condition the Building Official shall take corrective action under the provisions of Uniform Building Code. [Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

Article III. Vessel Regulations

8.60.360 Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall be applicable on all lakes, rivers and all other waters within the corporate boundaries of the City of Lakewood. [Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.370 Safety devices.
Every owner, agent or lessee having charge of any commercial or public pier shall furnish and keep for use on such pier, at least one serviceable 30-inch ring life buoy for every 300 lineal feet of mooring/docking space. Attached to said life buoy shall be at least 200 feet of suitable line. Each ring buoy and line attached thereto shall be kept in a suitable box on the pier for the use of the public in case of accident. The box shall be labeled and be at all times kept clear of obstructions. It shall be unlawful to take away, damage, disturb or destroy said buoy or box, except for use in saving life and property.
A violation of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 387 § 1, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.380 Vessel rental period.
A. The owner or proprietor of a vessel rental or charter operation shall cause to be kept a record of the names and addresses of person or persons hiring any vessel, the identification number of such vessel, the departure date and the time, and the date and time of the return of such vessel. Such record shall be preserved for not less than six months after the departure date of such vessel and shall be kept available for inspection by any duly authorized agency or authority.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner or proprietor of a vessel rental or charter operation to allow any vessel under his charge to depart from the premises without all the equipment required by this article.
C. The owner or proprietor of a vessel rental or charter operation shall make known to all persons hiring a vessel the rules and regulations of this article pertaining to the operation of a vessel on the waters of Lakewood.
D. The owner or proprietor of a vessel rental or charter operation shall obtain a business license from the City and shall comply with all requirements and conditions for such business license.
E. A violation of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 387 § 1, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.390 Regattas, races or aquatic events.
A. “Regatta” or “aquatic event” means an organized water event of limited duration, which is conducted according to a prearranged schedule.
B. An individual or organization planning to hold a regatta, race or aquatic event which, by its nature, circumstances or location may introduce extra or unusual hazards to the safety of life on the waters of Lakewood, shall submit an application to the City Manager or designee, which shall be reviewed by the City’s chief law enforcement officer, and the directors of other affected departments as determined by the City Manager or designee for approval of application, which shall be sent to the City Manager or designee for final approval.
C. Where such events are to be held regularly or repeatedly in a single area by an individual or organization, the City Manager or designee may, subject to conditions set from time to time by the City Manager or designee, grant a permit for such series of events for a fixed period of time, not to exceed one year.
D. The application shall be submitted no less than 90 days prior to the start of the event.
E. The application shall include the following details:
    1. The name and address of sponsoring organization;
    2. The name and address and telephone number of person or persons in charge of the event;
    3. Nature and purpose of event;
    4. Information as to general interest;
    5. Estimated number and types of vessels participating;
    6. Estimated number of spectator vessels;
    7. Estimated number of persons, participants and all others;
    8. Minimum number of vessels and persons furnished by sponsoring organization to patrol event;
    9. A time schedule and description of events;
    10. A section of a chart or scale drawing showing the boundaries of the event, various water courses or areas to be utilized by participants, officials and spectators.
F. Upon receiving an application to hold a regatta, race or aquatic event, the City’s law enforcement agency and such other departments as the City Manager or designee may designate shall take the following actions or make the following determinations:
    1. That the proposed regatta, race or aquatic event may be held at the proposed location with safety to life;
    2. That the interest of safety of life and property requires changes in the application before it can be approved;
    3. That the event requires no regulation or patrol at the proposed location;
    4. That the application be recommended for approval or rejection by the City Manager or designee for stated reasons;
    5. The application shall be sent with recommendations to the City Manager or designee not less than 30 days prior to event.
G. The City Manager or designee shall require that the sponsoring group post notice in the local paper and/or at the proposed site of the event, prior to taking action on the application. The City Manager or designee may also, before taking action on the application, require the sponsoring organization to petition or poll the property owners on the lake which would be affected by the event.
H. The City Manager or designee may close for general use, any part or whole of a lake for the purpose of the event; provided, the approval of the application is on the condition that all terms specified in the application be met by the sponsoring group.
I. If the chief law enforcement officer of the City or designee deems safety requires, one or more vessels available to the City’s law enforcement agency may be assigned to the event for the purpose of enforcing not only the event regulations, but also for assistance work and the enforcement of laws generally. Additionally, where law enforcement services are utilized in connection with a regatta, race or aquatic event, the approval of the application may include reimbursement of the costs of such law enforcement services.
J. Nothing in the provisions of this article shall be construed to mean that the operator or a vessel competing in a race or regatta or trials therefor which has been duly authorized by the City Manager or designee, or an operator engaged in industrial development and testing of experimental and product vessels, shall be prohibited from attempting to obtain high speed on racing and testing courses duly designated by the City Manager or designee nor while so engaged, shall such vessels or operators be required to comply with RCW 79A.60.130.
K. The person sponsoring the race or event or testing vessel shall, prior to obtaining authorization from the City Manager or designee, provide a certificate of insurance showing that the person has obtained public liability and property damage insurance in amounts not less than the minimum set by the City Manager or designee. The City of Lakewood shall be named as an additional insured and shall be notified by the insurer at least 20 days prior to any cancellation of this insurance.
L. The City Manager or designee may charge a fee for services provided under subsection I of this section. Such fee shall be from a fee schedule approved by the City Council. [Ord. 387 § 1, 2005; Ord. 380 § 7, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.400 Emergency vessels.
The provisions of this article shall be applicable to the operation of any and all vessels in the waters of Lakewood, except that they shall not apply in the following cases:
To any authorized emergency vessel actually responding to an emergency call or in immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, within the purpose for which such emergency vessel has been authorized. The provision of this section shall not relieve the operator of an authorized emergency vessel of the duty to operate with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall it protect the operator of any such emergency vessel from the consequences of a reckless disregard for the safety of others. The provisions of this section shall in no event extend any special privilege or immunity in the operation of an authorized emergency vessel for any purpose other than that authorized. [Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.410 Directing traffic emergency powers.
The chief law enforcement officer of the City is authorized to direct all waterborne traffic, either in person or by means of visible or audible signal. Where necessary to expedite waterborne traffic, to present or eliminate congestion or to safeguard persons or property, authorized officers of appropriate governmental agencies may direct waterborne traffic as conditions may require. [Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.420 Restricted areas.
In the interests of life, safety and the protection of property, the chief law enforcement officer of the City shall designate restricted areas. No person shall operate a vessel within a restricted area except the patrol of rescue craft or authorized emergency vessel, or when engaged in the activity to which the area is restricted or in the case of an emergency.
A violation of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 387 § 1, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.430 Marker and regulatory buoys.
A. Marker buoys, approved by the City Manager or designee, may be placed as authorized indicating the area of waters of Lakewood within which it shall be unlawful to operate a vessel in excess of the speed limit. The chief law enforcement officer of the City or designee may place, move, remove or replace marker buoys when deemed necessary by the chief law enforcement officer of the City.
B. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to deliberately damage, place, move or remove any marker or regulatory buoy or distinguishing device.
C. It shall be unlawful to moor any vessel or tie any object up to any marker or regulatory buoy.
D. A violation of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 387 § 1, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.440 Aiding and abetting violation.
It is unlawful to counsel, aid, or abet the violation of, or failure to comply with, any of the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

Article IV. Specific Rules for Lakes and Other Areas

8.60.450 Class “A” lakes.
American Lake is designated as a Class “A” lake, in that it covers 500 acres or more.
A. Specific regulations for American Lake include the following:
It shall be unlawful to operate a vessel in excess of five miles per hour in the area known as Little American Lake which starts at the narrowest point of the channel leading into Little American Lake and encompasses the entire area of Little American Lake. This provision also prohibits water-skiing on Little American Lake.
B. A violation of any provision of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.460 Class “B” lakes.
Lake Steilacoom and Gravelly Lake are designated as Class “B” lakes, in that they cover 100 acres or more, but less than 500 acres.
A. Specific regulations for Lake Steilacoom and Gravelly Lake include the following:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vessel in excess of five miles per hour from sunset to sunrise on Lake Steilacoom and Gravelly Lake.
It shall be unlawful to operate any vessel in excess of 40 miles per hour on Lake Steilacoom and Gravelly Lake.
B. Additional Specific Regulations for Steilacoom Lake. 
    1. It shall be unlawful to operate a vessel in excess of eight miles per hour within 75 feet of the Interlaaken Drive Bridge; provided, that a vessel pulling a water-skier or any other watercraft which desires to pass under the bridge in excess of eight miles per hour may pass under the bridge as specified in this section. If the water area is clear of other boats for a distance of 100 feet from both sides of the bridge, the vessel shall then approach the bridge at a right angle for at least a distance of 100 feet and pass under the bridge.
    2. It shall be lawful to operate a vessel pulling a skier in excess of eight miles per hour through the entrance to Evergreen Terrace Lagoon for the purpose of taking off or landing of a water-skier from specific property within the lagoon; provided, that said boat operator may enter the lagoon if he approaches the entrance to the Evergreen Terrace Lagoon from either side, and the water area is clear of all water traffic.
    3. It shall be unlawful to operate on Steilacoom Lake a motor-powered vessel that is more than 20 feet, six inches in length as registered in the state of Washington and as measured by U.S. Coast Guard standards, except for law enforcement motor-powered vessels and no-wake vessels, such as party boats.
    4. It shall be lawful to operate a vessel pulling a skier in excess of eight miles per hour through the entrance of the area known as Skate Rink Cove for the purpose of taking off or landing of a water-skier from specific property within the cove; provided, that said boat operator may enter said cove if he approaches the entrance at a right angle for a distance of 200 feet from the entrance to the cove from either side, and the water area is clear of all water traffic.
C. A violation of any provision of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 387 § 1, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.470 Class “C” lakes.
Lake Louise is designated as a Class “C” lake, in that it covers 25 acres or more, but less than 100 acres.
A. Specific restrictions for Lake Louise include the following:
    1. It shall be unlawful to operate any vessel in excess of five miles per hour between one half hour before sunset and 10:30 a.m. on Lake Louise.
    2. It shall be unlawful to operate any vessel in excess of 35 miles per hour on Lake Louise.
B. A violation of any provision of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

8.60.480 Class “D” lakes.
All lakes which are smaller than 25 acres are designated as Class “D” lakes.
A. Special Restrictions for Class “D” Lakes. It shall be unlawful to operate any vessel in excess of five miles per hour on any Class “D” lake.
B. A violation of any provision of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 1.48 LMC. [Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

Article V. Penalties

8.60.600 Penalties designated.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter, and unless specifically designated as a civil infraction, any violation shall constitute a misdemeanor, except where the state statute or regulation adopted by reference has been classified as a felony, gross misdemeanor or an infraction in which case the state classification shall control. Each separate day, or portion thereof, during which any violation occurs, shall constitute a separate violation.
B. Attached hereto, marked as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by this reference, is the Revised Schedule of Bail for Watercraft Offenses, whereby a defendant charged with watercraft offenses designated as infractions may be entitled to post and forfeit bail in the amount indicated on that charge. The City Council may by resolution amend Exhibit A to this section as it may be deemed necessary to ensure uniform application of the penalties contained herein.
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
|          LMC # AND DESCRIPTION           |         NEW BAIL          | INF 1 OR 2 OR MISD |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.020 VIO BOATING ORD                 | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.050 RULES OF THE ROAD               | 76.00                     | II= UP TO 500.00   |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.060 LIGHTS AND SHAPES               | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.070 VIO WATERCRAFT/LIGHTS           | 250.00                    | MISDEMEANOR        |
| AND SOUND                                |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.080(B) BLUE LIGHT FOR               | 101.00                    | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| LAW ENFORCEMENT                          |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.100 FIRE EXTINGUISHER               | 101.00                    | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| REQUIRED                                 |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.110 PERSONAL FLOTATION              | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| DEVICES                                  |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
|                                          | 1ST VIO/EACH YR – 76.00   |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
|                                          | 2ND VIO/EACH YR – 200.00  |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.120 EQUIPMENT AND NUMBERING         | 3RD+VIO/EACH YR – 400.00  | II=UP TO 500.00    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.140 MANNER OF OPERATION             | 250.00                    | II=UP TO 500.00    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
|                                          | 1-5 OVER LIMIT – 71.00    |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
|                                          | 6-10 OVER LIMIT – 91.00   |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
|                                          | 11-15 OVER LIMIT – 122.00 |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
|                                          | 16-20 OVER LIMIT – 153.00 |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
|                                          | 21-25 OVER LIMIT – 183.00 |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
|                                          | 26-30 OVER LIMIT – 224.00 |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
|                                          | 31-35 OVER LIMIT – 276.00 |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
|                                          | 36-40 OVER LIMIT – 327.00 |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.150 VIO SPEED OF WATERCRAFT         | EXCESS 40 – 388.00        | II=UP TO 500.00    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.160(A) TAKE-OFF PERPEND             | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| TO SHORE                                 |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.160(B) LAND <45°                    | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.160(C) SKIERS/RISK TO               | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| PERSONS/PROP                             |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.170 RECKLESS OPERATION              | 1,000.00                  | MISDEMEANOR        |
| WATERCRAFT                               |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.180(A) INSUFF PFDS/HAZARD           | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| CONDITIONS                               |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.180(B) INSUFF FIRE EQUIP/HAZARD     | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| CONDITIONS                               |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.180(C) OVERLOAD CONDITIONS          | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.180(D) IMPROPER NAVIGATION          | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| LIGHT DISPLAY                            |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.180(E) FUEL LEAKAGE                 | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.180(F) FUEL IN BILGES               | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.180(G) IMPROPER VENTILATION         | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.180(H) IMPROPER BACKFIRE            | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| FLAME CONTROL                            |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.190 DESIGNATED AREAS                | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.200 VIO DIRECTION OF                | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| TRAVEL                                   |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.210(B)(1) WTRSKRS – ATTENTIVE       | 150.00                    | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| OPERATOR                                 |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.210(B)(2) WTRSKRS – REQUIRED        | 150.00                    | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| OBSERVER                                 |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.210(B)(3) WTRSKRS – PFD             | 150.00                    | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| REQUIRED                                 |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.210(B)(4) WTRSKRS – REQUIRED        | 150.00                    | MISDEMEANOR        |
| DISTANCE                                 |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.210(B)(5) WTRSKRS – SUNSET          | 150.00                    | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| TO SUNRISE                               |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.210(B)(6) WTRSKRS – W/I             | 150.00                    | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| 200 FT                                   |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.220(A) NOISE/UNDERWTR               | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| EXHAUST                                  |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.220(B) NOISE/>75 DECBLS             | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.230 TESTING                         | 150.00                    | MISDEMEANOR        |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.240 VIO LEGAL AGE OF                | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| OPERATOR                                 |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.260(A) PROHIB OPER/PHYSICAL         | 1,000.00                  | MISDEMEANOR        |
| CONTROL                                  |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.260(B) WTRCRFT/ALLOW                | 1,000.00                  | MISDEMEANOR        |
| INTOXICATED OP                           |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.260(C) ALLOWING INCAPABLE           | 101.00                    | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| OPERATION                                |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.260(D) PROHIB OPER/ALLOW            | 101.00                    | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| UNDERAGE DRIVER                          |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.260(E) PROHIB OPER/OVERLOADING      | 101.00                    | II=UP TO 500.00    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.270(A) BOAT ACC/FAIL                | 5,000.00                  | MISDEMEANOR        |
| STOP/INFO/ASSIST                         |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.270(B) BOAT ACC/WRTN                | 250.00                    | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| RPT W/I 48 HOURS                         |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.310(A) VIO OF SCUBA DIVING          | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| REG                                      |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.320 POSTING OF REGULATIONS          | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.330 VIO OF SWIMMING REGULATION      | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.340 UNLAWFUL DUMPING                | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.370 SAFETY DEVICES                  | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.420 OPERATE IN RESTRICTED           | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| AREA                                     |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.430 DAMAGE/PLACE/MOVE/REMOVE        | 150.00                    | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| BUOY                                     |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.450 CLASS A LAKE ORD                | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| VIO                                      |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.460 CLASS B LAKE ORD                | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| VIO                                      |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.470 CLASS C LAKE ORD                | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| VIO                                      |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.470(A)(1) CLASS C LAKES/5MPH/SUNSET | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| TO 10:30                                 |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| 8.60.480 CLASS D LAKE ORD                | 76.00                     | II=UP TO 500.00    |
| VIO                                      |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
| REVISED 07/2005                          |                           |                    |
+------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------+
[Ord. 387 § 1, 2005; Ord. 86 § 1, 1996.]

Chapter 8.68 FIREWORKS

Sections:
8.68.010     Definitions.
8.68.020     General provisions.
8.68.030     Sales application – Permit.
8.68.040     Fireworks stands.
8.68.050     Public displays of fireworks.
8.68.060     Sale of fireworks.
8.68.070     Unclassified fireworks.
8.68.080     Exceptions.
8.68.090     Violation – Penalty.
8.68.100     Savings.

8.68.010 Definitions.
The words and phrases herein used for the purposes of this chapter shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
“Common fireworks” includes only such fireworks that have been defined in RCW 70.77.136 or WAC 212-17-035.
“Dangerous fireworks” includes all fireworks which do not meet the common fireworks definition under RCW 70.77.136 or WAC 212-17-035.
“Fireworks stands” includes all displays and locations where fireworks are displayed in connection with sale of fireworks, offered for sale or are stored. Fireworks stands includes temporary fireworks stands as well as permanent structures where fireworks are offered for sale or are stored.
“Person” includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit.
“Public display of fireworks” means an entertainment feature where the public is admitted or permitted to view the display or discharge of dangerous fireworks.
“Sale at retail” includes any sale or transfer, including contracts or orders for sales or transfers, wherein any person at a fixed location or a place of business sells, transfers or gives fireworks to a consumer or user.
“Sale at wholesale” includes a sale or transfer to a retailer or any other person for resale, and which also includes any sale or transfer of fireworks to a permittee of a public display of fireworks. [Ord. 84 § 1, 1996.]

8.68.020 General provisions.
Each of the following are hereby declared to be unlawful within the City:
A. For any person to offer for sale, at retail or wholesale, or to sell, at retail or wholesale, any fireworks without having first obtained a permit or license to do so;
B. For any person to possess, use or explode any dangerous fireworks or any fireworks other than those listed as being able to be sold to the public in WAC 212-17-198, except as specifically provided for public displays in this chapter;
C. For any person to sell, possess, use or explode any fireworks except as provided in this chapter;
D. For any person to sell, at retail or wholesale, or offer for sale, at retail or wholesale, any fireworks to be sold within the City except from 12:00 noon on June 28th through 11:00 p.m. on July 4th. Fireworks may not be sold between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. from June 28th through July 3rd.
E. For any person to use, discharge or explode any fireworks in a negligent or reckless manner or during a period other than from 11:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. from July 3rd through July 5th of any year and from 11:00 p.m. December 31st to 1:00 a.m. January 1st.
    1. For purposes of this section, “negligent manner” means in a manner which endangers or is likely to endanger persons, animals or property.
    2. “Reckless manner” means in a manner with willful and wanton disregard for the safety of persons, animals or property.
F. For any person to sell, at retail or wholesale, or to offer for sale, at retail or wholesale, fireworks to any person under the age of 16 years of age. It shall be the responsibility of any seller of fireworks to obtain and/or require proof of age of any customer at the time of purchase, which proof requirement may be satisfied by inspecting the customer’s valid Washington State photo driver’s license or valid Washington State photo identification card or the equivalent thereof issued by another state or jurisdiction.
G. For any person under the age of 16 years of age to possess or to discharge any fireworks within the City without direct supervision of his/her parent or guardian.
H. In addition, it shall be unlawful for any person to use, discharge or explode any type of firework in any manner on any school grounds or park located within the City of Lakewood or in any City rights-of-way. [Ord. 564 § 4, 2013; Ord. 416 § 1, 2006; Ord. 84 § 1, 1996.]

8.68.030 Sales application – Permit.
An application for a permit to offer for sale, at retail or wholesale, or to sell, at retail or wholesale, any fireworks within the City shall be made at the offices of the Fire Marshal for the City on or before June 10th of the year for which the permit is desired. Such a permit shall be issued only upon the following minimum conditions and requirements:
A. The application shall be filed with and accompanied by a permit fee of $100.00.
B. Approval of the permit by the City Manager or designee, subsequent to an investigation by the City’s Fire Marshal or designee.
C. The application shall have a valid license issued by the state authorizing the holder thereof to engage in the business of sale of fireworks.
D. If the applicant does not own or have the right to possess a temporary fireworks stand complying with the standards required for temporary fireworks stands, then the applicant shall have as a place for the sale of fireworks a building which is of fireproof construction and with proper firefighting equipment located therein, as approved by the City’s Fire Marshal or his designee. In all cases, the placing of fireworks for display in the fireworks stand or place of sale shall be in such a manner as to be beyond the reach of customers.
E. The applicant shall procure and maintain a policy or policies of public liability and property damage insurance with a company or companies acceptable to the City Attorney in the following amounts: $100,000 or more for injuries to any one person in any one accident or occurrence; $200,000 or more for injuries to two or more persons in any one act or occurrence; $50,000 or more for damage to property in any one accident or occurrence. The City shall be named as an additional insured in each policy providing coverage in connection with the manufacture, importation, exportation, regulation, possession, sale, use and/or discharge of fireworks.
F. The permittee’s location or place business, if a temporary fireworks stand, shall be only in those areas or zones within the City which have been approved by the Fire Marshal of the City or designee. The permittee’s location or place of business, if the fireworks stand or display is located within a permanent structure, shall be only in those zones within the City in which commercial businesses may be located.
G. The applicant shall post with the City Clerk a performance bond or cash bond in the amount of not less than $50.00, subject to the following conditions: The deposit shall be returned to the applicant only if the applicant promptly removes the temporary fireworks stand and cleans the area of its location to the satisfaction of the Fire Marshal or his designee, or, in the case of a fireworks stand being located within a permanent structure, if the applicant promptly cleans the area of its location to the satisfaction of the Fire Marshall or his designee. In the event that the applicant fails to do so, the performance bond or cash deposit shall be forfeited to the City. In no event shall the applicant be entitled to the return of the performance bond or the cash deposited if he/she fails to complete the above described work by July 15th of any year. [Ord. 84 § 1, 1996.]

8.68.040 Fireworks stands.
Fireworks stands shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 212-17 WAC and the following minimum standards, conditions and requirements:
A. All fireworks stands shall be inspected and approved by the City’s Fire Marshal or designee. Temporary fireworks stands need not comply with all of the provisions of the City’s Building Code; provided, however, that all such temporary fireworks stands shall be erected under the supervision of the City’s Fire Marshal or designee, or in accordance with the specified standards of the City’s Fire Marshal or designee, including but not limited to the requirement that all temporary fireworks stands be constructed in a safe manner for both persons selling fireworks at the temporary fireworks stand and for potential customers of the temporary fireworks stand. In the event any fireworks stand is wired for and connected to electric power, then the wiring shall be approved by the City’s Fire Marshal or the Electrical Inspector or their designee to ensure compliance with Article 502-2(a), Class II, Div. I of the N.E.C. or successor regulations.
B. No temporary fireworks stand shall be located within 50 feet of any other building or structure constructed entirely or partially of combustible materials or with unprotected openings, nor within 20 feet of any building or structure constructed entirely of noncombustible materials; nor within 100 feet of any gas station, oil storage tank or premises where flammable liquids are kept or stored.
C. Each fireworks stand must have at least two exits; which shall be unobstructed at all times.
D. Each fireworks stand shall have in readily accessible places two or more extinguishers approved by the City’s Fire Marshal or designee, and a two-gallon pail of water.
E. All weeds, grass and combustible materials shall be cleared from the location of a fireworks stand and the surrounding area, a distance of not less than 20 feet measured from the exterior walls on each side of the fireworks stand.
F. No smoking shall be permitted in or near a fireworks stand and fireworks stands shall be posted with “No Smoking” signs with letters at least two inches in height, in conspicuous places on all four sides of the fireworks stand. Each temporary fireworks stand or fireworks display within a permanent structure where fireworks are displayed and offered for sale shall have at least one adult in attendance at all times during which fireworks are available for sale.
G. All unsold stock and accompanying litter shall be removed from the vicinity of the fireworks stand by 12:00 noon on July 5th of any year, and shall be stored and/or disposed of as provided in Chapter 212-17 WAC.
H. There shall be no discharging or igniting of fireworks within 100 feet of any fireworks stand.
I. No fireworks stand shall be located within 10 feet of a public sidewalk or street.
J. There shall be no sleeping in any fireworks stands, nor within any structure where fireworks are stored.
K. There shall be no matches, lighters, pressurized or nonpressurized propane, kerosene, gas, fuel oil lanterns, or similar devices, or other open flame devices stored, nor offered for sale in any fireworks stand, nor within any structure where fireworks are stored.
In the event that there are any conflicts between the provisions hereof and the provisions of Chapter 212-17 WAC, the more restrictive of the two shall control. [Ord. 84 § 1, 1996.]

8.68.050 Public displays of fireworks.
A. Application for Permits for Public Displays of Fireworks. Any person desiring to give or make a display of fireworks within the City shall, not less than 10 days in advance of the proposed display, make an application for a permit to operate the public display, in writing, to the City Manager or designee. The application shall set forth the following information:
    1. The name of the organization sponsoring the display, together with the names and addresses of persons actually in charge of the firing/presentation of the display;
    2. The date and time of day at which the display is to be held;
    3. The exact location planned for the display;
    4. A description setting forth the age and experience of the persons who are to do the actual discharging of the fireworks, and copies of their public display permit issued pursuant to RCW 70.77.280 or comparable applicable statute;
    5. The number, type and description of fireworks to be discharged;
    6. The manner and place of storage of such fireworks prior to the display; and
    7. A diagram of the grounds on which the display is to be held showing the point at which the fireworks are to be discharged, the location of all buildings, highways and other lines of transit or communication as well as telephone, electric and other utility lines and poles and any other structures, facilities or objects which could present overhead obstructions, located within 500 feet of the point of discharge.
B. Fee for Public Display Permit. There shall be no permit fee for a public display permit other than the license required by the State Fire Marshal.
C. Investigation on Site – Certificate of Compliance by City’s Fire Marshal – Notice of Approval by City’s Fire Marshal or Designee. Upon receipt of such application, at least 20 days in advance of the date set for the display, the City’s Fire Marshal or designee shall make an investigation of the site of the proposed display for the purpose of determining whether the provisions of these regulations are complied with in the case of the particular display. If the City’s Fire Marshal or designee is satisfied that the display is lawful and there has or will be full compliance with all applicable laws, state and local, then the City’s Fire Marshal or designee shall issue a written recommendation for or against the permit which shall be kept on file in the City’s Fire Marshal’s or designee’s office and available for review by authorized reviewing agencies. If the City’s Fire Marshal or designee finds that the permit applicant has complied with all applicable laws, then the City’s Fire Marshal or designee may issue a certificate of compliance stating an endorsement of the display as being in conformance with all applicable laws and with these regulations. For any scheduled public display, applicants must submit such information as is deemed appropriate by the City’s law enforcement agency to ensure that adequate traffic control and crowd protection policing and any other measures necessary or appropriate for public safety have been arranged either through private security agencies or through a contract with a law enforcement agency and/or with commissioned law enforcement officers of the agency. A written notice that the applicant has complied with these requirements shall be issued by the City’s Police Chief before a public display permit is issued; provided, that if the applicant should contract for traffic control and crowd protection policing with the City, for use of its law enforcement officers, in no event shall the sum agreed upon as payment for such policing be less than the actual expenses incurred by the City for providing such services. Such consideration shall be calculated in terms of personnel resources at the hourly rate for overtime under current collective bargaining agreements and/or rates of pay, plus that percentage which is paid by the public agency for fringe benefits, whichever applies, and all such sums paid under the contract shall be paid in accordance with procedures specified by the City’s Fire Marshal.
D. Every public display of fireworks shall be handled by at least two competent operators approved by the City’s Fire Marshal or designee, and every public display of fireworks shall be of such character, and so located, discharged or fired that, in the opinion of the City’s Fire Marshal or designee, after proper investigation, it would not constitute a hazard to property or endanger any person.
E. A state pyrotechnics license is required for at least one operator at each public display of fireworks. The state licensed operator shall be the person who actually discharges or ignites the fireworks.
F. A bond or certificate of insurance must be furnished to the City Manager or designee before a permit is issued. The bond shall be in the amount of $1,000,000 and shall be conditioned upon the applicant’s payment of all damages to persons and property resulting from or caused by any public display of fireworks, or by any negligence on the part of the applicant or its agents, servants, employees or subcontractors in the presentation of the display. The certificate of insurance shall evidence a comprehensive general liability (including automobile coverage) insurance policy providing limits of $1,000,000 combined single limit per occurrence and annual aggregate, naming the City of Lakewood as an additional insured. Any such bond or insurance policy must be approved by the City Attorney.
G. A cash deposit in the amount of $500.00 must be posted with the City Manager or designee at least 30 days in advance of the public display date to provide for the costs of site cleanup. The deposit shall be forfeited to the City if the operator fails to perform such cleanup within six days of the public display. If the operator properly performs the cleanup, the deposit shall be returned to the operator.
H. Storage. 
    1. As soon as the fireworks have been delivered to the display site, they shall be attended and shall remain dry.
    2. All shells shall be inspected upon delivery to the display site by the display operator. Any shells having tears, leaks, broken fuses or showing signs of having been wet shall be set aside and shall not be fired. After the display, any such shells shall be either returned to the supplier or destroyed according to the supplier’s instructions.
    3. All fireworks at the firing site must be stored in ready boxes (substantially constructed wood magazines). During the display, magazines must be 25 feet upwind (in relation to the firing item) from the nearest mortar. Magazine lids must be open in the opposite direction of the firing. All ready boxes are to be protected by a flameproof water repellent canvas cover until emptied.
    4. The shell storage area shall be located at a minimum distance of not less than 25 feet from the discharge site.
    5. During the display, shells shall be stored upwind from the discharge site. If the winds shift during the display, the shell storage area shall be relocated to be upwind from the discharge site.
    6. There shall be at least two 2A-rated fire extinguishers (two and one-half gallons water), UL approved kept as widely separated as possible within the actual area where the discharging will occur.
I. Preparation of Site Crowd Control. 
    1. All dry grass, weeds and other combustible waste within 50 feet of the firing site shall be removed.
    2. The site shall be located so that the trajectory of shells shall not come within 50 feet of any overhead object including but not limited to aboveground telephone, telegraph or electric lines, trees or wooded areas.
    3. Discharged fireworks shall not come within 100 feet of any tent or canvas shelter.
    4. The firing and storage site shall be located not less than 200 feet from any building, public highway or railroad or other means of travel.
    5. No boats shall be allowed within 200 feet of the firing or storage site.
    6. The operators shall provide sufficient personnel to assure that no unauthorized persons are allowed within 200 feet of the firing and storage site. This requirement shall be in effect from one-half hour prior to the arrival of fireworks until the fireworks debris, equipment and fireworks have been removed from the site.
    7. Spectators shall be restrained behind lines or barriers at least 200 feet from the firing and storage locations.
J. Installation of Mortars. 
    1. Mortars shall be inspected by the operators for dents, bent ends, and cracked or broken plugs prior to ground placement. Mortars found to be defective in any way shall not be used. Any scale on the inside surface of the mortars shall be removed.
    2. Mortars shall be positioned so that the shells are carried away from spectators and buildings. When fired over water, mortars shall be installed at an angle of not less than 10 degrees, pointed towards the water.
    3. Mortars shall be either buried securely into the ground to a depth of two-thirds to three-fourths of their length or fastened securely in mortar boxes or drums. In soft ground, heavy timber or rock slabs shall be placed beneath the mortars to prevent their sinking or being driven into the ground during firing.
    4. In damp ground, a weather-resistant bag should be placed under the bottom of the mortar prior to placement in the ground to protect the mortar against moisture.
    5. Weather-resistant bags shall be placed over the open end of the mortar in damp weather to keep moisture from accumulating inside the surface of the mortar.
K. Operation of the Display. 
    1. The operators shall provide fire protection at the site as required by the City’s Fire Marshal or designee.
    2. Only permitted fireworks are authorized for use.
    3. When display is fired from a barge or vessel, a secured area shall be established around the barge or vessel to prevent boats from entering the fallout area. No boats shall be allowed within 200 feet of the firing or storage site. A boat shall be on standby to remove personnel from the barge and otherwise respond in the case of an emergency. Additional fire extinguishers, rated 2A minimum, shall be on the barge and so spaced that an extinguisher shall be available at all times.
    4. If, in the opinion of the City’s Fire Marshal or designee or authorized representative, lack of crowd control should pose a danger, the display shall be immediately discontinued until such time as the situation is corrected.
    5. If at any time high winds or unusually wet weather prevail such that in the opinion of the City’s Fire Marshal or designee or authorized representative of the display operators, a definite fire danger exists, the public display shall be discontinued or postponed until weather conditions improve so as to permit safe discharge of fireworks.
    6. Light snow or mist need not cause cancellation of the display; however, all materials used in the display shall be protected from the weather until immediately prior to use.
    7. Display operators and assistants shall use only flashlights or approved electrical lighting for artificial illumination.
    8. No smoking or open flames shall be allowed within 50 feet of the firing or storage area so long as shells are present. Signs to this effect shall be conspicuously posted.
    9. The first shell fired shall be carefully observed to determine that its trajectory will carry it into the intended firing range and that the shell functions are over and any debris falls into the planned landing area.
    10. Mortars shall be re-angled or reset if necessary at any time during the display to properly adjust the trajectory or landing area.
    11. When a shell fails to ignite in the mortar, the mortar shall not be touched for a minimum of five minutes. After five minutes it shall be carefully flooded with water. Immediately following the display, the mortar shall be emptied into a bucket of water. The supplier shall be contacted as soon as possible for proper disposal instructions.
    12. Operators shall not attempt to repair a damaged shell nor shall they attempt to dismantle a dry shell. In all such cases, the supplier shall be contacted as soon as possible for proper disposal instructions.
    13. Operators shall not dry a wet shell, nor shall they lance or pot a wet shell for reuse.
    14. The entire firing range shall be inspected immediately following the display to locate any defective shells. Any such shells found shall be immediately doused with water before handling. The shells shall be placed in a bucket of water. The supplier shall then be contacted as soon as possible for proper disposal instructions.
    15. When fireworks are displayed in darkness, the sponsor shall ensure that the firing range is inspected early the following morning.
    16. Any fireworks remaining unfired after the display shall be immediately disposed of or removed from the City in a safe manner.
    17. The debris from discharged fireworks shall be disposed of in a proper manner.
    18. The operator shall further comply with the requirements of Chapter 212-17 WAC. In the event that the requirements of Chapter 212-17 WAC are inconsistent or in conflict with the provisions hereof, the more restrictive of the two shall control.
L. The denial by the City’s Fire Marshal or designee of a permit for the public display of fireworks may be appealed to the City Council. If no such appeal is made within 60 days, the denial is final. [Ord. 416 § 1, 2006; Ord. 84 § 1, 1996.]

8.68.060 Sale of fireworks.
The sale at retail of any fireworks other than “common fireworks” or fireworks authorized to be sold to the public in WAC 212-17-198 is prohibited; provided, however, that toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other similar devices, in which paper caps containing not more than 0.25 grains of explosive compound for each cap is used, may be sold at any time. The transfer of dangerous fireworks, whether by sale, at wholesale or retail, by gift or by means of conveyance, or the delivery of any fireworks to any person who does not possess a valid permit issued pursuant to LMC 8.68.050 at the time of such transfer is prohibited. All sale of fireworks from stands and locations within the City of Lakewood shall be reported as taxable events within the City of Lakewood, and the same shall be indicated on the permit issued pursuant to this chapter, so that sales tax due the City shall be properly routed. [Ord. 84 § 1, 1996.]

8.68.070 Unclassified fireworks.
The sale, transportation, possession or discharge of fireworks not marked with manufacturer’s license number and the Washington State Department of Community Trade and Economic Development’s classification, as required by Chapter 70.77 RCW or Chapter 212-17 WAC, is prohibited. [Ord. 416 § 1, 2006; Ord. 84 § 1, 1996.]

8.68.080 Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to “toy sparklers” and “toy caps” containing not more than 0.25 grains of explosive compound for each cap and/or sparkler. It is further provided that nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the use of any explosive or flammable compound, blasting caps and similar items used for industrial purposes, nor to prohibit the use of any blank cartridges for use by person for bona fide ceremonial services, sporting events or demonstrations. This chapter shall not be construed so as to prohibit the use of torpedoes, flares or fuses by the operators of motor vehicles or railroads, nor by other transportation agencies for signal purposes. This chapter shall also not apply to the assembling, use and display of fireworks, of whatever nature, by any persons engaged in the production of fireworks when such use and display are necessary parts of the production and such persons possess requisite state permits to do so. This chapter shall also not apply to manufacturers, wholesalers, dealers or jobbers who possess the appropriate licenses and/or permits, from manufacturing or selling any kind of fireworks for direct shipment out of the City or out of the state, nor for manufacturing and/or selling at wholesale, any dangerous fireworks to properly licensed persons holding a valid permit for a public display of fireworks. [Ord. 84 § 1, 1996.]

8.68.090 Violation – Penalty.
A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine in an amount not exceeding $1,000, or by imprisonment in jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or by both. In the case of a conviction for a violation of this chapter, the City’s Fire Marshal or designee may order the fireworks stand closed and may deny approval of a request by the person for a fireworks license for the next year.
B. A person is guilty of a separate offense for each separate and distinct violation of any provisions of this chapter, and a person is guilty of a separate offense for each day during which he/she commits or allows to continue a violation of any provisions of this chapter.
C. Any fireworks which are illegally sold, offered for sale, used, discharged, possessed or transported in violation of the provisions of this chapter or of Chapter 70.77 RCW shall be subject to seizure by any police officer or by the City’s Fire Marshal or his designee.
D. For the purposes of this chapter, any person violating LMC 8.68.020(H) in a manner not rising to the level of negligence or recklessness as defined by LMC 8.68.020 shall have committed a civil infraction. The penalty for a violation of LMC 8.68.020(H) shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $75.00 in addition to any other costs and assessments provided by law. The City shall have the burden of proving the violation by a preponderance of the evidence. [Ord. 416 § 1, 2006; Ord. 84 § 1, 1996.]

8.68.100 Savings.
If any portion of LMC 8.68.020 is held invalid, upon the determination of invalidity, LMC 8.68.020 shall revert to that version which existed prior to the amendment set forth in Ordinance 564 (to wit: Ordinance 416 § 1 (part), 2006). [Ord. 564 § 4, 2013.]

Chapter 8.76 PARK CODE

Sections:
Article I.  General
    8.76.010     Definitions.
    8.76.020     Program – Purpose.
Article II. Administration
    8.76.030     Administrative rules – Hours and conditions of operation.
    8.76.050     Special use permits.
    8.76.055     Gender equity.
    8.76.060     Cancellation of permit.
    8.76.080     Use of facilities.
    8.76.090     Park cleanup.
    8.76.100     Liability.
    8.76.110     Liability insurance.
    8.76.120     Adults to be present at functions of minors.
    8.76.130     Storage of equipment – Liability of City.
    8.76.140     Equipment regulations – Failure to perform.
    8.76.150     Facility use – Sale of goods or services.
    8.76.160     Picnicking, fires and cooking.
Article III. Rules Governing Use of Facilities – Infractions
    8.76.165     Alcoholic beverages (information also included in LMC 8.76.050, Special use permits).
    8.76.168     Smoking and tobacco use.
    8.76.170     Bathing, washing of clothes or animals.
    8.76.180     Parking lots and roadways – Games prohibited.
    8.76.190     Motor vehicles – Parking.
    8.76.200     Motor vehicles on roads and trails.
    8.76.210     Motor vehicles – Speed limits.
    8.76.220     Boat speeds in associated marine areas.
    8.76.221     Power loading at City boat launch facilities.
    8.76.230     Cleaning, washing or repairing vehicles.
    8.76.240     Motor vehicles – Trucks and commercial vehicles.
    8.76.250     Trail use.
    8.76.260     Vehicle – Boating – Occupancy policy.
    8.76.270     Use of marine heads.
    8.76.280     Camping prohibited.
    8.76.290     Tents and shelters on beaches.
    8.76.300     Indecent exposure.
    8.76.310     Ice.
    8.76.320     Game fish.
    8.76.330     Pets in City park facilities.
    8.76.340     Animal disturbances.
    8.76.341     Wildlife feeding and harassment.
    8.76.342     Damage by animals.
    8.76.350     Horseback riding in designated areas only.
    8.76.360     Littering.
    8.76.370     Swimming in designated areas only.
    8.76.380     Swimmers must obey rules.
    8.76.385     Visitors must obey rules.
    8.76.390     Swimming/scuba diving in boat launch areas prohibited.
    8.76.400     Presence in parks during hours the park is closed.
Article IV. Rules Governing Use of Facilities – Misdemeanors
    8.76.405     Bicycle and scooter restriction in skate park facilities.
    8.76.410     Mechanical trapping devices.
    8.76.420     False alarm of drowning prohibited.
    8.76.430     Games on beaches.
    8.76.440     Moorage in swimming area prohibited.
    8.76.450     Damage to property.
    8.76.460     Removal of property.
    8.76.465     Metal detecting.
    8.76.470     Outside household or commercial waste.
    8.76.480     Waste from vehicles.
    8.76.490     Dumping in water prohibited.
    8.76.500     Model aircraft and rockets.
    8.76.510     Solicitation.
    8.76.520     Fireworks.
    8.76.530     Firearms, weapons.
    8.76.550     Intoxication.
    8.76.560     Interference with trails.
Article V.  Penalties
    8.76.570     Infractions.
    8.76.580     Misdemeanors.
    8.76.590     Administrative sanctions.

Article I. General

8.76.010 Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter the following terms shall be defined as herein indicated:
“Aircraft” means any machine or device designated to travel through the air including but not limited to: airplanes, helicopters and balloons.
“Alcoholic beverages” or “liquor” includes the four varieties of liquor defined as alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, all fermented, spirituous, vinous, or malt liquor, and all other intoxicating beverages, and every liquor, solid or semisolid or other substance, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer; all drinks or drinkable liquids and all preparations or mixtures capable of human consumption. Any liquor, semisolid, solid or other substance which contains more than one percent alcohol by weight shall be conclusively deemed to be intoxicating.
“Associated marine area” means any water area within 100 feet of any “Lakewood City park area” or “marine facility” such as a dock, pier, float, buoy, log boom, or other object which is part of a “Lakewood City park area”; provided, that such area does not include private property.
“Camper” means a motorized vehicle containing sleeping and/or housekeeping accommodations, and shall include a pickup truck with camper, a van-type body, a converted bus, or any similar type vehicle.
“Camping” means erecting a tent or shelter or arranging bedding or both for the purpose of, or in such a way as will permit remaining overnight, or parking a trailer, camper, or other vehicle for the purpose of remaining overnight.
“Campsite” means designated camping sites which are designated for the use of camping, and which have no water and/or electrical facilities available for hookup to a trailer or a camper.
“City” means the City of Lakewood, a municipal corporation in the state of Washington.
“City Manager” means the City Manager of the City of Lakewood or designee.
“Commercial use” means any use of a park facility where money is exchanged on site; the area is used as a staging, instruction or display area; or doing work at a park location (i.e., testing engines, storing or delivering goods) that could result in a personal/professional benefit.
“Community athletic programs” means any athletic program that is organized for the purposes of training for and engaging in athletic activity and competition and that is in any way operated, conducted, administered, or supported by a city, town, county, district or school district (other than those athletic programs offered by the school and created solely for the students by the school).
“Department” means the department of the City of Lakewood that administers and oversees the City parks; provided, that where the context indicates, “department” may mean the person or persons responsible for the administration and oversight of the City parks.
“Discrimination” means any action or failure to act, whether by single act or part of a practice, the effect of which is to adversely affect or differentiate between or among individuals or groups of individuals, because of race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex, marital status, parental status, sexual orientation, the presence of any sensory, mental or physical handicap, or the use of a trained dog guide by a blind or deaf person.
“Facility” or “facilities” means any building, structure, or park area managed by the City of Lakewood Parks and Recreation Department.
“Facility supervisor” refers to a duly appointed City of Lakewood Parks and Recreation Department employee.
“Gender equity” means that cities, towns, counties and districts are prohibited from discriminating on the basis of sex in the operation, conduct, or administration of community athletic programs. Third parties who receive a lease or permit from such entities to operate, conduct, or administer a community athletic program are also prohibited from discriminating on the basis of sex.
“Holiday” means federally recognized holidays.
“Motor vehicle” means any self-propelled device capable of being moved upon a road, and in, upon, or by which any persons or property may be transported or drawn, and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motor scooters, jeeps or similar type four-wheel drive vehicles, snowmobiles and vessels, whether or not they can legally be operated upon the public highways.
“Overnight” means a 24-hour period of time with a defined start time/end time.
“Park area” means any area under the ownership, management, or control of the City of Lakewood Parks and Recreation Department.
“Person” means all natural persons, groups, firms, partnerships, corporations, clubs, and all associations or combination of persons whenever acting for themselves or an agent, servant, or employee.
“Power loading” is the use of a boat motor to load a boat onto a boat trailer.
“Recreational vehicle” shall include vehicles used exclusively for noncommercial purposes which are primarily designed for recreational, camping, or travel use or towing a horse trailer.
“Resident” means anyone who can verify proof of Lakewood residency with identification such as a public utility bill, Lakewood business license or Washington driver’s license.
“Rocket” means any device containing a combustible substance which when ignited propels the device forward.
“Service animal” means any dog that is individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including a physical, sensory, psychiatric, intellectual or other mental disability.
“Smoking” shall include inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other lighted or vaporized substance in any manner or form for any purpose.
“Tobacco” means the leaves of various plants which are dried and processed chiefly for chewing or snuffing or smoking in cigarettes, cigars, or pipes.
“Trail” means any path, track, or right-of-way designed for use by pedestrians, bicycles, equestrians, or other nonmotorized modes of transportation.
“Trailer” means a towed vehicle which contains sleeping or housekeeping accommodations or used to tow a vessel.
“Vessel” includes every description of watercraft on the water, other than a seaplane, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on the water. However, it does not include inner tubes, air mattresses, sailboards, and small rafts or flotation devices or toys customarily used by swimmers. [Ord. 579 § 1, 2014; Ord. 509 § 2, 2010; Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.020 Program – Purpose.
Our vision is that Lakewood is a healthy and vibrant community where opportunities abound. The mission of the Parks, Recreation and Community Services Department is to support an active, engaged and livable Lakewood through quality parks, diverse programs and sustainable practices. The playgrounds, activity centers, and other facilities of the Department are established by law for public recreation purposes. [Ord. 579 § 2, 2014; Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

Article II. Administration

8.76.030 Administrative rules – Hours and conditions of operation.
The City shall establish rules setting forth the times and conditions upon which the City parks and recreation facilities will be open, closed, or used by the public. The City parks and park facilities shall be open from dawn to dusk, except as otherwise provided by permits issued by the City, and except as otherwise posted. [Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.050 Special use permits.
The City may grant special use permits to individuals and groups who wish to reserve a park area for a designated period of time or for a special use. Based on type of event, number of participants, or other unusual conditions, a special use permit may be required. The special use permit allows the City to gather information regarding the special use and outlines conditions to ensure the park and other park visitors will not be negatively impacted.
Factors to be considered and evaluated in granting or denying an application for a special use permit shall include: the type of event or use, time of facility use, other competing uses and their compatibility, insurance and indemnification, police and fire concerns, parking, number of expected participants and size limitations, methods to ensure that all alcohol will remain in approved areas, and any other factors that warrant consideration based on the event and/or activity involved or local, county or state laws and permit regulations.
The City will charge a fee for special use permits. Where appropriate, additional fees and special conditions of use will be established by the City and so noted on the special use permit. The City is authorized to develop a schedule of fees for such permits, which allow the City to offset impacts caused by the use and/or recover its costs in connection with the use. The schedule of fees shall be posted.
Depending on the type and nature of use, and the number of participants involved, the City Manager or designee may require the posting of a refundable deposit, in a reasonable amount, to ensure compliance with the requirements of this section of the code. The City Manager or designee is authorized to determine and identify criteria to be used in administering the requirement for posting such deposit.
The City may grant special use permits to meet or conduct activities in City parks without charge, provided the activities are exclusively for youth 18 years of age or under; and provided, that all of the following conditions are satisfied: the buildings or facilities are not otherwise required by the City; the activities are conducted in accordance with the City’s standards; held without admission charge; not conducted for fundraising or other financial gain; open to the general public without discrimination; not exclusively planned for one group; and scheduled during hours when the facility is regularly open. The City may discount fees based on programs for youth which provide scholarships to low-income participants or charge additional fees or require special conditions to offset impacts caused by the use and/or recover its costs in connection with the use.
No alcoholic beverages are allowed at any park facilities or on any park property, other than as provided in LMC 8.76.165, or its successor provision(s).
Selling, possessing or consuming alcoholic beverages in a City park, recreation area, or associated marine area is prohibited, other than in connection with an event or activity for which a special use permit or rental contract has been issued; provided, that the activities and the use of alcoholic beverages shall conform to the permits therefor, and shall conform to federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations with respect thereto.
Facilities cannot be reserved more than one year (12 calendar months) prior to an event. Fees may be adjusted prior to an event as fee schedules are typically adopted in January of each year. [Ord. 658 § 1, 2017; Ord. 579 § 3, 2014; Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 247 § 1, 2000; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.055 Gender equity.
The City prohibits discrimination in the operation, conduct, or administration of community athletic programs for youth or adults on basis of gender. The City currently administers programs, activities and facility allocations in a nondiscriminatory manner. The City shall have and follow a policy in compliance with Chapter 467, Washington Laws of 2009, approved by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board of the City of Lakewood and available to the public. [Ord. 509 § 2, 2010.]

8.76.060 Cancellation of permit.
The Parks and Recreation Department reserves the right to cancel a permittee’s reservation for cause (valid reasons) or if the City needs to make use of the facility which in the judgment of the City Manager supersedes the need of the permittee. Notice of the City’s cancellation for priority use shall be given at least five business days in advance and permit fees will be refunded. Notice of cancellation for cause may be given at any time. [Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.080 Use of facilities.
Time and use restrictions for any building or other facility that may be located in a City park shall be identified and determined by the Department. [Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.090 Park cleanup.
User groups and individuals will be responsible for setup, break down and general cleanup of their park facility space. Removal and disposal of garbage, decorations, and miscellaneous materials must be completed at the conclusion of the event. No paint or chalk markings are allowed on park paths or trails. In the event that additional cleaning or repairs are needed as a result of an event, the user will pay for the cost of cleanup or repair. If the cleanup or repairs can be performed by City staff, then the total hourly staff charges for services along with cost of supplies will be assessed against the deposit or billed to the user. Up to a 25 percent administrative charge may be added to the costs. [Ord. 658 § 2, 2017; Ord. 579 § 4, 2014; Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.100 Liability.
Persons using facilities by permit will be required to protect, save and hold the City, its elected and appointed officials and employees while acting within the scope of their duties, harmless from and against all claims, demands and causes of action of any kind or character, including the cost of defense thereof, arising in favor of a person or group’s members or employees or third parties on account of any action including but not limited to personal injuries, death or damage to property arising out of the use of premises, or in any way arising out of the acts or omissions of the person, group and/or its agents, employees or representatives. [Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.110 Liability insurance.
During all periods of use, persons using facilities by permit shall obtain and maintain public liability insurance acceptable to the City and/or other insurance necessary to protect the public and the City on premises to be used, with limits of liability not less than: a minimum of $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 aggregate. The City reserves the right to require higher limits if it deems there is an increased liability exposure.
The City shall be named as an additional insured in connection with any such insurance policy, unless waived in writing by the City. The City shall be provided with a certificate of insurance, or, upon written request of the City, a duplicate of the policy, as evidence of the insurance protection provided. This insurance shall not be canceled or reduced without prior written notice to the City at least 30 days in advance of the cancellation, with this provision being included in the insurance policy.
It is provided, however, that in the case of permits for use of park facilities by recognized nonprofit organizations, or by small, neighborhood or family groups, depending on the type and nature of the use, the extent to which park facilities are to be used, the amount of time the facilities are to be used and the number of persons involved in the use, and the level of liability exposure involved in the use, the City Manager or designee may waive some or all of the insurance requirements hereof, and/or may require lesser limits of liability than the amounts identified hereinabove this section. [Ord. 509 § 2, 2010; Ord. 242 § 1, 2000; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.120 Adults to be present at functions of minors.
Adults must be present and responsible at all functions involving organized assemblies of minors, and shall remain throughout the entire function. [Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.130 Storage of equipment – Liability of City.
Persons using facilities should not expect storage space for equipment necessary for their programs. If temporary storage is provided, the City shall not be held responsible for loss or damage. City equipment shall not be available for use by any non-City person, group or organization, nor for any non-City purpose. [Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.140 Equipment regulations – Failure to perform.
In addition to the penalties and consequences available pursuant to LMC 8.76.570, 8.76.580 and 8.76.590, the misuse of a park facility or the failure to conform with these regulations, the instructions of Department employees, or the conditions of a permit will be sufficient reason for denying any future permits. [Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.150 Facility use – Sale of goods or services.
The use of park facilities for financial gain shall be allowed only through concession contracts secured by the City’s competitive process, negotiated concession contracts or by special use permit issued by the Department. [Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.160 Picnicking, fires and cooking.
No open flame campfires are permitted. Barbecues, stoves or similar devices or uses are permitted in park facilities if used in accordance with individual manufacturer instructions and coals are disposed of in an approved manner. [Ord. 579 § 5, 2014; Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

Article III. Rules Governing Use of Facilities – Infractions

8.76.165 Alcoholic beverages (information also included in LMC 8.76.050, Special use permits).
Selling, possessing or consuming alcoholic beverages in a City park, recreation area, or associated marine area is prohibited, other than in connection with an event or activity for which a special use permit or rental contract has been issued by the Department; provided, that the activities and the use of alcoholic beverages shall conform to the permits therefor, and shall conform to federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations with respect thereto.
Factors to be considered and evaluated in granting or denying an application for a special use permit shall include: the type of event or use, time of facility use, other competing uses and their compatibility, insurance and indemnification, police and fire concerns, parking, number of expected participants and size limitations, methods to ensure that all alcohol will remain in approved areas, and any other factors that warrant consideration based on the event and/or activity involved. The fee for the alcohol special use permit is contained in the City’s fee schedule and may be determined on a case-by-case basis depending on those factors noted in this section. [Ord. 579 § 6, 2014; Ord. 509 § 2, 2010.]

8.76.168 Smoking and tobacco use.
No person shall use any form of tobacco within City parks and facilities when such use is within restrooms; within 50 feet of covered picnic shelters, swimming beaches, playgrounds, athletic fields or spectator areas during athletic events, or concession areas. [Ord. 579 § 7, 2014.]

8.76.170 Bathing, washing of clothes or animals.
No person shall bathe, clean fish or other food, or wash any clothing or other articles for personal or household use, or any dog or other animal in any park area. [Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.180 Parking lots and roadways – Games prohibited.
Games of any kind are prohibited in parking lots and roadways of all Department facilities. [Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.190 Motor vehicles – Parking.
No operator of any automobile, trailer, camper, boat trailer, or other vehicle, shall park such vehicle in any park area, except where the operator is using the area for the designated recreational purpose and the vehicle is parked either in the designated parking area, or in another area with the permission of a facility supervisor and for which all applicable fees have been paid. No person shall park, leave standing, or abandon a vehicle in any park area after closing time except persons using park facilities as part of an activity authorized by the Department. In addition to the penalties found in Article V of this chapter, any vehicle found parked in violation of this section may be towed away at the owner’s expense, consistent with signs posted in conformity with state law.
Overnight parking in the American Lake Park boat launch parking lot is allowed only if an overnight pass is purchased from the launch kiosk. The receipt will note the time of purchase and is valid for 24 hours from the dated time stamp. The City of Lakewood is absolved of all liability and/or responsibility for damage to the vehicle or boat trailer parked in the parking lot overnight.
No recreational vehicle may be parked overnight in any City of Lakewood park facility unless authorized by the Department. [Ord. 579 § 8, 2014; Ord. 509 § 2, 2010; Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.200 Motor vehicles on roads and trails.
No person shall operate any motor vehicle on a trail in any park area unless such trail has been specifically designated and posted for such use. No person shall operate a motor vehicle within the boundaries of a park area except on roads, streets, highways, parking lots, parking areas, or where otherwise permitted by proper posting. It is provided, however, that this section shall not apply to emergency vehicles, nor to any maintenance vehicles, construction vehicles or other vehicles authorized by the Department. [Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.210 Motor vehicles – Speed limits.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle within any park area at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour or as otherwise posted, having due regard for traffic on, and the surface and width of the road, and in no event at a speed which endangers the safety of persons, property, or wildlife; provided, however, that in no event shall a vehicle be driven at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour in picnic, utility, or headquarters areas, or in areas of general public assemblage. [Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.220 Boat speeds in associated marine areas.
No person shall operate a boat at a speed greater than five knots per hour in any no wake zone or associated marine areas. [Ord. 509 § 2, 2010; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.221 Power loading at City boat launch facilities.
Power loading at City boat launch facilities is prohibited. No person shall power load his/her boat engine when loading a boat onto a boat trailer at a City boat launch facility. Boaters should use the boat winch to load and unload their boat. [Ord. 509 § 2, 2010.]

8.76.230 Cleaning, washing or repairing vehicles.
No person shall clean or repair any automobile, other vehicle or vessel in any park area. [Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.240 Motor vehicles – Trucks and commercial vehicles.
No person shall cause a truck or other vehicle while being used for commercial purposes to enter upon, use, or traverse any portion of any park area or any park road except in the service of the Department at the request of the employees of the Department, or by express permission of the manager for a special activity not inconsistent with park use; provided, that, the provisions of this section shall not apply to City roads or state highways. [Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.250 Trail use.
No person shall travel on a trail at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards that exist. [Ord. 509 § 2, 2010; Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.260 Vehicle – Boating – Occupancy policy.
In order to afford the general public the greatest possible use of marine facilities, continuous occupancy of marine facilities by the same person or group in any area is limited to one day in any seven-day period; provided, that this day shall not include overnight, unless otherwise posted. A boat launch permit must be purchased and the permit/receipt clearly visible. Nonmotorized vessels do not need a permit to launch. Shorter or longer limitation of occupancy may be established by special permit. In addition to the penalties in Article V of this chapter, any boat/trailer/vehicle found to be in violation of this chapter may be towed away at the owner’s expense. No person shall launch a boat in any park except in areas specifically designated and/or marked for that purpose. Float planes may dock on designated docks for up to 14 consecutive days. [Ord. 579 § 9, 2014; Ord. 509 § 2, 2010; Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.270 Use of marine heads.
No person shall use/or flush any marine head which when flushed emits its contents directly into the waters of a lake, river, or any other water area, nor cause any human or animal waste to be dumped into the waters while moored, anchored, docked or berthed in a park area or associated marine area or when entering or leaving the area. [Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.280 Camping prohibited.
No person shall camp in any park unless authorized by special permit. [Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.290 Tents and shelters on beaches.
No person shall erect, maintain, use or occupy a temporary tent or shelter on any swimming beach and/or in any park area unless there is an unobstructed view through such tent or shelter from at least two sides; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize overnight camping.
Tents in excess of 400 square feet shall not be erected, operated or maintained for any purpose within the boundaries of a City park facility without a City special use permit. A permit is also required from the local Fire District. [Ord. 579 § 10, 2014; Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.300 Indecent exposure.
Nudity is not allowed. Clothing shall be worn at all times. Exposure of one’s buttocks, genitals and female breasts is not allowed. [Ord. 579 §11, 2014; Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.310 Ice.
No person shall go out onto ice in any City park or park area, except in areas specifically designated for that purpose. This includes but is not limited to: lakes, ponds, streams, rivers, and other bodies of water. [Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.320 Game fish.
All laws, rules and regulations of the State Game Commission relating to season, limits, and methods of fishing are applicable to fishing for game fish in park areas. No person may fish for, or possess any fish taken from any dam, dike, bridge, dock, boatland, or beach, which is posted with a sign prohibiting fishing. [Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.330 Pets in City park facilities.
A. Dogs, pets, service animals or domestic animals are not permitted off leash on any designated swimming beach, picnic area, play area or any other park area in any City park or in any building, except in those areas specifically identified with signs posted indicating that dogs, pets, or domestic animals are permitted off leash.
B. In those permissible areas, dogs or other pets or domestic animals must be kept under control at all times and follow all posted rules.
C. Any person whose dog or other pet is in any park area shall be responsible for the conduct of the animal and for removing feces deposited by such animal from the park area in compliance with LMC 6.02.086. [Ord. 658 § 3, 2017; Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 361 § 1, 2004; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.340 Animal disturbances.
No person shall allow his or her dog or other pet or domestic animal to molest or annoy park visitors or wildlife. [Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.341 Wildlife feeding and harassment.
It is unlawful in any manner to tease, annoy, disturb, molest, catch, injure, or kill, throw any stone or missile of any kind, or strike with any stick or weapon any animal, bird, or fowl, or to feed any fowl, bird or animal in any park area. [Ord. 420 § 1, 2006.]

8.76.342 Damage by animals.
Owners of dogs or other animals damaging or destroying park property will be held liable for the full value of the property damaged or destroyed in addition to impounding fees and the penalty imposed for violation of these provisions. [Ord. 420 § 1, 2006.]

8.76.350 Horseback riding in designated areas only.
Horses are not permitted in any park areas except Fort Steilacoom Park. Horses shall not be permitted in any designated swimming area, sports field, playground, or picnic area. No person shall allow a horse or other animal to stand unattended or insecurely tied. No person shall ride any horse or other animal in such a manner that could cause physical harm to any person or to any property. Horse riders are expected to pick up their animals’ waste and remove it from the park facility.
All persons riding horses within the boundaries of Fort Steilacoom Park are required to obtain an equestrian permit which allows access to ride his/her horse on Fort Steilacoom Park trails. While in the park, all horses are to wear a manure catcher at all times. Horse riders are expected to pick up their animals’ waste and remove it from the park facility. [Ord. 658 § 4, 2017; Ord. 579 § 12, 2014; Ord. 509 § 2, 2010; Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.360 Littering.
Per Chapter 8.32 LMC, Litter Control, no person shall litter on park property. [Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.370 Swimming in designated areas only.
Swimming areas shall be marked with buoys, log booms, or signs clearly designating the boundaries of such areas. [Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.380 Swimmers must obey rules.
All persons using designated park swimming areas shall obey all posted beach rules and/or the instructions of lifeguards, facility managers, or other City staff. [Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.385 Visitors must obey rules.
All persons using designated park areas shall obey all posted rules and/or the instructions of lifeguards, facility managers, or other City staff. [Ord. 420 § 1, 2006.]

8.76.390 Swimming/scuba diving in boat launch areas prohibited.
No person shall swim, sunbathe, or scuba dive in any designated boat launching area. [Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.400 Presence in parks during hours the park is closed.
No person shall enter or be present in a City park area during hours the park is closed except persons using park facilities as part of an activity authorized by the City. [Ord. 579 §13, 2014; Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

Article IV. Rules Governing Use of Facilities – Misdemeanors

8.76.405 Bicycle and scooter restriction in skate park facilities.
Skate park facilities are designed for use by skateboards, in-line skates and roller skates. No person shall have or use a bicycle, scooter or other similar vehicle in a skate park facility in any City park unless otherwise posted. For the purposes hereof, having or using a bicycle, scooter or other similar vehicle in a skate park facility means riding, locating or positioning a bicycle, scooter or other similar vehicle so that said vehicle touches any part of the concrete surface of the skate park facility. [Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 246 § 1, 2001.]

8.76.410 Mechanical trapping devices.
The use of a mechanical trapping device within any City park is prohibited. A “mechanical trapping device” shall be defined as any device, including but not limited to snares or machines, that shut suddenly upon contact by an animal, or a device which kills or inflicts physical pain and injury upon a captured animal. The act of capturing an animal, by other than lawful means is prohibited. It is provided, however, that this section shall not apply to authorized pest abatement actions of City personnel. [Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.420 False alarm of drowning prohibited.
No person shall give or transmit a false signal or false alarm of drowning. [Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.430 Games on beaches.
Activities including but not limited to sports and physical play which interfere or tend to interfere with and endanger other beach users and distract from or obstruct the performance of life safety responsibilities of parks personnel are prohibited. When circumstances can safely permit games, such games will be conducted only with the consent of a facility supervisor, lifeguard, or other Department employee. [Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.440 Moorage in swimming area prohibited.
No person or persons shall moor, dock, or berth a boat or other object to a dock, pier, log boom or float line which delineates a swimming area in a park area, associated marine area or where posted. [Ord. 579 § 14, 2014; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.450 Damage to property.
No person shall cut down, destroy, or in any way injure any shrub, tree, vine, grain, grass or crop, standing or growing or which has been cut down, in any park area unless authorized to do so by the Department. No person or pet shall deface, damage, remove or destroy any property, material or equipment which is under the jurisdiction of the Department. [Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.460 Removal of property.
No person shall change the position of or remove any City property, material, or equipment from its original position in any area under the jurisdiction of the Department. [Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.465 Metal detecting.
The use of metal detecting in any park shall be allowed as long as it does not interfere with reserved or organized sports or activities. There should be no noticeable impact to park property resulting from metal detecting activity. Any find that appears to have historical or archaeological significance may not be removed from where it was found and must be reported to a Department employee. [Ord. 658 § 5, 2017.]

8.76.470 Outside household or commercial waste.
No person shall deposit any household or commercial garbage, refuse, waste, vegetation or rubbish which is brought in such form from any private property, in any park area, garbage can or other receptacle designated for such purpose. [Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.480 Waste from vehicles.
No person shall drain or dump refuse or waste from any trailer, camper, vessel, automobile or other vehicle in any park area. [Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.490 Dumping in water prohibited.
No person shall pollute, or in any way contaminate by dumping or otherwise depositing any waste or refuse of any nature, kind or description, including human and bodily waste, into any stream, river, lake or other body of water running in, through, or adjacent to any park area. [Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.500 Model aircraft and rockets.
A. No person shall fly rockets or remotely piloted and powered aircraft in any park area unless in an area designated by the City Manager or for emergency or disaster response.
B. Notwithstanding LMC 8.76.580, a violation of this section shall be an infraction punishable by a fine in the amount set forth in LMC 8.76.570. [Ord. 658 § 6, 2017; Ord. 614 § 1, 2015; Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.510 Solicitation.
No person shall solicit, sell, or peddle any goods, services, wares, merchandise, liquids, or edibles for human consumption, or distribute or post any handbills, circulars, or signs, or use any loud-speakers or other amplifying devices, in any park area, except by concession contract or by special use permit issued by the Department. It shall be the responsibility of any person holding a concession contract or special use permit issued by the Department to display such permit or evidence of contract conspicuously so as to be visible to persons in the vicinity of the operations of such person. [Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.520 Fireworks.
No person shall possess, discharge, set off, or cause to be discharged, in or into any park area, any firecracker, torpedo, rocket, firework, explosive, or substance harmful to the life or safety of persons or property, unless so authorized by the Department. [Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.530 Firearms, weapons.
No person shall possess a bow and arrow, crossbow, or air or gas weapon in a City park. No person shall discharge across, in, or into any park area a firearm, bow and arrow, crossbow, air or gas weapon, or any device capable of injuring or killing any person or animal, or damaging or destroying any public or private property; provided, that where the Department for good cause has authorized and approved a special recreational activity or a recreational program, upon finding that it is not inconsistent with City park use, this section shall not apply. [Ord. 579 § 15, 2014; Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.550 Intoxication.
It is unlawful to be intoxicated while in any City park. [Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.560 Interference with trails.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or block any portion of a trail owned or maintained by the City. This section shall not apply to employees of the City in the performance of their duties or to persons acting on written direction of the City. [Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

Article V. Penalties

8.76.570 Infractions.
The failure to perform any act required or the performance of any act prohibited by Article II or III of this chapter is a civil infraction, punishable by a fine of no more than $125.00. [Ord. 658 § 7, 2017; Ord. 579 § 16, 2014; Ord. 509 § 2, 2010; Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.580 Misdemeanors.
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of Article IV of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000, or by imprisonment in jail for not more than 90 days, or both. [Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

8.76.590 Administrative sanctions.
It is unlawful to stay in a park when directed to leave by a City of Lakewood Park Department employee or any police officer. In addition to any prescribed penalty, any person who fails to comply with any provision of this chapter, or who violates any of the ordinances, or rules and regulations of the City while in a park in the City, or who otherwise interferes with the City’s administration of the parks or who restricts, or interferes with the use or enjoyment of the park by others, or engages in conduct that is likely to restrict or interfere with the use or enjoyment of the park by others, shall be subject to the loss of park or recreation facility use privileges and ejection from the City park area or associated marine park area. [Ord. 420 § 1, 2006; Ord. 126 § 1, 1997.]

Chapter 8.80 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT

Sections:
8.80.010     Purpose.
8.80.020     Emergency management policy.
8.80.030     Definitions.
8.80.040     Emergency management plan.
8.80.050     Emergency management program.
8.80.060     Disaster and emergency powers of the City Manager.
8.80.070     Disaster and emergency powers of the Director.
8.80.080     Private liability.
8.80.090     Penalty.
8.80.100     Severability.

8.80.010 Purpose.
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery for persons and property within the City of Lakewood in the event of an emergency or disaster, and to provide for the coordination of emergency functions and services of the City of Lakewood with the county and other affected public agencies and private persons, corporations and organizations. Any expenditures made in connection with such emergency management activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the City of Lakewood. [Ord. 148 § 1, 1997.]

8.80.020 Emergency management policy.
It is the policy of the City of Lakewood to make effective preparation and use of personnel, resources, and facilities for dealing with any emergency or disaster that may occur. Disasters and emergencies, by their very nature, may disrupt or destroy existing systems and the capability of the City of Lakewood to respond to protect life, public health and public property. Therefore, citizens are advised to be prepared to be on their own for up to three days should an emergency or disaster occur. [Ord. 148 § 1, 1997.]

8.80.030 Definitions.
“Deputy Director of Emergency Management” means the person appointed by the City Manager to represent the Director in his/her absence.
“Director of Emergency Management” means the person appointed by the City Manager who is responsible for the administration and operation of the emergency management program for the City of Lakewood.
“Emergency” or “disaster” as used in this chapter means an event or set of circumstances which: (1) demands immediate action to preserve public health, protect life, protect public property, or to provide relief to any stricken neighborhood overtaken by such occurrences, or (2) reaches such a dimension or degree of destructiveness as to warrant the City Manager proclaiming the existence of an emergency or the Governor declaring a state of emergency in accordance with appropriate local and state statute.
“Emergency management” means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which the military forces are primarily responsible, to mitigate, prepare for, respond to and recover from emergencies and disasters, and to aid victims suffering from injury or damage resulting from disasters caused by all hazards, whether natural or manmade, and to provide support for search and rescue operations for persons and property in distress. [Ord. 148 § 1, 1997.]

8.80.040 Emergency management plan.
The City Manager and the Director are authorized to develop and implement an emergency management plan for the City of Lakewood. The emergency management plan so developed shall be the official emergency management plan of the City of Lakewood. The Director shall file a copy of said plan in the Office of the City Clerk, and distribute copies of said plan to appropriate City departments. The City Manager is further authorized to assign to the various departments and to the officers and employees of the City the functions, duties and powers set forth in the emergency management plan of the City of Lakewood. [Ord. 148 § 1, 1997.]

8.80.050 Emergency management program.
A. The emergency management program of the City of Lakewood is hereby created, and shall consist of:
    1. The City Manager, who shall be the administrative head and have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the emergency management program for the City of Lakewood and direct responsibility for the emergency operations of departments of the City of Lakewood;
    2. The Director, who shall be appointed by the City Manager, and who shall develop and maintain the emergency management plan and program of the City of Lakewood, and shall have such other duties as may be assigned to him by the City Manager;
    3. A Deputy Director, who shall be appointed by the City Manager, shall perform such functions as outlined in the emergency management plan and shall act for and exercise the powers and perform the duties of the Director during his/her absence or disability;
    4. Compensated members of the emergency management organization, if appropriate;
    5. Volunteer members of the emergency management organization; and
    6. Such advisory committees as may be appointed by the City Council.
B. The City of Lakewood may form its own Department of Emergency Management, or it may contract pursuant to Chapter 39.34 RCW for emergency management services with another political subdivision which does have an approved emergency management program in accordance with Chapter 38.52 RCW. [Ord. 148 § 1, 1997.]

8.80.060 Disaster and emergency powers of the City Manager.
In the event of an emergency or disaster as defined herein, or upon the proclamation of a state of extreme emergency by the Governor, the City Manager is hereby empowered:
A. To proclaim the existence of an emergency, as authorized by local and state statute, and to report the facts concerning the emergency to the City Council at the earliest practical time;
B. To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such disaster; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practical time by the City Council;
C. To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of the life and property of the people and to bind the City of Lakewood for the fair value thereof, and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use;
D. To control and direct the efforts of the emergency management organization of the City of Lakewood for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;
E. To require emergency services of any City officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a state of extreme emergency by the Governor in the region in which the City of Lakewood is located, to command the aid of as many citizens of the City of Lakewood as may be deemed necessary in the execution of the City Manager’s duties; and such persons to be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered emergency workers;
F. To requisition necessary personnel or material of any City of Lakewood department or agency; and,
G. To execute all of the special powers conferred upon the City Manager by this chapter, by any other statute, agreement or lawful authority, as necessary. [Ord. 148 § 1, 1997.]

8.80.070 Disaster and emergency powers of the Director.
The Director is hereby empowered:
A. To request the City Manager to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of an emergency and the termination thereof, or to issue such proclamation, if the City Manager is not available, subject to confirmation by the City Manager at the earliest practical time;
B. To direct coordination and cooperation between divisions, services and staff of the departments and services of the City of Lakewood in carrying out the provisions of the emergency management plan, and to resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;
C. To recommend for adoption by the City Manager or City Council, as appropriate, emergency management plans and mutual aid agreements;
D. To act on behalf of the City Manager if he/she is unable to carry out his/her duties, in carrying out purposes of this chapter or the provisions of the emergency management plan;
E. To represent the emergency management organization of the City of Lakewood in dealing with issues pertaining to emergency management; and
F. To prepare and maintain the emergency management plan of the City of Lakewood and manage the day-to-day responsibilities of the emergency management program activities of the City of Lakewood. [Ord. 148 § 1, 1997.]

8.80.080 Private liability.
No individual, firm, association, corporation or other party owning, maintaining or controlling any building or premises, who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the City of Lakewood a license or privilege or otherwise permits said City to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such building or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending, mock or practice emergency or disaster, or their successors in interest, or the agents or employees of any of them, shall be subject to liability for injuries sustained by any person while in or upon said building or premises as a result of any act or omission in connection with the upkeep or maintenance thereof, except a willful act of misconduct, when such a person has entered or gone into or upon said building or premises for the purpose of seeking refuge therein during an emergency or disaster or an attack by enemies of the United States or during a disaster drill, exercise or test ordered by a lawful authority. [Ord. 148 § 1, 1997.]

8.80.090 Penalty.
Any person who shall willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed upon such member by virtue of this chapter; or do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this chapter if such act is of such a nature as to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this City, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof, or wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency management agency of the state, shall upon conviction, be punished by a fine in an amount not exceeding $1,000, or by imprisonment in jail for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both fine and imprisonment. [Ord. 148 § 1, 1997.]

8.80.100 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not effect other provisions or applications of the chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. [Ord. 148 § 1, 1997.]

Title 9 CRIMINAL CODE*

Chapters:
9.01         Preliminary Article
9.02         Adoption of RCW Sections Not Specifically Set Forth
9.03         Adoption of Specific RCW Sections
9.04         Aggressive Begging
9.05         Charitable Solicitations
9.06         Controlled Substances
9.07         Police Dogs
9.08         Public Disturbance
9.09         Public Indecency, Prostitution, Sex Crimes
9.10         Trespassing on School Property
9.11         Loitering
9.12         Miscellaneous Crimes
9.13         Security Alarms
9.14         Firearms, Dangerous Weapons, Explosives
* Prior legislation note: Ord. 526 repealed this title and enacted a Title 9A. Prior to its repeal and reenactment, the title was based on the provisions of Ords. 41, 55, 82, 106, 115, 117, 152, 170, 174, 180, 248, 320, 396, 444, 445, 482 and 502.

Chapter 9.01 PRELIMINARY ARTICLE*

Sections:
9.01.010     Preliminary article.
9.01.020     Jurisdiction.
* Prior legislation note: Ord. 526 repealed general criminal code provisions that were formerly in Chapter 9.01, based on the provisions of Ord. 41.

9.01.010 Preliminary article.
A. This title shall be known and may be cited as the “Lakewood Criminal Code.”
B. As used in this title, “RCW” shall mean the Revised Code of Washington.
C. As used in this title, “LMC” shall mean the Lakewood Municipal Code.
D. If any chapter, section, subsection, sentence, or provision of this title, or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this title, or the application of the chapter, section, subsection, sentence, or provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected, and to this end, the chapters, sections, subsections, sentences and provisions of this title are declared to be severable.
E. By adopting Washington State statutes by reference in this title, the City intends to assume jurisdiction over and become the jurisdictional authority for the enforcement and prosecution of misdemeanor and gross misdemeanor crimes committed within the City of Lakewood. Whenever the word “state” shall appear in any statute adopted by reference in this title, the word “City” shall be substituted therefor; provided, however, the term “City” shall not be substituted for the term “state” in those circumstances that set forth administrative or licensing duties of the state and its subdivisions.
F. Whenever a state statute specifically adopted in this title refers to another state statute not specifically adopted in this title, the statute referred to shall be given the force and effect necessary to enforce the statute specifically adopted in this title.
G. Any state statute that is adopted by reference in this title and which is later amended, repealed, or recodified shall remain in full force and effect until the effective date of the legislative act that repeals, recodifies, or amends the state statute. The amendment or recodification of any state statute adopted by reference in this title shall retain its full force and effect as part of this title subsequent to the effective date of its amendment or recodification.
H. When issuing a citation, information, or complaint for the violation of any section of the RCW adopted by this title, it shall be sufficient for a commissioned officer or prosecutor to cite to and refer to the RCW section number.
I. Title, chapter, section and subsection captions are for organizational purposes only and shall not be construed as part of this title.
J. The provisions of this title do not apply to or govern the construction of or punishment of any offense committed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title or to the construction and application of any defense to a prosecution for such offense. Such an offense shall be construed and punished according to the provisions of the law existing at the time of the commission of the offense in the same manner as if this title had not been enacted. The provisions of this title shall apply to any offense committed on or after its effective date unless otherwise expressly provided or unless the context otherwise requires and shall also apply to any defense to prosecution for such an offense.
K. As used in this title, words used in the present tense include the future tense; the masculine includes the feminine and neutral genders; and the singular includes the plural and vice versa.
L. The provisions of this title are intended to create a duty to the public in general and not to create any duty to individuals or to any particular class of individuals. These provisions are not for the protection of any person or class of persons.
M. Unless otherwise provided in this title, violation of any provision of this title shall be punishable by:
    1. Gross Misdemeanor. Every person convicted of a gross misdemeanor shall be punished by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than one year, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than $5,000, or by both such imprisonment and fine.
    2. Misdemeanor. Every person convicted of a misdemeanor shall be punished by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than 90 days, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than $1,000, or by both such imprisonment and fine. A violation of the Lakewood Criminal Code is a misdemeanor if not otherwise designated by this code or by the code adopted by reference. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.01.020 Jurisdiction.
The following persons are subject to punishment:
A. A person who commits in the City any crime as defined by ordinance, in whole or part;
B. A person who commits out of the City any act which, if committed within it, would be theft and is afterward found in the City with any of the stolen property;
C. A person who being out of the City, counsels, causes, procures, aids, or abets another to commit a crime in the City;
D. A person who commits an act without the City which affects persons or property within the City which, if committed within the City, would be a crime. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

Chapter 9.02 ADOPTION OF RCW SECTIONS NOT SPECIFICALLY SET FORTH

Sections:
9.02.010     Adoption of RCW sections not specifically set forth.

9.02.010 Adoption of RCW sections not specifically set forth.
A. With the exception of the RCW section set forth in subsection C of this section, and notwithstanding the RCW sections that are specifically adopted by reference in this title, all RCW sections that constitute misdemeanors and gross misdemeanors and the RCW sections necessary for the investigation, arrest, prosecution, sentencing, confinement, and enforcement of misdemeanors and gross misdemeanors are hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full.
B. All Class C felony crimes set forth in the RCW are hereby adopted by reference for the purposes of charging a gross misdemeanor for a violation of any of the crimes set forth in Chapter 9A.28 RCW. The adoption of Class C felonies shall be subject to the provisions of subsection A of this section.
C. The following RCW section is not adopted by the City of Lakewood:
9A.16.110 Defending against violent crime – Reimbursement. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

Chapter 9.03 ADOPTION OF SPECIFIC RCW SECTIONS

Sections:
9.03.010     Chapter 2.48 RCW entitled “State Bar Act” – Adoption by reference.
9.03.020     Chapter 7.21 RCW entitled “Contempt of Court” – Adoption by reference.
9.03.030     Chapter 7.80 RCW entitled “Civil Infractions” – Adoption by reference.
9.03.040     RCW Title 9 entitled “Crimes and Punishments” – Adoption by reference.
9.03.050     RCW Title 9A entitled “Washington Criminal Code” – Adoption by reference.
9.03.060     RCW Title 10 entitled “Criminal Procedure” – Adoption by reference.
9.03.070     Chapter 13.32A RCW entitled “Family Reconciliation Act” – Adoption by reference.
9.03.080     RCW Title 16 entitled “Animals and Livestock” – Adoption by reference.
9.03.081     Chapter 19.60 RCW entitled “Pawnbrokers and Secondhand Dealers” – Adoption by reference.
9.03.085     Chapter 19.290 RCW entitled “Metal Property” – Adoption by reference.
9.03.090     RCW Title 26 entitled “Domestic Relations” – Adoption by reference.
9.03.100     Chapter 28A.635 RCW entitled “Offenses Relating to School Property and Personnel” – Adoption by reference.
9.03.110     Chapter 46.80 RCW entitled “Vehicle Wreckers” – Adoption by reference.
9.03.120     RCW Title 66 entitled “Alcoholic Beverage Control” – Adoption by reference.
9.03.130     RCW Title 69 entitled “Food, Drugs, Cosmetics, and Poisons” – Adoption by reference.
9.03.140     RCW Title 70 entitled “Public Health and Safety” – Adoption by reference.
9.03.150     Chapter 74.34 RCW entitled “Abuse of Vulnerable Adults” – Adoption by reference.

9.03.010 Chapter 2.48 RCW entitled “State Bar Act” – Adoption by reference.
The following RCW section, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:
2.48.180 Definitions – Unlawful practice a crime – Cause for discipline – Unprofessional conduct – Defense – Injunction – Remedies – Costs – Attorneys’ fees – Time limit for action. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.03.020 Chapter 7.21 RCW entitled “Contempt of Court” – Adoption by reference.
The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:
 7.21.010 Definitions.
 7.21.020 Sanctions – Who may impose.
 7.21.030 Remedial sanctions – Payment for losses.
 7.21.040 Punitive sanctions – Fines.
 7.21.050 Sanctions – Summary imposition – Procedure.
 7.21.070 Appellate review. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.03.030 Chapter 7.80 RCW entitled “Civil Infractions” – Adoption by reference.
For purposes of offenses under this title only, the following RCW section, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:
7.80.120 Monetary penalties – Restitution. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.03.040 RCW Title 9 entitled “Crimes and Punishments” – Adoption by reference.
The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:
 9.01.055 Citizen immunity if aiding officer, scope – When.
 9.01.110 Omission, when not punishable.
 9.01.130 Sending letter, when complete.
 9.02.050 Concealing birth.
 9.03.010 Abandoning, discarding refrigeration equipment.
 9.03.020 Permitting unused equipment to remain on premises.
 9.03.040 Keeping or storing equipment for sale.
 9.04.010 False advertising.
 9.04.090 Advertising fuel prices by service stations.
 9.08.030 False certificate of registration of animals – False representation as to breed.
 9.08.065 Definitions.
 9.08.070 Pet animals – Taking, concealing, injuring, killing, etc. – Penalty.
 9.12.010 Barratry.
 9.12.020 Buying, demanding, or promising reward by district judge or deputy.
 9.16.005 Definitions.
 9.16.010 Removing lawful brands.
 9.16.020 Imitating lawful brand.
 9.16.030 Counterfeit mark – Intellectual property.
 9.16.035 Counterfeiting – Penalties.
 9.16.041 Counterfeit items – Seizure and forfeiture.
 9.16.050 When deemed affixed.
 9.16.060 Fraudulent registration of trademark.
 9.16.070 Form and similitude defined.
 9.16.080 Petroleum products improperly labeled or graded.
 9.16.100 Use of the words “sterling silver,” etc.
 9.16.110 Use of words “coin silver,” etc.
 9.16.120 Use of the word “sterling” on mounting.
 9.16.130 Use of the words “coin silver” on mounting.
 9.16.140 Unlawfully marking article made of gold.
 9.16.150 “Marked, stamped or branded” defined.
 9.18.080 Offender a competent witness.
 9.18.120 Suppression of competitive bidding.
 9.18.130 Collusion to prevent competitive bidding.
 9.18.150 Agreements outside state.
 9.24.010 Fraud in stock subscription.
 9.24.040 Corporation doing business without license.
 9.26A.090 Telephone company credit cards – Prohibited acts.
 9.26A.100 Definitions.
 9.26A.110 Fraud in obtaining telecommunications service – Penalty.
 9.26A.120 Fraud in operating coin-box telephone or other receptacle.
 9.26A.130 Penalty for manufacture or sale of slugs to be used for coin.
 9.27.015 Interference, obstruction of any court, building, or residence – Violations.
 9.35.005 Definitions.
 9.35.030 Soliciting undesired mail.
 9.38.010 False representation concerning credit.
 9.38.015 False statement by deposit account applicant.
 9.38.020 False representation concerning title.
 9.40.040 Operating engine or boiler without spark arrester.
 9.40.100 Tampering with fire alarm or fire fighting equipment – False alarm – Penalties.
 9.41.010 Terms defined.
 9.41.040 Unlawful possession of firearms – Ownership, possession by certain persons.
 9.41.050 Carrying firearms.
 9.41.060 Exceptions to restrictions on carrying firearms.
 9.41.090 Dealer deliveries regulated – Hold on delivery.
 9.41.098 Forfeiture of firearms – Disposition – Confiscation.
 9.41.100 Dealer licensing and registration required.
 9.41.110 Dealer’s licenses, by whom granted, conditions, fees – Employees, fingerprinting and background checks – Wholesale sales excepted – Permits prohibited.
 9.41.140 Alteration of identifying marks – Exceptions.
 9.41.220 Unlawful firearms and parts contraband.
 9.41.230 Aiming or discharging firearms, dangerous weapons.
 9.41.240 Possession of pistol by person from 18 to 21.
 9.41.250 Dangerous weapons – Penalty.
 9.41.260 Dangerous exhibitions.
 9.41.270 Weapons apparently capable of producing bodily harm – Unlawful carrying or handling – Penalty – Exceptions.
 9.41.280 Possessing dangerous weapons on school facilities – Penalty – Exceptions.
 9.41.300 Weapons prohibited in certain places – Local laws and ordinances – Exceptions – Penalty.
 9.41.800 Surrender of weapons or licenses – Prohibition on future possession or licensing.
 9.41.810 Penalty.
 9.44.080 Misconduct in signing a petition.
 9.45.060 Encumbered, leased, or rented personal property – Construction.
 9.45.070 Mock auctions.
 9.45.080 Fraudulent removal of property.
 9.45.090 Knowingly receiving fraudulent conveyance.
 9.45.100 Fraud in assignment for benefit of creditors.
 9.45.270 Fraudulent filing of vehicle report of sale.
 9.46.170 False or misleading entries or statements, refusal to produce records.
 9.46.185 Causing person to violate rule or regulation.
 9.46.190 Violations relating to fraud or deceit.
 9.46.195 Obstruction of public servant – Penalty.
 9.46.196 Cheating – Defined.
 9.46.1962 Cheating in the second degree.
 9.46.198 Working in gambling activity without license as violation – Penalty.
 9.46.217 Gambling records – Penalty – Exceptions.
 9.46.222 Professional gambling in the third degree.
 9.47A.010 Definition.
 9.47A.020 Unlawful inhalation – Exception.
 9.47A.030 Possession of certain substances prohibited, when.
 9.47A.040 Sale of certain substances prohibited, when.
 9.47A.050 Penalty.
 9.51.010 Misconduct of officer drawing jury.
 9.51.020 Soliciting jury duty.
 9.51.030 Misconduct of officer in charge of jury.
 9.61.230 Telephone harassment.
 9.61.240 Telephone harassment – Permitting telephone to be used.
 9.61.250 Telephone harassment – Offense, where deemed committed.
 9.61.260 Cyberstalking.
 9.62.010 Malicious prosecution.
 9.62.020 Instituting suit in name of another.
 9.66.010 Public nuisance.
 9.66.020 Unequal damage.
 9.66.030 Maintaining or permitting nuisance.
 9.66.040 Abatement of nuisance.
 9.66.050 Deposit of unwholesome substance.
 9.68.015 Obscene literature, shows, etc. – Exemptions.
 9.68.030 Indecent articles, etc.
 9.68.050 “Erotic material” – Definitions.
 9.68.060 “Erotic material” – Determination by court – Labeling – Penalties.
 9.68.070 Prosecution for violation of RCW 9.68.060 – Defense.
 9.68.080 Unlawful acts.
 9.68.100 Exceptions to RCW 9.68.050 through 9.68.120.
 9.68.110 Motion picture operator or projectionist exempt, when.
 9.68.130 “Sexually explicit material” – Defined – Unlawful display.
 9.68A.011 Definitions.
 9.68A.080 Reporting of depictions of minor engaged in sexually explicit conduct – Civil immunity.
 9.68A.090 Communication with minor for immoral purposes – Penalties.
 9.68A.103 Permitting commercial sexual abuse of a minor – Penalty.
 9.96A.105 Additional fee assessment.
 9.68A.110 Certain defenses barred, permitted.
 9.68A.120 Seizure and forfeiture of property.
 9.68A.150 Allowing minor on premises of live erotic performance – Definitions – Penalty.
 9.69.100 Duty of witness of offense against child or any violent offense – Penalty.
 9.73.010 Divulging telegram.
 9.73.020 Opening sealed letter.
 9.73.030 Intercepting, recording or divulging private communication – Consent required – Exceptions.
 9.73.050 Admissibility of intercepted communication in evidence.
 9.73.070 Persons and activities excepted from chapter.
 9.73.080 Penalties.
 9.73.090 Certain emergency response personnel exempted from RCW 9.73.030 through 9.73.080 – Standards – Court authorizations – Admissibility.
 9.73.100 Recordings available to defense counsel.
 9.73.110 Intercepting, recording, or disclosing private communications – Not unlawful for building owner – Conditions.
 9.86.010 “Flag,” etc., defined.
 9.86.020 Improper use of flag prohibited.
 9.86.030 Desecration of a flag.
 9.86.040 Application of provisions.
 9.91.010 Denial of civil rights – Terms defined.
 9.91.020 Operating railroad, steamboat, vehicle, etc., while intoxicated.
 9.91.025 Unlawful conduct in a transit vehicle.
 9.91.060 Leaving children unattended in a parked automobile.
 9.91.130 Disposal of trash in charity donation receptacle.
 9.91.140 Food stamps – Unlawful sale.
 9.91.142 Food stamps – Trafficking.
 9.91.160 Personal protection spray devices.
 9.91.170 Interfering with dog guide or service animal.
 9.91.175 Interfering with search and rescue dog. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.03.050 RCW Title 9A entitled “Washington Criminal Code” – Adoption by reference.
The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:
 9A.04.020 Purposes – Principles of construction.
 9A.04.040 Classes of crimes.
 9A.04.050 People capable of committing crimes – Capability of children.
 9A.04.060 Common law to supplement statute.
 9A.04.070 Who amenable to criminal statutes.
 9A.04.080 Limitation of actions.
 9A.04.090 Application of general provisions of the code.
 9A.04.100 Proof beyond a reasonable doubt.
 9A.04.110 Definitions.
 9A.08.010 General requirements of culpability.
 9A.08.020 Liability for conduct of another – Complicity.
 9A.08.030 Corporate and personal liability.
 9A.12.010 Insanity.
 9A.16.010 Definitions.
 9A.16.020 Use of force – When lawful.
 9A.16.060 Duress.
 9A.16.070 Entrapment.
 9A.16.080 Action for being detained on mercantile establishment premises for investigation – “Reasonable grounds” as defense.
 9A.16.090 Intoxication.
 9A.16.100 Use of force on children – Policy – Actions presumed unreasonable.
 9A.28.020 Criminal attempt.
 9A.28.030 Criminal solicitation.
 9A.28.040 Criminal conspiracy.
 9A.36.041 Assault in the fourth degree.
 9A.36.050 Reckless endangerment.
 9A.36.070 Coercion.
 9A.36.150 Interfering with the reporting of domestic violence.
 9A.36.160 Failing to summons assistance.
 9A.36.161 Failing to summons assistance – Penalty.
 9A.40.010 Definitions.
 9A.40.070 Custodial interference in the second degree.
 9A.40.080 Custodial interference – Assessment of costs – Defense – Consent defense, restricted.
 9A.42.010 Definitions.
 9A.42.035 Criminal mistreatment in the third degree.
 9A.42.037 Criminal mistreatment in the fourth degree.
 9A.42.040 Withdrawal of life support systems.
 9A.42.045 Palliative care.
 9A.42.050 Defense of financial inability.
 9A.42.080 Abandonment of a dependent person in the third degree.
 9A.42.090 Abandonment of a dependent person – Defense.
 9A.42.110 Leaving a child in the care of a sex offender.
 9A.44.010 Definitions.
 9A.44.030 Defenses to prosecution under this chapter.
 9A.44.096 Sexual misconduct with a minor in the second degree.
 9A.44.130 Registration of sex offenders and kidnapping offenders – Procedures – Definition – Penalties.
 9A.44.132 Failure to register as sex offender or kidnapping offender.
 9A.44.170 Custodial sexual misconduct in the second degree.
 9A.44.180 Custodial sexual misconduct – Defense.
 9A.46.010 Legislative finding.
 9A.46.020 Definition – Penalties.
 9A.46.030 Place where committed.
 9A.46.040 Court-ordered requirements upon person charged with crime – Violation.
 9A.46.050 Arraignment – No-contact order.
 9A.46.060 Crimes included in harassment.
 9A.46.080 Order restricting contact – Violation.
 9A.46.090 Nonliability of peace officer.
 9A.46.100 “Convicted,” time when.
 9A.46.110 Stalking.
 9A.48.010 Definitions.
 9A.48.050 Reckless burning in the second degree.
 9A.48.060 Reckless burning – Defense.
 9A.48.090 Malicious mischief in the third degree.
 9A.48.100 Malicious mischief – “Physical damage” defined.
 9A.48.105 Criminal street gang tagging and graffiti.
 9A.48.110 Defacing a state monument.
 9A.49.001 Findings.
 9A.49.010 Definitions.
 9A.49.030 Unlawful discharge of a laser in the second degree.
 9A.49.050 Exclusions.
 9A.50.010 Definitions.
 9A.50.020 Interference with health care facility.
 9A.50.030 Penalty.
 9A.52.010 Definitions.
 9A.52.050 Other crime in committing burglary punishable.
 9A.52.060 Making or having burglar tools.
 9A.52.070 Criminal trespass in the first degree.
 9A.52.080 Criminal trespass in the second degree.
 9A.52.090 Criminal trespass – Defenses.
 9A.52.100 Vehicle prowling in the second degree.
 9A.52.120 Computer trespass in the second degree.
 9A.52.130 Computer trespass – Commission of other crime.
 9A.56.010 Definitions.
 9A.56.020 Theft – Definition, defense.
 9A.56.050 Theft in the third degree.
 9A.56.060 Unlawful issuance of checks or drafts.
 9A.56.063 Making or possession motor vehicle theft tools.
 9A.56.096 Theft of rental, leased, or lease-purchased property.
 9A.56.140 Possessing stolen property – Definition – Presumption.
 9A.56.170 Possessing stolen property in the third degree.
 9A.56.180 Obscuring the identity of a machine.
 9A.56.220 Theft of subscription television services.
 9A.56.240 Forfeiture and disposal of device used to commit violation.
 9A.56.260 Connection of channel converter.
 9A.56.270 Shopping cart theft.
 9A.56.280 Credit, debit cards, checks, etc. – Definitions.
 9A.56.330 Possession of another’s identification.
 9A.60.010 Definitions.
 9A.60.045 Criminal impersonation in the second degree.
 9A.60.050 False certification.
 9A.60.070 False academic credentials – Unlawful issuance or use – Definitions – Penalties.
 9A.61.010 Definitions.
 9A.61.020 Defrauding a public utility.
 9A.61.050 Defrauding a public utility in the third degree.
 9A.61.060 Restitution and costs.
 9A.72.010 Definitions.
 9A.72.040 False swearing.
 9A.72.050 Perjury and false swearing – Inconsistent statements – Degree of crime.
 9A.72.060 Perjury and false swearing – Retraction.
 9A.72.070 Perjury and false swearing – Irregularities no defense.
 9A.72.080 Statement of what one does not know to be true.
 9A.72.085 Unsworn statements, certification.
 9A.72.140 Jury tampering.
 9A.72.150 Tampering with physical evidence.
 9A.76.010 Definitions.
 9A.76.020 Obstructing a law enforcement officer.
 9A.76.030 Refusing to summon aid for a peace officer.
 9A.76.040 Resisting arrest.
 9A.76.050 Rendering criminal assistance – Definition of term.
 9A.76.060 Relative defined.
 9A.76.070 Rendering criminal assistance in the first degree.
 9A.76.080 Rendering criminal assistance in the second degree.
 9A.76.090 Rendering criminal assistance in the third degree.
 9A.76.100 Compounding.
 9A.76.130 Escape in the third degree.
 9A.76.160 Introducing contraband in the third degree.
 9A.76.170 Bail jumping.
 9A.76.175 Making a false or misleading statement to a public servant.
 9A.80.010 Official misconduct.
 9A.84.010 Riot.
 9A.84.020 Failure to disperse.
 9A.84.030 Disorderly conduct.
 9A.84.040 False reporting.
 9A.86.010 Disclosing intimate images.
 9A.88.010 Indecent exposure.
 9A.88.030 Prostitution.
 9A.88.050 Prostitution – Sex of parties immaterial – No defense.
 9A.88.090 Permitting prostitution.
 9A.88.110 Patronizing a prostitute.
 9A.88.120 Additional fee assessments.
 9A.88.130 Additional requirements.
 9A.88.140 Vehicle impoundment. [Ord. 633 § 1, 2016; Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.03.060 RCW Title 10 entitled “Criminal Procedure” – Adoption by reference.
The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:
 10.14.120 Disobedience of order – Penalties.
 10.14.170 Criminal penalty.
 10.99.010 Purpose – Intent.
 10.99.020 Definitions.
 10.99.040 Duties of court – No-contact order.
 10.99.050 Victim contact – Restriction, prohibition – Violation, penalties – Written order – Procedures – Notice of change.
 10.99.070 Liability of peace officers.
 10.99.080 Penalty assessment. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.03.070 Chapter 13.32A RCW entitled “Family Reconciliation Act” – Adoption by reference.
The following RCW section, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:
 13.32A.080 Unlawful harboring of a minor – Penalty – Defense – Prosecution of adult for involving child in commission of offense. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.03.080 RCW Title 16 entitled “Animals and Livestock” – Adoption by reference.
The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:
 16.08.030 Marauding dog – Duty of owner to kill.
 16.08.100 Dangerous dogs – Confiscation – Conditions – Duties of animal control authority – Penalties and affirmative defenses for owners of dogs that attack – Dog fights, penalty.
 16.52.011 Definitions – Principles of liability.
 16.52.015 Enforcement – Law enforcement agencies and animal care and control agencies.
 16.52.080 Transporting or confining in unsafe manner – Penalty.
 16.52.090 Docking horses – Misdemeanor.
 16.52.095 Cutting ears – Misdemeanor.
 16.52.110 Old or diseased animals at large.
 16.52.165 Punishment – Conviction of misdemeanor.
 16.52.190 Poisoning animals – Penalty.
 16.52.193 Poisoning animals – Strychnine sales – Records – Report on suspected purchases.
 16.52.200 Sentences – Forfeiture of animals – Liability for costs – Civil penalty – Education, counseling.
 16.52.207 Animal cruelty in the second degree.
 16.52.300 Dogs or cats used as bait – Seizure – Limitation.
 16.52.305 Unlawful use of hook – Gross misdemeanor.
 16.52.310 Dog breeding – Limit on the number of dogs – Required conditions – Penalty – Limitation of section – Definitions. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.03.081 Chapter 19.60 RCW entitled “Pawnbrokers and Secondhand Dealers” – Adoption by reference.
The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:
 19.60.066 Prohibited acts – Penalty
 19.60.067 Secondhand precious metal dealers – Prohibited acts – Penalty [Ord. 573 § 3, 2013.]

9.03.085 Chapter 19.290 RCW entitled “Metal Property” – Adoption by reference.
The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:
 19.290.070 Violations – Penalty
 19.290.100 Scrap metal license – Penalties [Ord. 573 § 4, 2013.]

9.03.090 RCW Title 26 entitled “Domestic Relations” – Adoption by reference.
The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:
 26.09.300 Restraining orders – Notice – Refusal to comply – Arrest – Penalty – Defense – Peace officers, immunity.
 26.10.220 Restraining orders – Notice – Refusal to comply – Arrest – Penalty – Defense – Peace officers, immunity.
 26.26.138 Restraining order – Knowing violation – Penalty – Law enforcement immunity.
 26.28.080 Selling or giving tobacco to minor – Belief of representative capacity, no defense – Penalty.
 26.28.085 Applying tattoo to a minor – Penalty.
 26.44.020 Definitions.
 26.44.030 Reports – Duty and authority to make – Duty of receiving agency – Duty to notify – Case planning and consultation – Penalty for unauthorized exchange of information – Filing dependency petitions – Interviews of children – Records – Risk assessment process – Reports to legislature.
 26.44.040 Reports – Oral, written – Contents.
 26.44.060 Immunity from civil or criminal liability – Confidential communications not violated – Actions against state not affected – False report, penalty.
 26.44.063 Temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction – Enforcement – Notice of modification or termination of restraining order.
 26.44.067 Temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction – Contents – Notice – Noncompliance – Defense – Penalty.
 26.44.080 Violation – Penalty.
 26.44.150 Temporary restraining order restricting visitation for persons accused of sexually or physically abusing a child – Penalty for violating court order.
 26.50.010 Definitions.
 26.50.110 Violation of order – Penalties.
 26.50.140 Peace officers – Immunity.
 26.52.010 Definitions.
 26.52.050 Peace officer immunity.
 26.52.070 Violation of foreign orders – Penalties. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.03.100 Chapter 28A.635 RCW entitled “Offenses Relating to School Property and Personnel” – Adoption by reference.
The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:
 28A.635.020 Willfully disobeying school administrative personnel or refusing to leave public property, violations, when – Penalty.
 28A.635.030 Disturbing school, school activities or meetings – Penalty.
 28A.635.090 Interference by force or violence – Penalty.
 28A.635.100 Intimidating any administrator, teacher, classified employee, or student by threat of force or violence unlawful.
 28A.635.110 Violations under RCW 28A.635.090 and 28A.635.100 – Disciplinary authority exception. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.03.110 Chapter 46.80 RCW entitled “Vehicle Wreckers” – Adoption by reference.
The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:
 46.80.010 Definitions.
 46.80.080 Records – Penalty. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.03.120 RCW Title 66 entitled “Alcoholic Beverage Control” – Adoption by reference.
The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:
 66.04.010 Definitions.
 66.20.200 Unlawful acts relating to card of identification and certification card – Penalties.
 66.20.340 Alcohol servers – Violation of rules – Penalties.
 66.24.481 Public place or club – License or permit required – Penalty.
 66.28.200 Keg registration – Special endorsement for grocery store licensee – Requirements of seller.
 66.28.210 Keg registration – Requirements of purchaser.
 66.28.220 Keg registration – Identification of containers – Rules – Fees – Sale in violation of rules unlawful.
 66.28.230 Keg registration – Furnishing to minors – Penalties.
 66.44.010 Local officers to enforce law – Authority of board – Liquor enforcement officers.
 66.44.040 Sufficiency of description of offenses in complaints, information, process, etc.
 66.44.060 Proof of unlawful sale establishes prima facie intent.
 66.44.070 Certified analysis is prima facie evidence of alcoholic content.
 66.44.080 Service of process on corporation.
 66.44.090 Acting without license.
 66.44.100 Opening or consuming liquor in a public place – Penalty.
 66.44.120 Unlawful use of seal.
 66.44.130 Sales of liquor by drink or bottle.
 66.44.140 Unlawful sale, transportation of spirituous liquor without stamp or seal – Unlawful operation, possession of still or mash.
 66.44.150 Buying liquor illegally.
 66.44.160 Illegal possession, transportation of alcoholic beverages.
 66.44.170 Illegal possession of liquor with intent to sell – Prima facie evidence, what is.
 66.44.175 Violations of law.
 66.44.180 General penalties – Jurisdiction for violations.
 66.44.200 Sales to persons apparently under the influence of liquor – Purchases or consumption by persons apparently under the influence of liquor on licensed premises – Penalty – Notice – Separation of actions.
 66.44.210 Obtaining liquor for ineligible person.
 66.44.240 Drinking in public conveyance – Penalty against carrier – Exception.
 66.44.250 Drinking in public conveyance – Penalty against individual – Restricted application.
 66.44.270 Furnishing liquor to minors – Possession, use – Exhibition of effects – Exceptions.
 66.44.280 Minor applying for permit.
 66.44.290 Minor purchasing or attempting to purchase liquor.
 66.44.300 Treats, gifts, purchases of liquor for or from minor, or holding out minor as at least 21, in public place where liquor sold.
 66.44.310 Minors frequenting off-limits area – Misrepresentation of age – Penalty – Classification of licensees.
 66.44.316 Certain persons 18 years and over permitted to enter and remain upon licensed premises during employment.
 66.44.318 Employees aged 18 to 21 stocking, merchandising, and handling beer and wine.
 66.44.325 Unlawful transfer to a minor of an identification of age.
 66.44.328 Preparation or acquisition and supply to persons under age 21 of facsimile of official identification card – Penalty.
 66.44.340 Employees 18 years and over allowed to sell and handle beer and wine for certain licensed employers.
 66.44.350 Employees 18 years and over allowed to serve and carry liquor, clean up, etc., for certain licensed employers.
 66.44.370 Resisting or opposing officers in enforcement of title. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.03.130 RCW Title 69 entitled “Food, Drugs, Cosmetics, and Poisons” – Adoption by reference.
The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:
 69.41.010 Definitions.
 69.41.030 Sale, delivery, or possession of legend drug without prescription or order prohibited – Exceptions.
 69.41.050 Labeling requirements.
 69.41.300 Definitions.
 69.41.320 Practitioners – Restricted use – Medical records.
 69.41.350 Penalties.
 69.43.010 Report to state board of pharmacy – List of substances – Modification of list – Identification of purchasers – Report of transactions – Penalties.
 69.43.110 Ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine – Sales restrictions – Penalty.
 69.43.120 Ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine – Possession of more than 15 grams – Penalty – Exceptions.
 69.43.130 Exemptions – Pediatric products – Products exempted by the state board of pharmacy.
 69.50.101 Definitions.
 69.50.102 Drug paraphernalia – Definitions.
 69.50.202 Nomenclature.
 69.50.4013 Possession of controlled substance – Penalty – Possession of useable marijuana or marijuana infused products.
 69.50.4014 Possession of 40 grams or less of marijuana – Penalty.
 69.50.4016 Provisions not applicable to offenses under RCW 69.50.410.
 69.50.404 Penalties under other laws.
 69.50.407 Conspiracy.
 69.50.412 Prohibited acts: E – Penalties.
 69.50.4121 Drug paraphernalia – Selling or giving – Penalty.
 69.50.425 Misdemeanor violations – Minimum imprisonment.
 69.51A.010 Definitions.
 69.51A.030 Physicians excepted from state’s criminal laws.
 69.51A.040 Failure to seize marijuana, qualifying patients’ affirmative defense.
 69.51A.060 Crimes – Limitations of chapter.
 69.51A.080 Adoption of rules by the department of health – Sixty-day supply for qualifying patients. [Ord. 573 § 5, 2013; Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.03.140 RCW Title 70 entitled “Public Health and Safety” – Adoption by reference.
The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:
 70.74.010 Definitions.
 70.74.160 Unlawful access to explosives.
 70.74.295 Abandonment of explosives.
 70.74.300 Explosive containers to be marked – Penalty.
 70.74.310 Gas bombs, explosives, stink bombs, etc.
 70.74.400 Seizure and forfeiture.
 70.155.010 Definitions.
 70.155.080 Purchasing, possessing, or obtaining tobacco by persons under the age of 18 – Civil infraction – Courts of jurisdiction.
 70.155.105 Delivery sale of cigarettes – Requirements, unlawful practices – Penalties – Enforcement. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.03.150 Chapter 74.34 RCW entitled “Abuse of Vulnerable Adults” – Adoption by reference.
The following RCW sections, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:
 74.34.020 Definitions.
 74.34.021 Vulnerable adult – Definition.
 74.34.053 Failure to report – False reports – Penalties.
 74.34.145 Protection of vulnerable adults – Notice of criminal penalties for violation – Enforcement under RCW 26.50.110. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

Chapter 9.04 AGGRESSIVE BEGGING*

Sections:
9.04.010     Aggressive begging.
9.04.020     Definitions.
9.04.025     Restrictive areas.
9.04.030     Violation.
* Prior legislation note: Ord. 526 repealed provisions concerning aggressive begging that were formerly in Chapter 9.12, based on the provisions of Ord. 106.

9.04.010 Aggressive begging.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in aggressive begging in any public place in the City, as those terms are defined by this chapter. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.04.020 Definitions.
“Aggressive begging” means: (1) begging with intent to intimidate another person into giving money or goods by any means including repeated requests for money while approaching or following the person from whom funds are being requested; (2) continuing to solicit from a person or continuing to engage that person after the person has given a negative response to such soliciting; (3) soliciting from anyone who is waiting in line; (4) following a person with intent to solicit money or other things of value; (5) begging with use of false, misleading information, where the person knew or reasonably should have known of the falsity or misleading nature of the information; (6) begging with or involving activities that are unsafe or dangerous to any person or property; (7) begging in a manner that exploits children; or (8) willfully providing or delivering, or attempting to provide or deliver unrequested or unsolicited services or products with a demand or exertion of pressure for payment in return.
“Automated teller machine” means a machine, other than a telephone: (1) that is capable of being operated by a customer of a financial institution; (2) by which the customer may communicate with the financial institution a request to withdraw, deposit, transfer funds, make payment, or otherwise conduct financial business for the customer or for another person directly from the customer’s account or from the customer’s account under a line of credit previously authorized by the financial institution for the customer; and (3) the use of which may or may not involve personnel of a financial institution.
“Begging” means asking for money or goods as a charity, whether by words, bodily gestures, signs or other means.
“Exploit” means using in an unethical, selfish or abusive manner or in any other manner that seeks an unfair advantage.
“Financial institution” means any banking corporation, credit union, foreign exchange office. For purposes of this section, it shall also include any check cashing business.
Intimidate. To “intimidate” means to coerce or frighten into submission or obedience or to engage in conduct which would make a reasonable person fearful or feel compelled.
“Major/principal arterial intersections” means the intersections of the principal arterials identified in LMC 12.09.022.
“On and off ramps” refers to the areas commonly used to enter and exit public highways from any City roadway or overpass.
“Public place” means: (1) any public road, alley, lane, parking area, sidewalk, or other publicly owned building, facility or structure; (2) any public playground, school ground, recreation ground, park, parkway, park drive, park path or rights-of-way open to the use of the public; or (3) any privately owned property adapted to and fitted for vehicular or pedestrian travel that is in common use by the public with the consent, expressed or implied, of the owner or owners.
“Public transportation facility” means a facility or designated location that is owned, operated, or maintained by a city, county, county transportation authority, public transportation benefit area, regional transit authority, or metropolitan municipal corporation within the state for the purpose of facilitating bus and other public transportation.
“Public transportation vehicle” means any vehicle that is owned by a city, county, county transportation authority, public transportation benefit area, regional transit authority, or metropolitan municipal corporation within the state for the purpose of facilitating bus and other public transportation. [Ord. 532 § 1, 2011; Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.04.025 Restrictive areas.
Begging shall be deemed a violation of this section under the following conditions: (A) within 25 feet of an ATM machine or financial institution; (B) within 15 feet of any (1) occupied handicapped parking space, or (2) bus stop, train station or in any public parking lot or structure or walkway dedicated to such parking lot or structure; (C) before sunrise or after sunset at any public transportation facility or on any public transportation vehicle or (D) while a person is under the influence of alcohol or controlled substances. [Ord. 669 § 2, 2017; Ord. 532 § 1, 2011. Formerly 9.04.020A.]

9.04.030 Violation.
Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine up to $1,000 or by a jail sentence of up to 90 days, or by both such fine and jail time. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

Chapter 9.05 CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS*

Sections:
9.05.010     Definitions.
9.05.020     Exemptions.
9.05.030     Registration required.
9.05.040     Fees.
9.05.050     Unlawful solicitations.
9.05.060     Identification.
9.05.070     Misrepresentation prohibited.
* Prior legislation note: Ord. 526 repealed provisions concerning charitable solicitations that were formerly in Chapter 9.18, based on the provisions of Ord. 41.

9.05.010 Definitions.
When used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall apply:
“Charitable organization” means any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, eleemosynary, religious, education, social, recreation or fraternal organization or any other person having or purporting to have a charitable nature and which solicits or solicits and collects contributions for any charitable purpose. The word “charitable” includes “religious” and shall otherwise have its common law meaning unless the context in which it is used clearly requires a narrower or broader meaning.
“Contribution” means the donation, promise or grant, for consideration or otherwise, of any money or property of any kind or value, which contribution is wholly or partly induced by solicitation.
“Direct solicitation” means solicitation in which an individual making a solicitation is in the immediate physical presence of any individual being solicited.
“Solicitation” means any oral or written request for a contribution, including the solicitor’s offer or attempt to sell any property, rights, services, or other thing in connection with which:
    1. Any appeal is made for any charitable purpose; or
    2. The name of any charitable organization or purpose is used as an inducement for consummating the sale; or
    3. Any statement is made which implies that the whole or any part of the proceeds from the sale will be applied toward any charitable purpose or donated to any charitable organization. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.05.020 Exemptions.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in other sections of this chapter, this chapter shall not apply to the following:
A. Any organizations which are organized and operated principally for charitable purposes, other than the raising of funds, when the solicitation of contributions is confined to the bona fide membership of the organization and when the solicitation is managed and conducted solely by officers and members of such organizations who are unpaid for such services. The term “membership” shall not include those persons who are granted membership upon making a contribution as a result of solicitation;
B. Any solicitation conducted exclusively within any premises owned, leased, rented, or otherwise under the lawful control of the person or organization making the solicitation. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.05.030 Registration required.
A. A charitable organization shall register with the Finance Department at least 10 days prior to conducting any solicitation in the City. Such registrations shall be valid for a period of 90 days. Registration shall be on forms prescribed and provided by the Finance Department and shall require the following information:
    1. The name, address, and telephone number of the charitable organization intending to solicit; the individual supervising the solicitation; and the individual completing the registration form;
    2. The general statement of the purpose of the solicitation;
    3. The dates and times of the solicitation.
B. This section shall not apply to solicitations made exclusively by radio, television, publication in a newspaper or magazine of general circulation, or delivery by means of the United States mail. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.05.040 Fees.
Before a certification of registration shall be issued under this chapter, the following fees shall be paid to the Finance Department: the sum of $10.00 as a permit fee, and $0.25 for each facsimile copy. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.05.050 Unlawful solicitations.
A. It is unlawful to solicit without complying with the registration requirements hereof, unless specifically exempt as provided herein.
B. It is unlawful to solicit in public streets or alleys which are open to vehicular traffic or to make a solicitation of any person who is in or upon said public streets or alleys. It is also unlawful to make a solicitation within 10 feet of any marked pedestrian crosswalk, within 10 feet of any entrance or exit of any building then in use by the general public, or from the area of any sidewalk within 10 feet of its intersection with an alley or publicly used driveway.
C. It is unlawful to solicit within any office, theater, store, factory, or other premises where business is conducted or services are rendered without the prior approval of the person or persons in charge of the premises.
D. It is unlawful to continue with any direct solicitation of any individual after the individual being solicited has indicated, by words or action, that he has no desire to make a contribution.
E. It is unlawful to solicit on public property or in the residential area of the City between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.05.060 Identification.
A. Any person making a solicitation shall clearly identify to any person being solicited the name of the charitable organization sponsoring the solicitation and the purpose of the solicitation.
B. Any person making a solicitation shall provide personal identification of himself or herself upon demand by any lawful enforcement officer, and, upon demand, provide and exhibit a solicitor’s permit, to be issued by the Finance Department as provided in LMC 9.05.030. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.05.070 Misrepresentation prohibited.
A. No person shall for the purpose of soliciting contributions from persons in this City, use the name of any other person, except that of an officer, director or trustee of the charitable organization by or for which the contributions are solicited, without the written consent of such other persons.
B. A person shall be deemed to have used the name of another person for the purpose of soliciting contributions if such latter person’s name is listed on any stationery, advertisement, brochure or correspondence in or by which a contribution is solicited by or on behalf of a charitable organization or his name is listed or referred to in connection with a request for a contribution as one who has contributed to, sponsored or endorsed the charitable organization or its activities.
C. No person or organization for the purpose of soliciting contributions from persons in the City shall falsely represent that the contributions are for a charitable purpose. For the purpose of this section, revocation or loss of a 501(C)(3) tax exempt determination of an organization by the Internal Revenue Service shall be prima facie evidence that the solicitation or contribution is not for a charitable purpose.
D. A violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

Chapter 9.06 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES*

Sections:
9.06.010     Loitering with the intent of engaging in drug-related activity.
9.06.020     Designation of anti-drug emphasis areas.
9.06.030     Violation of conditions of release, suspension or deferral as separate crime.
9.06.040     Places of illegal drug activity declared public nuisances.
9.06.050     Evidence of use for illegal drug purposes.
9.06.060     Conviction as prima facie evidence.
9.06.070     Penalties for maintenance of public nuisance.
9.06.080     Violation – Penalty.
* Prior legislation note: Ord. 526 repealed provisions concerning controlled substances that were formerly in Chapter 9.22, based on the provisions of Ords. 41, 170 and 174.

9.06.010 Loitering with the intent of engaging in drug-related activity.
A. It is unlawful for any person to loiter in or near any thoroughfare, place open to the public, or near any public or private place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the intent to engage in drug-related activity contrary to any of the provisions of Chapter 69.41, 69.50, or 69.52 RCW.
B. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such intent is manifested are the following:
    1. Such person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller. For purposes of this chapter, a “known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller” is a person who has been convicted in any court within this state of any violation involving the use, possession, or sale of any of the substances referred to in Chapters 69.41, 69.50, and 69.52 RCW, or substantially similar laws of any political subdivision of this state or of any other state; or who is known to have been arrested for a drug-related violation not resulting in a conviction because the person participated in a diversionary program, deferral program, Drug Court or a similar program; or a person who displays physical characteristics of drug intoxication or usage, such as “needle tracks”; or who possesses marijuana in a manner not authorized by RCW 69.50.4013(1), 69.50.4013(2) and/or in amounts that exceed those set forth in RCW 69.50.360(3);
    2. Such person is currently subject to an order from any court prohibiting his/her presence in a high drug activity geographic area;
    3. Such person behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable suspicion that he or she is about to engage in or is then engaged in an unlawful drug-related activity, including by way of example only, such person acting as a “lookout”;
    4. Such person is physically identified by the officer, based on articulable factors, as a member of a “gang,” or association which has as its purpose illegal drug activity. Factors that support an officer physically identifying a person as a member of such a gang or association include, but are not limited to clothing, tattoos, known association and/or affiliation with such gang or association, specific and observed acts or circumstances consistent with drug-related activity, and gestures, signs, greetings and movements that are consistent with gang-related activity; provided, that clothing alone shall not be sufficient, without more, to support an officer physically identifying a person as a member of such a gang or association;
    5. Such person transfers small objects or packages for currency in a furtive fashion;
    6. Such person takes flight upon the appearance of a police officer;
    7. Such person manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any object which reasonably could be involved in an unlawful drug-related activity;
    8. The area involved is by public repute known to be an area of unlawful drug use and trafficking;
    9. The premises involved are known to have been reported to law enforcement as a place suspected of drug activity pursuant to Chapter 69.52 RCW;
    10. Any vehicle involved is registered to a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller, or a person for whom there is an outstanding warrant for a crime involving drug-related activity. [Ord. 573 § 6, 2013; Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.06.020 Designation of anti-drug emphasis areas.
A. Certain areas of the City shall be designated as and identified to be anti-drug emphasis areas based on the repeat incidents of illegal drug activities occurring therein, and enhanced penalties shall be applied in event of conviction of unlawful drug-related acts or loitering for drug purposes, within the said areas. The areas to be so designated shall be identified by the City Council in an ordinance or resolution passed after consultation with the City Manager, City Attorney and the chief law enforcement officer of the City, and the list identifying such areas shall be kept on file in the Office of the City Clerk. Additional areas may also be identified by the Judge of the Municipal or District Court hearing drug-related cases arising from within the City. If a defendant is convicted of a drug-related case occurring from within an area designated as an anti-drug emphasis area, a condition or term of sentence, deferral, or suspension, shall be that such defendant shall stay out of all areas of the City designated as an anti-drug emphasis area, unless there are significant and substantial extenuating circumstances in the defendant’s particular case justifying avoidance of the requirement for such condition or term of sentence, deferral, or suspension. In such case, the significant and substantial extenuating circumstances shall be identified and recited in the record of the case.
B. The following areas are hereby designated as and identified to be anti-drug emphasis areas:
    1. Area A – South Tacoma Way/Pacific Highway Southwest Business District. Starting at the northern edge of 80th Street Southwest and extending 300 feet to the east and 300 feet to the west of the centerline of South Tacoma Way and following South Tacoma Way to Pacific Highway Southeast then south on Pacific Highway Southwest 300 feet to the west of the center of Pacific Highway Southwest and to the perimeter fence for the southbound lanes of Interstate 5 to the east and extending to the southeastern corner of the intersection of Gravelly Lake Drive Southwest and Pacific Highway Southwest.
    2. Area B – Tillicum Area. Starting at the place where American Lake and Washington State National Guard Camp Murray (State Military Encampment Grounds as filed with Pierce County Auditor on 21 June 1921) intersect then northeasterly along shore of American Lake to place where northwestern border of Harry Todd County Park and American Lake intersect then northeasterly along the northern border of Harry Todd County Park to the place where North Thorne Lane Southwest and Harry Todd County Park intersect then 300 feet northeasterly of the center of North Thorne Lane Southwest and proceeding southeasterly along said 300 foot buffer along North Thorne Lane Southwest to the place where the perimeter fence of southbound Interstate 5 intersect and then proceeding in a southwesterly direction along the perimeter fence of the southbound lanes of Interstate 5 to the place where southwestern point of the perimeter fence of the southbound lanes of Interstate 5 and southeastern boundary of Washington State National Guards Camp Murray intersect (also known as the westerly right-of-way of Berkeley Street SW) then northwesterly along said right-of-way of Berkeley Street SW to the south line of the north half of Section 21, Township 19N, range 2E, WM then west along said south line a distance of 685 feet more or less to the southeasterly right-of-way line of Washington Ave. SW being on the boundary of Washington State National Guard Camp Murray then northeasterly on said right-of-way of Washington Ave. SW to the southwesterly right-of-way of Boundary St SW according to the Plat of “American Lake Addition” to Pierce County as file with the Pierce County Auditor on Oct 2, 1908 then northwesterly along said southwesterly right-of-way of Boundary St SW to southeasterly right-of-way line of Military Ave. SW then southwesterly along said southeasterly right-of-way of Military Ave. SW to the southwesterly right-of-way line of Stanley St SW also being the turning point on the Washington State National Guard Camp Murray boundary then northwesterly along said southwesterly right-of-way line of Stanley St SW to the northwesterly right-of-way line of Woodlawn Ave. SW said point being a turning point on the Washington State National Guard Camp Murray boundary then southwesterly on a bearing of 49 degrees 38’ 30" west 150 feet more of less being an extension of said northwesterly right-of-way line of Woodlawn Ave. SW to a turning point on the Washington State National Guard Camp Murray boundary then northwesterly on a bearing of 40 degrees 04’ 35" west along the northeasterly boundary of Washington State National Guard Camp Murray to place where northeasterly boundary of Washington State National Guard Camp Murray and American Lake intersect.
    3. Area C – Bridgeport Way Southwest Area. Starting at the northern edge of the intersection of Gravelly Lake Drive Southwest and Bridgeport Way Southwest and then extending 300 feet to the east and 300 to the west of the center of Bridgeport Way Southwest from Gravelly Lake Drive Southwest to the western edge of the Southbound Interstate 5.
    4. Area D – Lakeview Area. Starting at the northern edge of 100th Street Southwest starting at the northwest corner of the intersection of Bridgeport Way Southwest and 100th Street Southwest and proceeding south to Pacific Highway Southwest and then northeasterly to the intersection of Pacific Highway Southwest and the Burlington Northern Railroad tracks and then north on the western edge of the Burlington Northern railroad tracks to the intersection of the Burlington Northern Railroad tracks and 100th Street Southwest and then westerly along the northern edge of 100th Street Southwest to the northwest corner of 100th Street Southwest and Bridgeport Way Southwest.
    5. Area E – McChord Gate Area. Starting at the southern intersection of New York Street Southwest and the perimeter fence of the northbound lanes of Interstate 5 and then proceeding along the north side of the McChord Air Force Base fence to the Burlington Northern railroad track and then northerly along the western edge of the Burlington Northern railroad track to a point where the railroad track intersect with the perimeter fence of the northbound lanes of Interstate 5 and then southwesterly to the southern intersection of New York Street Southwest and the Perimeter fence.
    6. Area F – Woodbrook Area. Starting at the northwest corner of the intersection on North Thorne Lane and the southern boundary of McChord Air Force Base and then extending south along the western edge of 80th Avenue Southwest (Murray Road) to the southwestern point where 80th Avenue Southwest (Murray Road) and the Fort Lewis Logistics Center intersect and then east along the northern boundary of the Fort Lewis Logistics Center parallel to 150th Street Southwest to the place where McChord Air Force Base and Ft. Lewis Army base intersect and then north along the eastern boundary of McChord Air Force Base parallel to Woodbrook Drive Southwest and then west along the southern boundary of McChord Air Force Base Housing to the intersection of McChord Air Force Base and North Thorne Lane Southwest.
[Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.06.030 Violation of conditions of release, suspension or deferral as separate crime.
The presence of any person within an anti-drug emphasis area in violation of court-imposed conditions of release or conditions of suspension or deferral of any sentence shall constitute a separate crime hereby designated a gross misdemeanor and any such person may be apprehended and arrested without the necessity for any warrant or additional court order. Upon conviction, any person so violating the conditions of release or conditions of suspension or deferral shall be punished by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than one year, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than $5,000, or by both such imprisonment and fine. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.06.040 Places of illegal drug activity declared public nuisances.
Any building, structure or place within the City used for drug-related activity or for loitering with the intent of engaging in drug-related activity as defined in this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.06.050 Evidence of use for illegal drug purposes.
A. Two or more criminal convictions of persons for drug-related offenses in a building, structure or place, within the one-year period preceding the commencement of an action under this chapter, shall give rise to a rebuttable presumption that the building, structure or place has been used for illegal drug purposes and is a public nuisance. In any action under this chapter, evidence of the common fame and general reputation of the building or place, of the inmates or occupants thereof, or of those resorting thereto, shall be admissible as evidence to prove the existence of the public nuisance but must be supported by additional evidence. Evidence of the general reputation of the building or place, or of the inmates or occupants thereof that is sufficient to establish the existence of the public nuisance, shall be prima facie evidence of knowledge thereof and acquiescence and participation therein and responsibility for the nuisance by persons or legal entities having an interest in the property. Responsibility for the nuisance shall extend to the owners, lessors, lessees and all those in interest in any form in the property, real or personal, used in conducting or maintaining the public nuisance.
B. Evidence of cooperation by owners, agents or managers of a building or place with police investigations or operations to control drug-related activity may be used to rebut the presumptions created in this chapter. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.06.060 Conviction as prima facie evidence.
Any conviction of any owner, manager, operator, agent or employee for any illegal drug activity, or for loitering with the intent of engaging in drug-related activity, when such offense was related to any business or commercial enterprise, shall be prima facie evidence that the building, structure or place upon or in which business or commercial enterprise is or was conducted, was used for illegal drug activities. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.06.070 Penalties for maintenance of public nuisance.
Maintenance of a public nuisance as declared herein, in addition to any other civil or criminal penalties, shall result in a civil penalty not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000 for a first conviction of maintaining a public nuisance and by abatement by closure of such business or commercial enterprise for the period of 30 days for each subsequent conviction of maintaining a public nuisance. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.06.080 Violation – Penalty.
Unless otherwise specifically provided otherwise, any person who violates the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a gross misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be imprisoned in jail for a period of up to one year or fined an amount of not more than $5,000 or both such jail time and fine. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

Chapter 9.07 POLICE DOGS*

Sections:
9.07.010     Definitions.
9.07.020     Interference with and abuse of police dogs prohibited.
9.07.030     Reimbursement of costs to City.
9.07.040     Exemptions from Animal Control Code.
9.07.050     Violation – Misdemeanor.
* Prior legislation note: Ord. 526 repealed provisions concerning police dogs that were formerly in Chapter 9.75, based on the provisions of Ord. 445.

9.07.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter clearly requires otherwise, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings:
“Dog handler” means a law enforcement officer who has successfully completed training as prescribed by the Washington State Criminal Justice Training Commission in police dog handling.
“Police dog” means a dog used by a law enforcement officer in discharging any legal duty or power of his or her office including accelerant detection. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.07.020 Interference with and abuse of police dogs prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Willfully or maliciously assault, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, disable, shoot, poison, or in any other way abuse any other police dog, as defined in RCW 4.24.410, owned or being used by the Police Department in the performance of its official duties; or
B. Willfully hinder, delay, or obstruct any animal used by a law enforcement officer in discharging or attempting to discharge his official duties; or
C. Willfully or maliciously harass a police dog while the dog is confined in its quarters, an automobile, kennel, fenced area, training area, or while it is under the control of a dog handler; or
D. Willfully or maliciously interfere with a police dog while said police dog or dog handler is engaged in lawful police activities. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.07.030 Reimbursement of costs to City.
Any person who permanently disables a police dog as a result of any unlawful act set forth in LMC 9.07.020 shall be liable for the value of the police dog at the time the incident occurred which shall include the cost to the City to replace the dog, including but not limited to purchase, training, care, feeding, and any veterinary costs related to the injury or death of the dog. If the police dog is not permanently disabled but sustains an injury as a result of any unlawful act set forth in LMC 9.07.020, the responsible person shall pay, at a minimum, the costs of veterinary care required to return the canine to duty. All costs assessed under this section shall be paid to the general fund of the City of Lakewood. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.07.040 Exemptions from Animal Control Code.
All police dogs and all dogs being trained as police dogs shall be exempt from all provisions of the Lakewood Municipal Code pertaining to animal control. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.07.050 Violation – Misdemeanor.
Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

Chapter 9.08 PUBLIC DISTURBANCE*

Sections:
9.08.010     Disorderly conduct.
9.08.020     Causing unnecessary emergency response.
9.08.030     Violating privacy.
* Prior legislation note: Ord. 526 repealed provisions concerning public disturbances that were formerly in Chapter 9.78, based on the provisions of Ords. 41 and 180.

9.08.010 Disorderly conduct.
A. A person is guilty of disorderly conduct if he or she:
    1. Fights or encourages others to fight in any public place within the City;
    2. Willfully annoys, molests, bothers, insults, offers an affront to another person and thereby intentionally creates the risk of assault;
    3. Intentionally obstructs vehicular or pedestrian travel or traffic without lawful authority;
    4. Intentionally disrupts any lawful assembly or meeting of persons without lawful authority; or
    5. Urinates or defecates in any place open to the public view.
B. Disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.08.020 Causing unnecessary emergency response.
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally and maliciously engage in any activity or take any action which causes or is likely to cause the needless or unnecessary expenditure of emergency response resources of the City or of any public or private emergency response organization. A violation of this section shall constitute and be punishable as a misdemeanor. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.08.030 Violating privacy.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain in or upon the curtilage of a building or premises of another for the purposes of observing, photographing, video taping or filming another person, other than a family or household member, under circumstances where the other person has a reasonable expectation of privacy. For the purposes hereof, “curtilage” shall mean any premises located within 10 feet of the exterior wall of any building, regardless of whether the premises are enclosed.
B. Violation of this section shall be a gross misdemeanor punishable by a jail sentence of up to 365 days and/or a fine of up to $5,000. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

Chapter 9.09 PUBLIC INDECENCY, PROSTITUTION, SEX CRIMES*

Sections:
9.09.010     Body studios prohibited.
9.09.020     Body studios declared a public nuisance.
9.09.030     Designation of anti-prostitution emphasis areas.
9.09.040     Violation of conditions of release, suspension or deferral as separate crime.
9.09.050     Places of prostitution activity declared public nuisances.
9.09.060     Evidence of use for prostitution purposes.
9.09.070     Conviction as prima facie evidence.
9.09.080     Loitering for prostitution purposes.
* Prior legislation note: Ord. 526 repealed provisions concerning public indecency, prostitution and sex crimes that were formerly in Chapter 9.82, based on the provisions of Ords. 41, 82 and 502.

9.09.010 Body studios prohibited.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following respective meanings ascribed to them:
    “Body studio” means any premises upon which is furnished for a fee or charge or other consideration the opportunity to paint, massage, feel, handle or touch the unclothed body or unclothed portion of the body of another person, or to be so painted, massaged, felt, handled or touched by another person, or to observe, view or photograph any such activity, and shall include any such premises which is advertised or represented in any manner whatsoever as a “body painting studio,” “model studio,” “sensitivity awareness studio” or any other expression or characterization which conveys the same or similar meaning and leads to the reasonable belief that there will be furnished on any such premises for a fee or charge or other consideration the opportunity to paint, massage, feel, handle or touch the unclothed body or an unclothed portion of the body of another person, or to be so painted, massaged, felt, handled or touched by another person, or to observe, view or photograph any such activity.
    “Body studio” as defined in this section shall not include massage businesses defined and regulated by Chapter 18.108 RCW, reducing salons or any studio which functions as a part of and under the direct supervision of an institution, the curriculum for which institution is approved by the Office of the State Superintendent of Public Instruction of the state of Washington. “Body studios” shall also not include instances where individuals pay a fee to have decorations painted on their faces, hands or arms, in connection with church, civic or community celebrations and events.
    “Model studio” means any premises where the primary purpose of the business is the furnishing of persons as models for a fee or charge or other consideration for the purpose of sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted in such a manner or under circumstances which constitute lewd conduct consistent with the definition and description of lewd matter and lewdness provided in Chapter 7.48 RCW dealing with moral nuisances.
    “Model studio” as defined in this section shall not include any studio which functions as a part of and under the direct supervision of any institution, the curriculum for which institution is approved by the Office of the State Superintendent of Public Instruction of the state of Washington, or which functions to provide models who are sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted for the purpose of commercial sale or advertising.
B. Unlawful Conduct. 
    1. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate, conduct or maintain a body studio or model studio as defined in subsection A of this section.
    2. It is unlawful for any person, on the premises of a body studio or model studio to paint, massage, feel, handle or touch the unclothed body or an unclothed portion of the body of another person, or to be so painted, massaged, felt, handled or touched by another person, or to observe, view or photograph any such activity or to engage in any such activity for the purpose of being observed, viewed or photographed.
C. Separate Offenses. 
    1. Each day of operating, conducting or maintaining a body studio or a model studio in violation of subsection (B)(1) of this section shall constitute a separate offense.
    2. Each incident of unlawful conduct prohibited by subsection (B)(2) of this section shall constitute a separate offense. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.09.020 Body studios declared a public nuisance.
Any use of property within the City of Lakewood as a body studio or model studio as defined in LMC 9.09.010 is a public nuisance, subject to prevention or abatement by injunction or other appropriate legal remedy in the Superior Court of the state of Washington in and for the County of Pierce. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.09.030 Designation of anti-prostitution emphasis areas.
Certain areas of the City shall be designated as and identified to be anti-prostitution emphasis areas based on the repeat incidents of prostitution activities occurring therein, and enhanced penalties shall be applied in event of conviction of unlawful acts of prostitution, prostitution loitering, permitting prostitution or pandering, or patronizing a prostitute, within the said areas. The areas to be so designated shall be identified by the City Council in a resolution passed after consultation with the City Manager, City Attorney and the chief law enforcement officer of the City, and the list identifying such areas shall be kept on file in the Office of the City Clerk. Additional areas may also be identified by the Judge of the Municipal or District Court hearing prostitution cases arising from within the City. If a defendant is convicted of prostitution or a prostitution related case occurring from within an area designated as an anti-prostitution emphasis area, a condition or term of sentence, deferral, or suspension shall be that such defendant shall stay out of all areas of the City designated as anti-prostitution emphasis areas, unless there are significant and substantial extenuating circumstances in the defendant’s particular case justifying avoidance of the requirement for such condition or term of sentence, deferral, or suspension. In such case, the significant and substantial extenuating circumstances shall be identified and recited in the record of the case. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.09.040 Violation of conditions of release, suspension or deferral as separate crime.
The presence of any person within an anti-prostitution emphasis area in violation of court-imposed conditions of release or conditions of suspension or deferral of any sentence shall constitute a separate crime hereby designated a gross misdemeanor and any such person may be apprehended and arrested without the necessity for any warrant or additional court order. Upon conviction, any person so violating the conditions of release or conditions of suspension or deferral shall be punished by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than one year, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than $5,000, or by both such imprisonment and fine. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.09.050 Places of prostitution activity declared public nuisances.
Any building, structure or place within the City used for the purpose of prostitution or pandering as defined in this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.09.060 Evidence of use for prostitution purposes.
A. Two or more criminal convictions of persons for acts of prostitution in a building, structure or place, within the one-year period preceding the commencement of an action under this chapter shall give rise to a rebuttable presumption that the building, structure or place has been used for the purposes of prostitution and is a public nuisance. In any action under this chapter, evidence of the common fame and general reputation of the building or place, of the inmates or occupants thereof, or of those resorting thereto, shall be admissible as evidence to prove the existence of the public nuisance but must be supported by additional evidence. Evidence of the general reputation of the building or place, or of the inmates or occupants thereof that is sufficient to establish the existence of the public nuisance, shall be prima facie evidence of knowledge thereof and acquiescence and participation therein and responsibility for the nuisance by persons or legal entities having an interest in the property. Responsibility for the nuisance shall extend to the owners, lessors, lessees and all those in interest in any form in the property, real or personal, used in conducting or maintaining the public nuisance.
B. Evidence of cooperation by owners, agents or managers of a building or place with police investigations or operations to control prostitution may be used to rebut the presumptions created in this chapter. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.09.070 Conviction as prima facie evidence.
Any conviction of any owner, manager, operator, agent or employee for promoting prostitution, for prostitution or pandering, for prostitution loitering, or for permitting prostitution, when such offense was related to any business or commercial enterprise, shall be prima facie evidence that the building, structure or place upon or in which business or commercial enterprise is or was conducted, was used for prostitution. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.09.080 Loitering for prostitution purposes.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in or near any thoroughfare or place open to the public in any manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of committing, or inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to permit an act of prostitution. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such purpose is manifest shall be that the person is a known prostitute or panderer, repeatedly beckons to, stops or attempts to stop, or engages passers-by in conversation, or repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicle operators by hailing, waving of arms or any other bodily gesture.
B. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to attempt to detect or identify a police officer, peace officer, or other law enforcement officer, during an investigation into prostitution or loitering for the purposes of prostitution, by any of the following means:
    1. By exposing or offering to expose one’s breast or breasts, buttocks, sexual organs or private body parts.
    2. By requesting, asking or encouraging another to touch or fondle one’s breast or breasts, buttocks, sexual organs or private body parts.
    3. By touching or requesting to touch the breast, breasts, buttocks, sexual organs or private body parts of another.
    4. By requesting, asking or encouraging another to expose or show the other’s breasts, buttocks, sexual organs or private body parts.
C. There is a rebuttable presumption of a violation of the provisions of this chapter where any person inquires, in any manner, as to whether another person is a peace officer, police officer or other law enforcement officer when such inquiry occurs in the course of a police investigation of potential violations of the provisions of this chapter.
D. For the purposes of this section, a “known prostitute or panderer” is a person who, within three years previous to the date of arrest for violation of this section, has within the knowledge of the arresting officer been convicted of violating any ordinance or law of any jurisdiction within the state of Washington defining and punishing acts of soliciting, committing, or offering or agreeing to commit prostitution.
Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a jail sentence of up to 90 days, or a fine of up to $1,000, or both such jail time and fine. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

Chapter 9.10 TRESPASSING ON SCHOOL PROPERTY*

Sections:
9.10.010     Designated.
9.10.020     Definitions.
9.10.030     Lawful purpose or authorization.
9.10.040     Posting of notices.
9.10.050     Recreational area excepted.
9.10.060     Statutory authority.
* Prior legislation note: Ord. 526 repealed provisions concerning trespassing on school property that were formerly in Chapter 9.94, based on the provisions of Ord. 41.

9.10.010 Designated.
A person shall be guilty of the crime of trespassing on school property if said person is on school property located within the City, where said property is posted as per LMC 9.10.040 without lawful purpose or authorization as defined in LMC 9.10.030. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.10.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the words set out in this section shall have the following meanings:
“Actual attendance at an event” means inside the school-owned area for which admittance fees are required, or if attendance fees are not required, that area inside which a fee would have been required had the school district or administration determined to charge for admittance.
“Authorized individual” means any administrator or employee of the school, or other person delegated with the responsibility of supervision for school property.
“Recreational area” means those areas established by the Clover Park School District, and by the administration of any other school located within the City, for use during nonschool hours for recreational activities, including, but not limited to, basketball, tennis, baseball, football and soccer.
“School property” means that property which is owned by the Clover Park School District or any other school located within the City.
“Student” means a person of school age who is duly enrolled in a school in the Clover Park School District, and who is not currently under suspension from attendance at classes of said school and/or district. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.10.030 Lawful purpose or authorization.
“Lawful purpose or authorization” shall be defined as follows:
A. Those persons who are on school property for the purpose of conducting lawful business.
B. A student assigned to the school at which he or she is found within one-half hour before and one-half hour after the beginning or the conclusion of official school hours as set by the school district or administration.
C. If said student is engaged in athletic or other extracurricular events sponsored by the school, then said student shall have 60 minutes after the close of such event to leave the premises.
D. If a nonstudent, other than the parent of a student, is on the premises for the purpose of delivering a student or picking up a student from school or from an event as described in subsection C of this section, said nonstudent, must have the permission of the parent or guardian of said student to pick up said student; the time period for this nonstudent to be on the school property is 15 minutes prior to and 15 minutes after school hours and/or extracurricular activities; in addition, a nonstudent, other than a parent or guardian of a student, shall not be present on school property during lunch or recess periods.
E. In the event that the extracurricular activity, such as sporting events, concerts, meetings, presentations, instructional programs, dances, and the like, permits nonstudents to attend, then the nonstudent may remain on the premises involved only, and must depart within 60 minutes after the end of such event.
F. To be included in the interpretation of lawful purpose or authorization for extracurricular events, the nonstudent must be in actual attendance of the event; actual attendance does not permit gathering in parking lots or other school area adjacent to buildings or stadiums during the activity; persons not in actual attendance of an event but on school property will be deemed to be trespassing.
G. In all cases a nonstudent will be guilty of trespassing if said person fails to leave the school property after being ordered to do so by an authorized individual. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.10.040 Posting of notices.
The school authorities must post notices on their property which shall read as follows:ANY PERSON ON THESE PREMISES WITHOUT LAWFUL PURPOSE OR AUTHORIZATION SHALL BE GUILTY OF TRESPASSING. LAKEWOOD MUNICIPAL CODE CHAPTER 9.10.
[Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.10.050 Recreational area excepted.
Those students and nonstudents who are making recreational use of the areas designated by the Clover Park School District or the administration of any other schools located within the City, as recreational areas outside school hours whose conduct is otherwise lawful, will not be deemed to be trespassing. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.10.060 Statutory authority.
The provisions of RCW 28A.87.010 and 28A.87.055 are adopted by reference in this section, as if fully set forth, and as may be hereinafter amended. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

Chapter 9.11 LOITERING

Sections:
9.11.010     Definitions.
9.11.020     Order to disperse.

9.11.010 Definitions.
“Loitering” means remaining idle in essentially one location and includes the concept of spending time idly, to be dilatory, to linger, to stay, to saunter, to delay, to stand around, and also includes the colloquial expression “hanging around.”
“Public place” means any place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It also includes the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public grounds, areas or parks. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.11.020 Order to disperse.
A. It is unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either alone and/or in consort with others in a public place in such a manner so as to:
    1. Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians;
    2. Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building, all of which prevent the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress, therein, thereon and thereto.
B. When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in subsection A of this section, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders is guilty of a violation of this chapter. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

Chapter 9.12 MISCELLANEOUS CRIMES

Sections:
9.12.010     Bridge over Steilacoom Lake on Interlaaken Drive Southwest.
9.12.020     Piercing ears or other body parts of a minor without parental consent – Penalty.
9.12.040     Obtaining hotel, restaurant or lodging house accommodations by fraud.
9.12.050     Unguarded fires.
9.12.060     Malicious prosecution.
9.12.070     Unlawful depositing of refuse in containers.
9.12.080     Unauthorized communication with prisoner.
9.12.090     Animals taken or held.
9.12.100     Making or having burglar or auto theft tools.
9.12.110     Threats to do harm.
9.12.120     Assault – Fourth degree (strangulation).
9.12.130     Exposing minor child to domestic violence.

9.12.010 Bridge over Steilacoom Lake on Interlaaken Drive Southwest.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to swim from Bridge No. 3192-A which spans Steilacoom Lake on Interlaaken Drive Southwest in the City of Lakewood (Section 3, Township 19 North, Range 2 East, W.M.). [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.12.020 Piercing ears or other body parts of a minor without parental consent – Penalty.
Every person who pierces the ear or ears or other part or parts of the body of any minor under the age of 18 without the personal or written consent of a parent or legal guardian of the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor. It is not a defense to a violation of this section that the person piercing the ear or ears or other part or parts of the body of the minor did not know the minor’s age unless the person piercing the minor’s ear or ears or other body part or parts establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that he or she made a reasonable, bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of the minor by requiring production of a driver’s license or other picture identification card or paper and did not rely solely on the oral allegations or apparent age of the minor, or in the case of purported consent, that he or she made a reasonable, bona fide attempt to determine the identity of the parent or guardian and to ascertain the legitimacy of the consent.
For the purposes of this section, “piercing the ear or ears or other part or parts of the body” includes any piercing of any skin or tissue of any person with insertion of or to facilitate insertion of jewelry or ornaments which leaves a permanent or temporary perforation or hole in the skin or tissue of the person. Medical procedures performed by a licensed physician are exempted from this section. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.12.040 Obtaining hotel, restaurant or lodging house accommodations by fraud.
Any person who shall willfully obtain food, money, credit, lodging or accommodation at any hotel, inn, restaurant, boarding house or lodging house, without paying therefor, with intent to defraud the proprietor, owner, operator or keeper thereof, or who obtains food, money, credit, lodging, accommodation at such hotel, inn, restaurant, boarding house or lodging house, by the use of any false pretense; or, who, after obtaining food, money, credit, lodging or accommodation at such hotel, inn, restaurant, boarding house or lodging house, removes or causes to be removed from such hotel, inn, restaurant, boarding house or lodging house, his or her baggage, without the permission or consent of the proprietor, manager or authorized employee thereof, before paying for such food, money, credit lodging or accommodation, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; provided, that the aggregate amount of food, credit, money, lodging or accommodation so obtained is less than $75.00. Proof that food, money, credit, lodging or accommodation were obtained by false pretense or by false or fictitious show or pretense of any baggage or other property, or that the person refused or neglected to pay for such food, money, credit, lodging or accommodation on demand, or that he or she gave in payment for such food, money, credit, lodging or accommodation, negotiable paper on which payment was refused, or that he or she absconded, or departed from, or left, the premises without paying for such food, money, credit, lodging or accommodation, or that he or she removed or attempted to remove, caused to be removed, or caused to be attempted to be removed, his or her property or baggage, shall be prima facie evidence of the fraudulent intent hereinbefore mentioned. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.12.050 Unguarded fires.
Any person who kindles a fire upon any street, alley, land, lot or block within the corporate limits of the City, which is not so enclosed or guarded as to prevent the same from spreading or being transmitted to any adjoining property belonging to or occupied by any other person, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.12.060 Malicious prosecution.
Every person who shall, maliciously and without probable cause therefor, cause or attempt to cause another to be arrested or proceeded against for any misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor of which he is innocent shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.12.070 Unlawful depositing of refuse in containers.
It is unlawful for any person to dump or deposit garbage in garbage or refuse containers or next to garbage or refuse containers on the property of another where the result would be to increase or add to the garbage collection service needs of the owner of the property on which the garbage or refuse container is located. Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.12.080 Unauthorized communication with prisoner.
Every person who, not being authorized by law, or by an officer authorized by law, has any verbal communication with any prisoner in the City jail or brings into or conveys out of the City jail any writing, clothing, food, tobacco, or any article whatsoever, is guilty of a misdemeanor. It is also unlawful for any person to loiter in or about any City detention facility for the purpose of engaging in any conduct prohibited in this section. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.12.090 Animals taken or held.
Any person who, with intent to deprive or defraud the owner thereof, does any of the following, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor:
A. Takes, leads away, confines, secrets or converts any dog or other animal;
B. Conceals the identity of any dog or other animal or its owner by obscuring or removing from the dog or other animal any collar, tag, license, tattoo or other identification device or mark; or
C. Willfully kills or injures any dog or other animal, unless excused by law.
D. Violation of this section is a misdemeanor. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.12.100 Making or having burglar or auto theft tools.
A. Every person who shall make or mend, or cause to be made or mended, or have in his possession any engine, machine, tool, false key, pick lock, bit, nippers, or implement or any other implement listed in subsection B of this section, that is adapted, designed, or commonly used for the commission of burglary or vehicle related theft, under circumstances evincing an intent to use or employ, or allow the same to be used or employed, in the commission of a burglary or vehicle related theft, or knowing that the same is intended to be so used, shall be guilty of making or having burglar tools or auto theft tools.
B. The following tools are to be considered prohibited implements: slim jim, false master key, master purpose key, altered or filed key, trial (“jiggler”) keys, slide hammer, lock puller, or any other implement shown by facts and circumstances to be intended for use in the commission of a burglary or vehicle involved theft.
C. For the purposes hereof, the following definitions shall apply:
    “Altered key” means any key so altered, by cutting, filing, or other means to fit multiple vehicles or vehicles other than the vehicle for which the key was originally manufactured.
    “False master” or “master key” means any key or other device made or altered to fit locks or ignitions of multiple vehicles, or vehicles other than that for which the key was originally manufactured.
    “Trial (“jiggler”) keys” means keys or sets designed or altered to manipulate a vehicle locking mechanism other than the lock for which the key was originally manufactured.
D. It shall be prima facie evidence of “circumstances evincing an intent to use for commission of burglary or vehicle related theft” for a person to be in possession of multiple vehicle keys or altered vehicle keys unless such person is a bona fide locksmith or an employee of a licensed auto dealer or other position for which the possession of such keys is required in the performance of their duties.
E. Making or having burglar or auto theft tools is a gross misdemeanor. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.12.110 Threats to do harm.
It is unlawful for any person to communicate, directly or indirectly, the intent to cause bodily injury to another person or the intent to cause physical damage to the property of another. Every person convicted of a violation of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of the misdemeanor of threats to do harm. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.12.120 Assault – Fourth degree (strangulation).
A. A person is guilty of strangulation if he or she assaults another by means of strangulation.
B. “Strangulation” means to compress a person’s neck, thereby obstructing the person’s blood flow or ability to breathe, or doing so with the intent to obstruct the person’s blood flow or ability to breathe.
C. A violation of this section is a gross misdemeanor. [Ord. 667 § 1, 2017.]

9.12.130 Exposing minor child to domestic violence.
A. A person commits the crime of exposing children to domestic violence when he or she:
    1. Commits a crime against a family or household member, as defined in RCW 10.99.020; and
    2. The crime is committed in the immediate presence of, or is witnessed by, the suspect’s or the victim’s minor child, stepchild, or a minor child residing within the household of the suspect or victim. For the purposes of this section, “witnessed” shall mean if the crime is seen or directly perceived in any other manner by the child.
B. Exposing children to domestic violence is a gross misdemeanor. Any person convicted of this crime shall be punished by imprisonment of not less than 30 days. [Ord. 667 § 2, 2017.]

Chapter 9.13 SECURITY ALARMS

Sections:
9.13.010     Definitions.
9.13.020     Administration – Funding – Increases in fees – Annual evaluation.
9.13.030     Alarm user permit requirements and fees.
9.13.040     Alarm user permit application and contents.
9.13.050     Terms of alarm user permit – Transfer of permit prohibited.
9.13.060     Duties of alarm users.
9.13.070     Audible alarms – Restrictions.
9.13.080     Duties of alarm installation companies and monitoring companies.
9.13.090     Alarm installation and monitoring companies.
9.13.100     Duties and authority of the Alarm Administrator.
9.13.110     False alarm fees.
9.13.120     Notice to alarm users of false alarms and suspension of police response.
9.13.130     Suspension of police response to alarm sites.
9.13.140     Appeal of determinations regarding alarm permits and fees.
9.13.150     Reinstatement of suspended alarm permits.
9.13.160     Revocation of alarm user permit and business permit.
9.13.170     Confidentiality of alarm information.
9.13.180     Scope of Police Chief duty – Immunities preserved.
9.13.190     Service charges.
9.13.200     Violation – Penalty.
9.13.210     Construction.

9.13.010 Definitions.
“Alarm Administrator” means the person or persons designated by the Chief of Police to administer the provisions of this chapter.
“Alarm agreement” means the legal contract or agreement by and between the alarm installation company and/or monitoring company and the alarm user.
“Alarm dispatch request” means a notification to the Chief of Police that an alarm, either manual or automatic, has been activated at a particular alarm site.
“Alarm installation company” means a person in the business of selling, providing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing an alarm system at an alarm site for compensation, and includes individuals or firms that install and service alarm systems used in a private business or proprietary facility.
“Alarm installer checklist” means a check-off list provided by the Alarm Administrator to the alarm installer to complete at each alarm site after the installation of an alarm system prior to its activation.
“Alarm permit” means the alarm registration issued by the Alarm Administrator to an alarm user which authorizes the operation of an alarm system within the City of Lakewood.
“Alarm response manager (ARM)” means a person designated by an alarm installation company or monitoring company to handle alarm issues for the company and act as the primary point of contact for the Chief of Police or Alarm Administrator.
“Alarm site” means a location served by one or more alarm systems. In a multi-unit building or complex, each unit shall be considered a separate alarm site if served by a separate alarm system. In a single unit building that houses two or more separate businesses with separate alarm systems, each business will be considered a separate alarm site.
“Alarm system” means an audible or remote visual or electronic alarm signal which is intended to summon law enforcement response. The term includes hardwired systems and systems interconnected with a radio frequency method such as cellular or private radio signals, and includes local alarm systems. This term does not include an alarm installed in a motor vehicle, nor on one’s person or an alarm system designed solely to alert the occupants of a building or residence which will not emit a signal either audible or visible from outside the building or residence.
“Alarm user” means any person who has contracted for monitoring, repair, installation, or maintenance service for any alarm system from an alarm company, or who owns or operates an alarm system which is not monitored, maintained or repaired under agreement.
“Alarm user awareness class” means a class conducted for the purpose of educating alarm users about the responsible use, operation, and maintenance of alarm systems and the problems created by false alarms.
“Arming station” means a device that controls an alarm system.
“Automatic voice dialer” means any electronic, mechanical or other device which, when activated, is capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded voice message to a law enforcement agency requesting a patrol dispatch to an alarm site.
“Burglar alarm” means an alarm intended to identify the presence of an intruder in either a business or residence.
“Burglar alarm confirmation” means a method by which an alarm monitoring company shall verify a burglar alarm call prior to making a burglar alarm dispatch request. This method requires at least one of four types of acceptable verification for a burglar alarm call:
    1. Witness at site who indicates criminal or suspicious activity.
    2. Audio verification that indicates criminal activity.
    3. Visual verification (live-time video) that indicates criminal activity.
    4. Sequential verification (two zone/device activation). The sequential verification allows for a variety of configurations that are acceptable as burglar alarm confirmation. It is the most common verification that is used.
        a. Two independent detectors activated.
        b. Two alarm signals within a 10-minute time period.
“Business permit” means the permit issued by the Alarm Administrator to an alarm installation company or monitoring company to sell, install, monitor, repair, or replace alarm systems. The term does not include a business license issued by the City of Lakewood or a license issued by the State Fire Marshal for fire alarm systems.
“Cancellation” means the termination of police response to an alarm site after dispatch request is made but before an officer has arrived at the alarm site.
“Chief” means the Chief of Police of the City of Lakewood or his/her designee.
“Conversion” means the transaction or process by which one alarm installation company or monitoring company begins the servicing or monitoring of a previously unmonitored alarm system or an alarm system that was previously serviced or monitored by another alarm company.
“Customer false alarm prevention checklist” means a check-off list provided by the Alarm Administrator to the alarm installer to provide to the alarm user to complete prior to the activation of an alarm system.
“Duress alarm” means a silent alarm system signal generated by the entry of a designated code into an arming station in order to signal that the alarm user is being forced to turn off the system and requires law enforcement response.
“Enhanced call verification” means that prior to requesting law enforcement dispatch a second telephone call is made to a different telephone number if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can determine whether an alarm signal is valid.
“False alarm” means an alarm dispatch request to the police which results in the responding officer finding no evidence of a criminal offense or attempted criminal offense after completing an investigation of the alarm site.
“Holdup alarm” means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress.
“Local alarm system” means an unmonitored alarm system that annunciates an alarm only at the alarm site.
“Monitoring” means the process by which a monitoring company receives signals from an alarm system and relays an alarm dispatch request to the police.
“Monitoring company” means the company that contracts with the alarm user to provide monitoring services. The monitoring company is also referred to as the alarm agreement holding company.
“One plus duress alarm” means the manual activation of a silent alarm signal by entering a code that adds one number to the last digit of the normal arm/disarm code (e.g., normal code = 1234, one plus duress code = 1235).
“Panic alarm” means an alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency situation requiring law enforcement response.
“Permit number” means a unique individual number assigned to an alarm user as part of the registration of their alarm permit issued by the Police Department.
“Person” means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, organization or similar entity.
“Police” or “Police Department” means the Lakewood Police Department.
“Protective or reactive alarm system” means an alarm system that produces a temporary disability or sensory deprivation through use of chemical, electrical, sonic or other means, including use of devices that obscure or disable a person’s vision.
“Responsible party” means a person capable of appearing at the alarm site upon request who has access to the alarm site, the code to the alarm system and the authority to approve repairs to the alarm system.
“Robbery alarm” means an alarm signal generated by the manual or automatic activation of a device, or any system, device or mechanism on or near the premises intended to signal that a robbery or other crime is in progress, and that a person is in need of immediate law enforcement assistance in order to avoid bodily harm, injury or death. The term has the same general meaning as “holdup alarm.”
“SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01” means the ANSI – American National Standard Institute-approved Security Industry Association – SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design features for security system control panels and their associated arming and disarming devices to reduce the incidence of false alarms. Control panels built and tested to this standard by Underwriters Laboratory (UL) or other nationally recognized testing organizations are marked as follows: “Design evaluated in accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard Features for False Alarm Reduction.”
“Takeover” means the transaction or process by which an alarm user takes over control of an existing alarm system which was previously controlled by another alarm user.
“Zones” means division of devices into which an alarm system is divided to indicate the general location from which an alarm system signal is transmitted. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.13.020 Administration – Funding – Increases in fees – Annual evaluation.
A. Responsibility for administration of this chapter is vested with the Chief of Police (Chief) for the City of Lakewood.
B. The Chief shall designate an Alarm Administrator to carry out the duties and functions described in this chapter.
C. Moneys generated by false alarm service fees and permit fees assessed pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited into the appropriate Police Department revenue accounts.
D. Based upon a review and recommendation from the Chief, the fees set forth in this chapter may be modified by the City Council. The Chief or its contract representative shall post the fees on the Police Department’s link to the City’s website and notify the alarm companies and monitoring companies. These companies shall then be responsible for notifying their customers of these fees. For purposes of this subsection, “fees” include any type or class of fee and include late fees and penalties.
E. The Alarm Administrator shall conduct an annual evaluation and analysis of the effectiveness of this chapter and identify and implement system improvements as warranted. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.13.030 Alarm user permit requirements and fees.
A. Alarm Sites Must Be Registered. 
    1. An alarm user shall not operate, or cause to be operated, any alarm system without a valid alarm permit. A separate alarm permit is required for each alarm site having a distinct address or business name. A separate alarm permit is required for each alarm site with the same address having a distinct and separate alarm system (i.e., detached shops or garages on residential property). The initial alarm permit fee must be collected by the alarm installation company from the alarm user. The permit fee and application form shall be sent to the Alarm Administrator within 10 days after any alarm system installation or alarm system takeover.
    Owners of local alarm systems are required to adhere to this chapter and are subject to all fees (including service fees), suspensions, penalties or other requirements that are applicable.
    The fee for a new initial alarm permit shall be collected by the alarm installation company and an alarm permit renewal fee shall be collected by the alarm agreement holding company.
    2. Alarm Fees. Permit, renewal, senior rate, physically disabled and other fees for an alarm permit or an alarm permit renewal shall be collected by the alarm agreement holding company and shall be as set forth in the City’s fee schedule.
        a. Residential alarm users aged 60 years and older may be charged a senior rate. In order to qualify for the senior rate, applicants must provide proof of age, be listed as the property owner or lessee and must have the alarm contract in his or her name.
        b. In order to qualify for the physically disabled rate, applications must be in accordance with RCW 46.19.060.
    3. Refunds. No refund of a permit or permit renewal fee will be made.
    4. Existing Alarm Systems. 
        a. Any alarm system which was installed before the effective date of this chapter must be registered and a permit fee collected by the alarm agreement holding company 60 days after the effective date of this chapter. An alarm installation company or monitoring company shall, within 30 days after being notified in writing from the Alarm Administrator, provide a list of existing alarm users in the City of Lakewood to the Alarm Administrator to include name, address, billing address, and telephone number in a manner decided upon by the Alarm Administrator. Included shall be the permit fee for each of their alarm user customers.
        b. The alarm agreement company may through a mutual written agreement have another alarm company provide the alarm user’s list and collect the alarm permit fee.
        c. Failure to comply and provide customer lists to the Alarm Administrator, as required, will result in a fine, the amount of which is set forth in the City’s fee schedule, per working day (after the initial 30-day notice expires, i.e., day 31) until the alarm installation company or monitoring company complies with the requirement. Failure to comply will also result in automatic suspension of their alarm permit.
    5. New Alarm Systems. Any alarm installation company that installs an alarm system on premises within the City of Lakewood after the effective date of this chapter must notify the Alarm Administrator within 10 days after the date of installation and provide the name, address, billing address, and telephone number of the alarm user and a copy of the customer false alarm prevention checklist as well as any appropriate registration permit fee collected from the alarm user. The failure to notify in accordance with terms of this subsection shall result in an administrative penalty as set forth in the City’s fee schedule against the alarm installation company.
    6. Upon receipt of a completed alarm permit application form and the alarm permit fee, the Alarm Administrator shall authorize response to the applicant unless:
        a. The applicant has failed to pay a false alarm fee or fine assessed under this chapter.
        b. An alarm permit for the alarm site has been suspended, and the violation causing the suspension has not been corrected.
    7. Upon receipt of the permit application form and fee, the Alarm Administrator shall authorize response to the alarm user, which is valid for a one-year period. Renewal permits are valid for a one-year period from the date of initial issuance.
    8. Government entities, including but not necessarily limited to the City of Lakewood and Clover Park School Districts, must obtain permits for all alarm systems on their property under their control within the City of Lakewood, but are exempt from payment of permit and renewal fees. [Ord. 664 § 1, 2017; Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.13.040 Alarm user permit application and contents.
A. An application for alarm permit must be on a form provided by the Alarm Administrator and must contain the following information:
    1. The name, complete address, including apartment or suite number, and telephone numbers of the person who will be the holder of the permit and be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees assessed under this chapter;
    2. The physical alarm site address and classification as either residential (includes apartment, condo, mobile home, etc.) or commercial;
    3. The classification (i.e., burglary, holdup, duress, panic alarm or other) for each alarm system located at the alarm site, and, for each classification, whether the alarm is audible or silent;
    4. The applicant’s mailing address, if different from the address of the alarm site;
    5. Any dangerous or special conditions present at the alarm site;
    6. The type of business conducted at a commercial alarm site;
    7. A written certification from the alarm user setting forth the following:
        a. The date of installation, conversion or take over of the alarm system, whichever is applicable;
        b. The name, address, and telephone number of the alarm installation company or companies performing the alarm system installation, conversion or take over and of the alarm installation company responsible for providing repair service to the alarm system;
        c. The name, address, and telephone number of the monitoring company if different from the alarm installation company;
        d. That a set of written operating instructions for the alarm system, including written guidelines on how to avoid false alarms, have been left with the applicant by the alarm installation company; and
        e. That the alarm installation company has trained the applicant in proper use of the alarm system, including instructions on how to avoid false alarms;
    8. An acknowledgment that the police response may be influenced by factors including, but not limited to, the availability of officers, priority of calls, traffic conditions, emergency conditions and staffing levels;
    9. Any false statement of a material fact made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit is sufficient cause for refusal to issue a permit, or revocation of an existing permit. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.13.050 Terms of alarm user permit – Transfer of permit prohibited.
A. An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another person or alarm site. An alarm user shall inform the Alarm Administrator of any change in the information listed on the alarm permit application within five business days after such change. Exceptions may be made at the discretion of the Alarm Administrator when the transfer proposed is among members of the family of the original permit holder or successors in interest to the property for which the permit has been issued.
B. An alarm permit shall expire one year after the date of issue, and must be renewed annually by submitting a renewal application and a renewal fee to the Alarm Administrator. The Alarm Administrator shall notify the alarm agreement holding company of the need to renew their registered customers 60 days prior to the expiration of the registration on a monthly basis. It is the responsibility of the alarm agreement holding company to submit the updated information and renewal fees prior to the registration expiration date. [Ord. 664 § 2, 2017; Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.13.060 Duties of alarm users.
A. An alarm user shall:
    1. Complete the customer false alarm prevention checklist available from their alarm installation company or through the Police Department’s online website, and send the checklist to the Alarm Administrator.
    2. Maintain the alarm site and the alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarms.
    3. Make every reasonable effort to arrive at the alarm system’s location within 30 minutes after being requested by the monitoring company or law enforcement agency in order to:
        a. Deactivate an alarm system;
        b. Provide access to the alarm site; and/or
        c. Provide alternative security for the alarm site.
    4. Provide to the monitoring company the names and telephone numbers of at least two individuals who are able and have agreed to:
        a. Receive notification of an alarm system activation any time;
        b. Respond to the alarm site at any time in the presence of the Lakewood Police; and
        c. Provide access to the alarm site and deactivate the alarm system, if necessary. An alarm user will notify the monitoring company when this information changes.
    5. Not activate an alarm system for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report.
B. An alarm user shall not use automatic voice dialers for any type of alarm system. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any automatic dialing device which, when activated, uses a telephone device or attachment to automatically select a telephone line leading into the Police Department or transmit any prerecorded message or signal. Waiver: An automatic voice dialer is allowed as long as it is not connected to the Police Department. It may be used to alert the user only or others.
C. An alarm user shall not use any type of alarm system that is rigged to produce a temporary disability or sensory deprivation through use of chemical, electrical, sonic or other means, including use of devices that obscure or disable one’s vision.
D. Installation of a protective-reactive device can only be done with the prior written approval of the Chief or his/her designee. During any alarm at such a site, a responsible party must be contacted and confirm that he or she will respond to the alarm site to disarm the device.
E. After the effective date of this chapter, an alarm user shall not operate or cause to be operated any alarm system capable of sending one plus duress alarms. Within 180 days of the effective date of this chapter, all alarm users shall authorize their alarm installation company to reprogram all existing duress alarms which utilize a one plus duress code.
F. After the effective date of this chapter, an alarm user shall not operate or cause to be operated any alarm system with single action or nonrecessed button robbery, duress, or panic devices. Within 180 days of the effective date of this chapter, all alarm users shall authorize their alarm installation company to replace existing single-action devices with devices that have dual action at a minimum.
G. An alarm user shall keep a set of written operating instructions for each alarm system at each alarm site.
H. All alarm users shall agree with their alarm installation company or monitoring company to go through an “acclimation period” for the first seven days after installation of an alarm system, during which time the alarm installation company or monitoring company will have no obligation to respond to, nor will it respond to, any alarm signal from the alarm site, or make an alarm dispatch request to law enforcement, even if the alarm signal is the result of an actual alarm event. Exceptions to the “acclimation period” of nonresponse can be made by the Chief in special circumstances, including but not limited to, domestic violence and stalking. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.13.070 Audible alarms – Restrictions.
A. After the effective date of this chapter it is a violation of this chapter for any person to operate an alarm system in the City of Lakewood that has a siren, bell or other signal audible from any property adjacent to the alarm site that sounds for longer than 10 consecutive minutes after the alarm is activated, or that repeats the 10-minute alarm cycle more than three consecutive times without resetting. Violators will be fined in accordance with the penalties for false alarms. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.13.080 Duties of alarm installation companies and monitoring companies.
A. Each alarm installation company and monitoring company must designate one individual as the alarm response manager (ARM) for the company who will manage alarm related issues and act as the point of contact for the Alarm Administrator and Alarm Coordinator. The appointed individual must be knowledgeable of the general provisions of this chapter, as well as have the knowledge and authority to deal with false alarm issues and respond to requests from the Alarm Administrator and Alarm Coordinator. The name, telephone number, and email address of the designated ARM must be provided to the Alarm Administrator. Failure to comply will result in the suspension of the alarm company business permit. A reinstatement fee of at least $100.00 or $10.00 per registered user if letters have been sent (per subsection B of this section) whichever is the greater amount, will be charged. This will cover the administration action costs for this chapter.
B. Upon the installation or activation of an alarm system, the alarm installation company shall distribute to the alarm user information summarizing:
    1. The applicable law relating to false alarms, including the potential for penalties and revocation or suspension of an alarm permit; and
    2. How to prevent false alarms; and
    3. How to operate the alarm system; and
    4. The customer false alarm prevention checklist available through the Police Department.
C. After the effective date of this chapter, alarm installation companies shall not program alarm systems so that they are capable of sending one plus duress alarms. Within 180 days of the effective date of this chapter, alarm installation companies shall reprogram all existing duress alarms which utilize a one plus duress code.
D. Alarm installation companies shall not install single action or nonrecessed button robbery, duress, or panic devices, and within 180 days of the effective date of this chapter, replace existing single-action devices within devices that have dual action at a minimum.
E. Ninety days after the effective date of this chapter, an alarm installation company shall, on new installations, use only alarm control panel(s) which meet ANSI/SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard – Features for False Alarm Reduction.
F. An alarm company shall not use an automatic voice dialer which calls the Police Department, the Chief’s designee for any alarm system.
G. After completion of the installation of an alarm system, an employee of the alarm installation company shall review with the alarm user the customer false alarm prevention checklist or an equivalent checklist approved by the Alarm Administrator, giving the alarm user instructions to send the completed checklist to the Alarm Administrator.
H. After completion of the installation of an alarm system, an employee of the alarm installation company shall complete the alarm installer checklist, and send the completed checklist to the Alarm Administrator.
I. A monitoring company shall not make an alarm dispatch request to an alarm signal during the first seven-day “acclimation period” after an alarm system installation. Exceptions to the “acclimation period” of nonresponse can be made by the Chief in special circumstances, including but not limited to, domestic violence and stalking.
J. A monitoring company shall employ “burglar alarm confirmation” and:
    1. Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers designated by the Alarm Administrator, ensuring they have received two or more alarm signals during the same alarm event within 10 minutes.
    2. Employ “enhanced call verification” and burglar alarm confirmation on all burglar alarm dispatch requests by attempting to verify by telephone the validity of every alarm signal, except robbery and panic activation, before requesting law enforcement response to an alarm system signal. Verification before requesting law enforcement dispatch also requires that a second telephone call be made to a different phone number if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can determine whether an alarm signal is valid. Names and telephone numbers of those persons contacted or attempted to be contacted must be provided to the Alarm Administrator, Alarm Coordinator or Police Department upon request. The Lakewood Police Department may refuse to accept an alarm dispatch request from a monitoring company that has failed to comply with the procedure required by enhanced call verification and burglar alarm confirmation.
    3. Communicate alarm dispatch requests to the Police Department in a manner and form determined by the Alarm Administrator.
        a. A valid permit number is required for all alarm requests. Failure to provide a valid permit number shall result in the call request not being accepted for a police dispatch.
        b. Provide zone(s) activation information as part of the sequential verification process within the burglar alarm confirmation procedures.
    4. Communicate cancellations to the Police Department in a manner and form determined by the Alarm Administrator.
    5. Ensure that all alarm users of alarm systems equipped with a duress, holdup or panic alarm are given adequate training as to the proper use of the alarm.
    6. Communicate any available information (north, south, front, back, floor, etc.) about the location of an alarm signal as part of an alarm dispatch request.
    7. Communicate the type of alarm activation (silent or audible, interior or perimeter), if available, on any alarm dispatch request.
    8. Installation of a protective-reactive device can only be made with the prior written approval of the Chief or his designee. During any alarm at such a site, a responsible party must be contacted and confirm that he or she will respond to the alarm site to disarm the device. In all cases where a protective-reactive device is present at an alarm site, the patrol dispatch request shall include a warning for officers not to enter the alarm site until the responsible party is present and has disarmed the device. Failure to provide this warning to officers shall result in a $200.00 fee to the monitoring company.
    9. Prior to making an alarm dispatch request, attempt to notify the alarm user to send a responsible party to the alarm site, in order to:
        a. Deactivate an alarm system;
        b. Provide access to the alarm site; and/or
        c. Provide alternative security for the alarm site.
    10. After an alarm dispatch request, promptly advise the Chief the alarm company knows that the alarm user or a responsible party is on the way to the alarm site.
    11. Each monitoring company must maintain, for a period of at least one year after the date of an alarm dispatch request, all records relating to the alarm dispatch request. Records must include the name, address and telephone number of the alarm user, each alarm system zone activated, the time of alarm dispatch request and evidence of all attempts to verify. The Alarm Administrator may request copies of such records for any individual alarm user. If the request is made within 60 days after an alarm dispatch request, the monitoring company shall furnish requested records within three business days after receiving the request. If the records are requested between 60 days and one year after an alarm dispatch request, the monitoring company shall furnish the requested records within 30 days after receiving the request. Failure to comply will result in an immediate suspension of response and $25.00 per day per customer service fee.
    12. Each monitoring company shall, upon request, immediately provide the Police Department with the names and phone numbers of the alarm user’s emergency contacts at the time of each alarm dispatch request.
K. Purchased Accounts. An alarm installation company or monitoring company that purchases any alarm system account from another company shall notify the Alarm Administrator of such purchase and shall provide to the Alarm Administrator within 30 days from the date of acquisition a complete list of the acquired customers, in a format the alarm company is capable of producing, that includes the following:
    1. Alarm user’s permit number;
    2. Customer name;
    3. Customer billing address;
    4. Customer telephone number;
    5. Alarm site address; and
    6. Alarm company license number.
L. The customer lists described in subsection K of this section are proprietary and confidential information and will not be released to anyone absent a court order.
M. Failure to provide customer lists to the Alarm Administrator, as required in subsection K of this section, will result in a fine of $25.00 per working day until the alarm installation company or monitoring company complies with the requirement. Failure to pay this fine will result in the immediate suspension of their business permit. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.13.090 Alarm installation and monitoring companies.
A. Every alarm installation company and every monitoring company shall obtain an alarm permit from the police Alarm Administrator and pay an annual prorated fee per each of their registered alarm users in the City of Lakewood up to a maximum payment.
B. The Chief may not respond to any alarm dispatch request from any alarm installation company or monitoring company that does not possess a current valid permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
C. The Alarm Administrator shall notify all known alarm users subscribing to an unregistered alarm installation company or an unregistered monitoring company that the company is unregistered and that the Chief will no longer respond to the user’s alarms. A reinstatement fee will be charged to the alarm installation company or monitoring company. This will cover the administration action costs for this chapter.
D. The fee imposed by this chapter is in addition to all other fees levied by the City of Lakewood. Fees under this chapter will be as set forth in the City’s fee schedule. [Ord. 664 § 3, 2017; Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.13.100 Duties and authority of the Alarm Administrator.
A. The Alarm Administrator shall:
    1. Designate the manner and form of alarm dispatch requests and the telephone numbers to be used for such requests; and
    2. Establish a procedure to accept cancellation of alarm dispatch requests.
B. The Alarm Administrator shall establish a procedure to acquire and record information on alarm dispatch requests including the following information:
    1. Identification of the alarm site;
    2. The date and time alarm dispatch request was received, including the name of the monitoring company and the monitoring operator’s name and number;
    3. Date and time of an officer’s arrival at the alarm site;
    4. The alarm zone and zone description, if available;
    5. Name of alarm user’s personal representative present at the alarm site, if any;
    6. Whether an officer was unable to locate the address of the alarm site; and
    7. The cause of the alarm signal, if known.
C. The Alarm Administrator shall establish and implement a procedure to notify the alarm user of a false alarm. The notice shall include the following:
    1. The date and time of an officer’s response to the false alarm; and
    2. A statement urging the alarm user to ensure that the alarm system is properly operated, inspected, and serviced in order to avoid false alarms and resulting false alarm fees; and
    3. The false alarm fees incurred.
D. The Alarm Administrator may require that a conference be held with an alarm user and the alarm installation company or monitoring company responsible for repairing or monitoring of the alarm system to review the circumstances of each false alarm. The conference may be held in person or by telephone call, at the Alarm Administrator’s discretion. Failure to participate by any of the notified parties will result in suspension of their alarm user permit or the alarm company business permit after a written notice has been sent.
E. The Alarm Administrator may establish an alarm user awareness class. The Alarm Administrator may request the assistant of associations, alarm companies and law enforcement agencies in developing and implementing the class. The class shall inform alarm users of the problems created by false alarms and teach alarm users how to avoid creating false alarms.
F. If a false holdup alarm has occurred and the alarm was triggered using a single action, nonrecessed button, the Alarm Administrator may consider a waiver of the false alarm fee if action is taken by the alarm user to remove or replace the single action, nonrecessed button.
G. The Alarm Administrator will make a copy of this chapter and/or a summary sheet available to each alarm user. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.13.110 False alarm fees.
A. An alarm user, whether registered or unregistered, shall pay fees to the Alarm Administrator for police response to any false alarm or robbery alarm. The amount of the fees shall be set by the City’s fee schedule. The Alarm Administrator may waive fees imposed upon an unregistered system if the alarm user submits an application for alarm permit within 10 business days after receiving notice of such violation.
B. If cancellation of police response occurs prior to an officer arriving at the alarm site, the response is not considered a false alarm for the purposes of fees, and no penalty will be assessed.
C. The Alarm Administrator may waive a false alarm fee due to a history of false alarms that is identified as chronic equipment failure and the alarm user has documented work orders of attempts to repair the alarm system.
D. Notice of the right of appeal pursuant to this chapter will be included with notice of any penalty. [Ord. 664 § 4, 2017; Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.13.120 Notice to alarm users of false alarms and suspension of police response.
The Alarm Administrator shall notify the alarm user in writing after each false alarm. The notice shall include the amount of the fee for the false alarm, the fact that response will be suspended after the third false alarm in their one-year permit period (excluding duress, holdup and panic alarms), and a description of the appeals procedure available to the alarm user.
The Alarm Administrator shall notify the alarm user and the alarm installation company or monitoring company in writing 30 days before an alarm response is to be suspended. Suspension of alarm response does not apply to duress, robbery, holdup and panic alarms. The notice of suspension must also include the amount of the fee for each false alarm and a description of the appeals procedure available to the alarm user and the alarm installation company or monitoring company. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.13.130 Suspension of police response to alarm sites.
A. It is a violation of this chapter to make an alarm dispatch request for a suspended alarm site.
B. The Alarm Administrator shall notify the police and alarm installation company and/or monitoring company of each alarm user whose alarm permit qualifies for suspension under this chapter. The Alarm Administrator shall suspend an alarm permit if it is determined that:
    1. The alarm user has had three or more false alarms within one year after the date of issuance of their annual permit, except that the Alarm Administrator may waive a suspension of a permit upon receipt of documented work orders showing numerous attempts to repair the alarm system;
    2. There is a false statement of a material fact in the application of a permit; or
    3. The alarm user fails or refuses to pay a permit fee, false alarm fee or late fee assessment pursuant to this chapter.
C. It is unlawful for a monitoring company to make an alarm dispatch request to an alarm site after the company has been notified by the Alarm Administrator that the permit for that alarm site has been suspended. The monitoring company must pay a $200.00 fee to the Alarm Administrator for each such dispatch to an alarm site. If the penalty is not paid to the Alarm Administrator within 30 days, a late fee of $25.00 is hereby imposed on the alarm company.
D. Unless there is a separate indication that there is a crime in progress, Emergency Communications (Dispatch) may not dispatch an officer to an alarm site for which an alarm permit is suspended.
E. If an alarm permit is reinstated, the police may again suspend the alarm permit if it is determined that two false alarms have occurred within 180 days after the reinstatement date. The exception set forth in subsection (B)(1) of this section applies to any such suspension.
F. This section applies to alarm systems, except holdup alarms, robbery alarms and panic alarms, which are subject to suspension at the discretion of the Alarm Administrator. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.13.140 Appeal of determinations regarding alarm permits and fees.
A. If the Alarm Administrator assesses a fee, suspends an alarm permit or denies the issuance, renewal or reinstatement of an alarm permit, the Alarm Administrator shall send written notice of the action and a statement of the right to appeal to the affected applicant or alarm user and the alarm installation company or monitoring company.
B. The alarm user, alarm installation company or monitoring company may appeal any action described in subsection A of this section to the designated administrator of the police by setting forth in writing the reasons for the appeal and delivering the appeal to the police within 20 business days after receipt of notice of the action. Failure to deliver the appeal within that time period is a waiver of the right to appeal.
C. The procedure for an appeal of the Chief of Police is as follows:
    1. The applicant, alarm user, alarm installation company or monitoring company may file a written request for appeal by paying an appeal fee to the City of Lakewood and setting forth the reasons for the appeal. The appeal must be entitled “Appeal from Alarm Administrator’s Action.” Appeal fees will be returned to the appealing party if the appeal is successful. Upon good cause shown, the designated administrator of the Police Chief may, in the exercise of discretion, waive the appeal fee for residential alarm users.
    2. The designated administrator of the Police Chief shall conduct a recorded hearing within 30 days after receipt of the request for review and shall consider the evidence submitted by the appealing party and the Alarm Administrator. The designated administrator of the Police Chief must base his/her decision on the preponderance of evidence presented at the hearing and must render a decision within 15 days after the date of the hearing. The decision shall affirm or reverse the decision or action taken by the Alarm Administrator.
    3. Filing of an appeal stays any action by the Alarm Administrator to suspend an alarm permit or require the payment of a fee or penalty until the appeal process has been exhausted. This provision applies only to the action of the Alarm Administrator that is the subject of the appeal. The provision does not operate as a bar to enforcement action or violations of this chapter that occur thereafter.
D. The Alarm Administrator or the Chief of Police or their respective designees may adjust the count of false alarms based on:
    1. Evidence that false alarm was caused by action of a communications services provider (i.e., telephone, cellular, cable company);
    2. Evidence that a false alarm was caused by a power outage;
    3. Evidence that an alarm dispatch request was not a false alarm;
    4. The occurrence of multiple alarms within a 24-hour period, which may be considered as one false alarm to allow the alarm user time to take corrective action, unless the false alarms are directly caused by the alarm user; or the Alarm Administrator may waive all of a false alarm fee or a partial part of the fee due to extenuating circumstances or to encourage corrective action;
    5. On review of fees or penalties assessed to an alarm installation company or monitoring company, the Alarm Administrator, or, if appealed, the Chief, or designee, or the administrative hearing officer, may consider whether the alarm company had engaged in a consistent pattern of violations. [Ord. 664 § 5, 2017; Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.13.150 Reinstatement of suspended alarm permits.
A. On the first suspension of a permit, a person whose alarm permit has been suspended may obtain reinstatement of the permit by the Alarm Administrator if the person:
    1. Submits a new application and pays a reinstatement fee; and
    2. Pays, or otherwise resolves, all outstanding fees and penalties; and
    3. Submits a certification from an alarm installation company stating that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if necessary) by the alarm installation company; and
    4. The alarm user successfully completes an online alarm awareness class and test or written test to waive the first alarm suspension.
B. On the second and every subsequent suspension of a permit, reinstatement may be obtained by compliance with subsection A of this section and compliance with any of the following conditions that the Alarm Administrator may require:
    1. Proof that an employee of the alarm installation company or monitoring company caused the false alarm.
    2. Upgrade the alarm control panel to meet SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01.
    3. A written statement from an independent inspector designated by the Chief that the alarm system has been inspected and is in good working order.
    4. Conformation that all motion detectors are properly configured.
    5. Confirmation that the alarm system requires two independent zones to trigger before transmitting an alarm signal to the monitoring company.
    6. Conformation that the alarm system requires two independent detectors to trigger before transmitting an alarm signal to the monitoring company.
    7. Certification that the monitoring company will not make an alarm dispatch request unless the need for law enforcement response is confirmed by voice verification. This condition does not apply to residential property.
    8. Certification that the monitoring company will not make an alarm dispatch request unless the need for law enforcement response is confirmed by a camera device. This condition does not apply to residential property.
    9. Certification that the monitoring company will not make an alarm dispatch request unless the need for law enforcement is confirmed by a person at the alarm site.
    10. The alarm user successfully completes an online alarm awareness class and test.
C. The Chief shall reinstate the Police Department’s response to an alarm site as soon as is practicable after receiving notice of reinstatement from the Alarm Administrator. [Ord. 664 § 6, 2017; Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.13.160 Revocation of alarm user permit and business permit.
A. The Police Chief or designee may revoke an alarm user permit, alarm installation company permit or monitoring company permit if he determines that:
    1. There is a violation of this chapter by the alarm user, alarm installation company or monitoring company;
    2. There is a false statement of a material fact in the application for a permit;
    3. The registered alarm system has generated more than 12 false alarms during any 12-month period; or
    4. The alarm user, alarm installation company or monitoring company has failed to pay an alarm permit fee or late fee, a late renewal fee or any fee or penalty assessed under this chapter, more than 30 days after the fee is due.
B. The Chief or designee may, for good cause shown, reinstate a permit that has been revoked pursuant to this chapter. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.13.170 Confidentiality of alarm information.
A. All information contained in documents gathered through alarm permits, the submission of customer lists and in the alarm appeal process must be held in confidence by all employees of the Alarm Administrator, the City of Lakewood and any third-party administrator. Such information is proprietary and is hereby declared confidential. A disclosure of such information would violate the customer’s right to privacy and could endanger that person’s right to safety. Absent special circumstances, such information must not be released to the public or any person other than a law enforcement agency or the applicable alarm user, alarm installation company or monitoring company, except pursuant to court order. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.13.180 Scope of Police Chief duty – Immunities preserved.
The issuance of alarm permits does not create a contract between the Chief and or City of Lakewood and any alarm user, alarm installation company or monitoring company, nor does it create a duty or obligation, either express or implied, on the Chief to respond to an alarm. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure of the Chief to respond to an alarm dispatch request is hereby disclaimed and full governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By applying for an alarm permit, the alarm user acknowledges that the Chief’s response is influenced by the availability of officers, priority of calls, traffic conditions, weather conditions, emergency conditions and staffing levels, prior response history and administrative actions. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.13.190 Service charges.
Service charges for monitored alarm sites will be assessed to the alarm user, alarm installation company or monitoring company as specified in the provisions of this chapter. Service charges for unmonitored alarm sites will be assessed to the alarm user. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.13.200 Violation – Penalty.
In addition to the penalties and regulations provided herein, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.13.210 Construction.
All references to alarm fees in other sections of the Lakewood Municipal Code or in other legislation shall be construed as referring to this chapter. [Ord. 664 § 7, 2017.]

Chapter 9.14 FIREARMS, DANGEROUS WEAPONS, EXPLOSIVES

Sections:
9.14.005     Definitions.
9.14.010     Weapons apparently capable of producing bodily harm – Carrying, exhibiting, displaying or drawing unlawful – Exhibitions.
9.14.020     Weapons – Intoxicated persons – Places where liquor consumed.
9.14.030     Discharge of firearms in City prohibited.
9.14.040     Defenses.

9.14.005 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall control:
“Chako sticks” are defined as an instrument consisting of two or more sticks, clubs, bars or rods to be used as handles, connected by rope, cord, wire or chain in the design of a weapon used in connection with the practice of a system of self-defense, such as karate.
“Firearm” means a weapon or device from which a projectile or projectiles may be fired by an explosive such as gunpowder.
“Pistol” and “rifle” shall include but are not limited to pellet guns, B-B guns, air-propelled guns and similar devices.
“Throwing stars” are defined as an instrument consisting of a metal plate having three or more radiating points with one or more sharp edges and designed in the shape of a polygon, trefoil, cross, star, diamond, or other geometric shape for use as a weapon. [Ord. 566 § 3, 2013.]

9.14.010 Weapons apparently capable of producing bodily harm – Carrying, exhibiting, displaying or drawing unlawful – Exhibitions.
A. It is unlawful for anyone to carry, exhibit, display or draw any pistol, rifle, dagger, sword, knife or other cutting or stabbing instrument, club or any other weapon that appears to be capable of producing bodily harm, in a manner, under circumstances, and at a time and place that either manifests an intent to intimidate another or that warrants alarm for the safety of other persons. It is also unlawful, except as provided herein, for any person to possess or have within an area of dominion and control throwing stars and chako sticks.
B. Any person violating the provisions of subsection A of this section shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor. [Ord. 566 § 1, 2013; Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.14.020 Weapons – Intoxicated persons – Places where liquor consumed.
A. Any person other than the owner or manager approved as such by the Liquor and Cannabis Board who has in his possession or within his immediate physical control a deadly weapon while in an establishment where liquor or alcoholic beverages are served as a consumer thereof, or while under the influence of or affected by the use of intoxicating liquor or drugs as defined in RCW 46.61.506, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, but this section shall not apply in the former case to customers partaking of alcoholic beverages with a meal and while seated, nor in the latter case to a person in his own residence.
B. The proprietor of all establishments where liquor or alcoholic beverages are consumed on the premises must advise patrons of the requirements of this section. A conspicuous sign stating “No Weapons Allowed” or other sign approved by the Chief of Police and indicating this section is sufficient notice. No notice needs to be given or posted in the dining area of an establishment with a separate lounge.
C. “Deadly weapon” means any explosive or loaded or unloaded firearm or fixed blade cutting or stabbing instrument, and includes any other weapon, device, instrument, article, or substance as defined in this section, which, under the circumstances in which it is used, attempted to be used, or threatened to be used, is readily capable of causing death or serious bodily injury. [Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.14.030 Discharge of firearms in City prohibited.
The entire area of the City is a “no shoot” area. It is unlawful to shoot or discharge any firearm, pistol, rifle or similar device anywhere within the corporate limits of the City other than for the purposes of exercising the rights or allowable circumstances which may be authorized by law, to include but not limited to that conduct specified in RCW 9A.16.020, Chapter 9.41 RCW or LMC 9.14.040. [Ord. 566 § 2, 2013; Ord. 526 § 2, 2010.]

9.14.040 Defenses.
This chapter shall not apply to the following uses of a weapon or firearm:
A. Any act committed by a person while in his place of abode or fixed place of business in self-defense of such abode or business;
B. Any person acting for the purpose of protecting himself against the use or presently threatened unlawful force by another, or for the purpose of protecting another against the use of such unlawful force by the third person;
C. Any federal, military, state, county or municipal law enforcement officer in the discharge of their official duties, whether such officer is within or outside their jurisdictions, or on or off duty;
D. Any person engaged in military activities sponsored by the federal or state governments;
E. The provision relating to chako sticks or throwing stars shall not apply to or affect regularly enrolled members of clubs and associations organized for the practice, instruction or demonstration of self-defense arts involving chako sticks or throwing stars while such members are at, or are going to and from their place of residence, a practice session, an instruction session, a demonstration, or place of repair, or while such members are going from the place of purchase, providing that the chako sticks or throwing stars are in a carrying case in the possession of the owner;
F. Any person engaged in the lawful use of a pistol, rifle or other firearm at any commercial sport shooting range, or a private basement or cellar target range. For purposes of this chapter, a “commercial sport shooting range” means a business holding a master business license issued by the state of Washington and business operating license issued by the City of Lakewood to conduct a for-profit business under Chapter 5.02 LMC, and operating a shooting range at a building or facility designed for the use and discharge of pistols, rifles and other firearms;
G. Engaging in practice in the use of a firearm or target shooting at an established range owned by the City of Lakewood; or
H. Any person discharging blank cartridges in theatrical performances, sporting events, or education events or to the firing of salutes by a honor guard at funerals or memorials. [Ord. 566 § 4, 2013.]

Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

Chapters:
10.04        Model Traffic Ordinance
10.12        Speed Limits
10.16        Miscellaneous Traffic Violations
10.22        Bicycle Helmets
10.24        Traffic Congestion Areas – Cruising
10.28        Impoundment of Vehicles Driven by Drivers with Suspended Licenses

Chapter 10.04 MODEL TRAFFIC ORDINANCE

Sections:
10.04.010    Adoption of Model Traffic Ordinance.
10.04.020    Copy on file.
10.04.030    Additional code sections adopted by reference.
10.04.040    Authorized use of automated traffic safety cameras.
10.04.050    Penalty for violation of infraction noted by automated traffic safety cameras.

10.04.010 Adoption of Model Traffic Ordinance.
The “Washington Model Traffic Ordinance,” as set forth in Chapter 308-330 WAC, is hereby adopted by reference as the traffic ordinance of the City of Lakewood, as set forth in full. [Ord. 26 § 1, 1995.]

10.04.020 Copy on file.
A copy of the provisions of Chapter 308-330, WAC, containing the Washington Model Traffic Ordinance as adopted by reference pursuant to LMC 10.04.010, shall be on file in the Office of the City Clerk. [Ord. 26 § 2, 1995.]

10.04.030 Additional code sections adopted by reference.
The following sections of RCW Title 46, as they currently are and as they may be amended in the future, not having been included in the MTO, are hereby adopted by reference into the Lakewood Traffic Code:
46.08.185 Electric vehicle charging stations – Signage – Penalty.
46.16.160 Vehicle trip permits – Restrictions and requirements – Fees and taxes – Penalty – Rules.
46.20.055 Violation of instructional permit restrictions.
46.20.205 Failure to notify DOL of address change.
46.20.730 Ignition interlock device – Definition.
46.29.610 Requirements – Surrender of license – Penalty.
46.29.620 Forge proof of financial responsibility – Penalty.
46.37.685 License plate flipping device – Unlawful use, display, sale – Penalty.
46.44.080 Local weight regulations – Authority to establish.
46.63.160 Use of automated traffic safety cameras.
46.61.165 Violation of transit/carpool lane.
46.70.090 Unlawful/improper use of dealer license plates.
46.61.667 Using wireless communications device while driving.
46.61.668 Sending, reading or writing a text message while driving. [Ord. 573 § 10, 2013; Ord. 401 § 1, 2005; Ord. 110 § 1, 1997.]

10.04.040 Authorized use of automated traffic safety cameras.
A. Authority. 
    1. Law enforcement officers of the City of Lakewood and persons commissioned by the Chief of Police for the City of Lakewood are authorized to use automated traffic cameras and related automated systems to detect one or more of the following: (a) stoplight violations, (b) railroad crossing violations, and (c) school speed zone violations.
    2. The use of automated traffic safety cameras is subject to the following restrictions:
        a. Use of traffic safety cameras is restricted to two arterial intersections, railroad crossings, and school speed zones only;
        b. Automated traffic safety cameras may only take pictures of the vehicle and vehicle license plate and only while an infraction is occurring. Pictures taken by automated traffic safety cameras may not reveal the face of the driver or of the passengers in the vehicle.
    3. The City shall clearly mark all locations where automated traffic safety cameras are in use by placing signs in locations that clearly indicate to a driver that he or she is entering a zone where traffic laws are enforced by an automated traffic safety camera.
B. Notice of Infraction. 
    1. Whenever any vehicle is photographed by an automatic traffic safety camera, a notice of infraction shall be mailed to the registered owner of the vehicle within 14 days of the violation, or to the renter of a vehicle within 14 days of establishing the renter’s name and address under this section.
    2. If the registered owner of the vehicle is a rental car business, the law enforcement agency shall, before a notice of infraction is issued, provide a written notice to the rental car business that a notice of infraction may be issued to the rental car business if the rental car business does not, within 18 days of receiving the written notice, provide to the issuing agency by return mail:
        a. A statement under oath stating the name and known mailing address of the individual driving or renting the vehicle when the infraction occurred; or
        b. A statement under oath that the business is unable to determine who was driving or renting the vehicle at the time the infraction occurred; or
        c. In lieu of identifying the vehicle operator, the rental car business may pay the applicable penalty. Timely mailing of this statement to the issuing law enforcement agency relieves a rental car business of any liability under this chapter for the notice of infraction.
    3. The law enforcement officer issuing the notice of infraction shall include with it a certificate or facsimile thereof, based upon inspection of photographs, microphotos, or electronic images produced by an automated traffic safety camera, stating the facts supporting the notice of infraction. This certificate or facsimile is prima facie evidence of the facts contained in it and is admissible in a proceeding charging a violation under this chapter.
C. Request for Hearing. A person receiving a notice of infraction based on evidence detected by an automated traffic safety camera may respond to the notice by mail. The person receiving the infraction may also request a hearing.
D. Presumption of Committed Infraction/Presumption Overcome. 
    1. In a traffic infraction case involving an infraction detected through the use of a photo enforcement system under RCW 46.63.160 or detected through the use of an automated traffic safety camera under this section, proof that the particular vehicle described in the notice of traffic infraction was in violation of any such provision of RCW 46.63.160, together with proof that the person named in the notice of traffic infraction was at the time of the violation the registered owner of the vehicle, constitutes in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person in control of the vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, the violation occurred.
    2. This presumption may be overcome only if the registered owner states, under oath, in a written statement to the court or in testimony before the court that the vehicle involved was, at the time, stolen or in the care, custody, or control of some person other than the registered owner.
E. Infractions Processed. Infractions detected through the use of automated traffic safety cameras are not part of the registered owner’s driving record under RCW 46.52.101 and 46.52.120. Additionally, infractions generated by the use of automated traffic safety cameras under this section shall be processed in the same manner as parking infractions including RCW 3.46.120, 3.50.100, 35.20.220, 46.16.216 and 46.20.270(3).
F. Nothing in this section prohibits a law enforcement officer from issuing a notice of traffic infraction to a person in control of a vehicle at the time a violation occurs under RCW 46.63.030 (1)(a), (b), or (c).
G. For the purposes of this chapter, “automated traffic safety camera” means a device that uses a vehicle sensor installed to work in conjunction with an intersection traffic control system, a railroad grade crossing control system, or a speed measuring device, and a camera synchronized to automatically record one or more sequenced photographs, microphotographs, or electronic images of the rear of a motor vehicle at the time the vehicle fails to stop when facing a steady red traffic control signal or an activated railroad grade crossing control signal, or exceeds a speed limit to a school speed zone as detected by a speed measuring device. [Ord. 401 § 1, 2005.]

10.04.050 Penalty for violation of infraction noted by automated traffic safety cameras.
A violation of any portion of this chapter shall be a violation punishable by infraction penalties established by the Washington Administrative Code except that the maximum fine to be assessed for violations of an infraction recorded by an automated traffic safety camera will not exceed $250.00. [Ord. 401 § 1, 2005.]

Chapter 10.12 SPEED LIMITS

Sections:
10.12.010    Speed limits.
10.12.020    City Manager authorized to designate speed limits.
10.12.025    Temporary decreases authorized.
10.12.030    City Manager to maintain list of streets with designated speed limits.
10.12.040    Traffic control devices.
10.12.050    Penalty.

10.12.010 Speed limits.
The maximum speed limit for all streets or roads within the City is established as 25 miles per hour except where a lower or greater maximum speed limit is specifically established as provided by this chapter or by state law and posted with appropriate signage. [Ord. 28 § 1, 1995.]

10.12.020 City Manager authorized to designate speed limits.
The City Manager or designee is authorized to designate the maximum speed limit for all streets or roads within the City where a different maximum speed limit is set than the speed limit of 25 miles per hour, except where a lower or greater maximum speed limit is specifically established by City ordinance or by state law. In making speed limit determinations, the City Manager or designee shall consider traffic levels of service and safety in light of relevant circumstances and applicable factors. Any streets with a different maximum speed limit than 25 miles per hour shall be posted with appropriate signage. [Ord. 28 § 2, 1995.]

10.12.025 Temporary decreases authorized.
The City Manager or designee is authorized to establish a maximum speed limit of 20 miles per hour on all streets or roads within the City when the City Manager or designee deems it unadvisable for vehicles to operate at the maximum speed limit allowed by state law due to temporary conditions, including, but not limited to, construction or repairs; identified excessive traffic periods; dangerous conditions; emergencies, whether manmade or natural disaster; or any other temporary cause (RCW 46.61.415).
A. A speed limit established under this section does not need to be determined on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation;
B. When establishing a speed limit under this section, the City Manager or designee shall consult the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices as adopted by the Washington State Department of Transportation and shall ensure that adequate signage reflecting the reduced speed limits is maintained;
C. Temporary controls will be removed when the City Manager or designee determines that conditions no longer warrant their continued use; and
D. Alteration of maximum limits on state highways within the City shall not be effective until such alteration has been approved by the Secretary of Transportation. [Ord. 690 § 1, 2018.]

10.12.030 City Manager to maintain list of streets with designated speed limits.
The City Manager or designee shall maintain a list of City streets and roads, designating the maximum speed limits thereon as established by the City; provided, that the maximum speed limit on all City streets or roads not included in the listing is 25 miles per hour as specified in LMC 10.12.010. The list shall be made available to the public during all normal City Hall business hours. [Ord. 28 § 3, 1995.]

10.12.040 Traffic control devices.
The City Manager or designee is directed to post City streets and roads with the proper traffic-control devices to regulate the maximum speed limits as established by the City, including traffic control signs in school zones pursuant to RCW 46.61.440, and said speed limits shall become effective when posted. In addition, the City shall be authorized to use automated traffic safety cameras in school speed zones and shall clearly mark all locations where automated traffic safety cameras are in use by placing signs in locations that clearly indicate to a driver that he or she is entering a zone where traffic laws are enforced by an automated traffic safety camera. The maximum legal speed limit on any City street or road or portion thereof which is not posted with a regulatory speed limit sign is 25 miles per hour. [Ord. 401 § 2, 2005; Ord. 28 § 4, 1995.]

10.12.050 Penalty.
A violation of the established speed limits shall be an infraction and punished in accordance with Chapter 308-330 WAC. [Ord. 28 § 5, 1995.]

Chapter 10.16 MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS

Sections:
10.16.010    Parking on roadway or in a manner which impedes traffic – Exceptions.
10.16.015    Parking in public right-of-way.
10.16.020    Use of City rights-of-way – Display of merchandise prohibited.
10.16.030    No oversize or commercial vehicles on residential streets.
10.16.040    Interference with Postal Service.
10.16.050    Pedestrian obstruction in roadways.
10.16.060    Parking restrictions – Authority to identify restrictive zones.
10.16.070    Avoidance of intersections penalty.
10.16.080    Inattentive driving penalty.

10.16.010 Parking on roadway or in a manner which impedes traffic – Exceptions.
A. It shall be unlawful for any driver or operator of a vehicle to stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, on the travel portion of any public roadway or park, stop or leave any motor vehicle in any other location which impedes, restricts or prevents travel over, or across any public roadway. Violation of this section shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a penalty not to exceed the amount of $124.00, in addition to other costs and assessments provided by law.
B. The travel portion of any public roadway, for the purposes of this section, shall include any roadway median, center, merge or turn lane.
C. A law enforcement officer may immediately remove any vehicle that is unsafely parked, stopped or blocking traffic on a public street. Such removal may take place without notice to the driver or registered owner of the vehicle.
D. It is provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the driver of a public transit vehicle who temporarily stops the vehicle upon the roadway for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers at a marked transit vehicle stop; and, this section shall not apply to the driver of a solid waste collection company or recycling company vehicle who temporarily stops the vehicle as close as practical to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder of the roadway or right edge of the roadway if no shoulder exists for the purpose of and while actually engaged in collection of solid waste or recyclables, or both under Chapters 81.77, 35.21, and 35A.21 RCW or by contract under RCW 36.58.030.
E. A vehicle is defined as any device capable or designed to be capable of moving upon a public highway whether motorized or not; including vehicles towed by another vehicle such as trailers. [Ord. 543 § 1, 2011; Ord. 467 § 1, 2008; Ord. 35 § 1, 1996.]

10.16.015 Parking in public right-of-way.
A. Consistent with the procedures and requirements of RCW 46.55.085, as now stated or hereinafter amended, a law enforcement officer discovering an unauthorized vehicle parked upon public right-of-way shall attach to the vehicle a readily visible notification sticker. The sticker shall contain the following information:
    1. The date and time the sticker was attached;
    2. The identity of the officer;
    3. A statement that if the vehicle is not removed within 48 hours from the time the sticker is attached, the vehicle may be taken into custody and stored at the owner’s expense;
    4. A statement that if the vehicle is not removed from the roadway, the registered owner will have committed the crime of littering, a gross misdemeanor; and
    5. The address and telephone number where additional information may be obtained about the notification.
B. If the vehicle has a current vehicle license plate, the officer shall check the record to determine the identity of the registered owner and, if possible, contact the owner.
C. For purposes of this chapter, law enforcement officers shall include police officers as well as those employees who have special limited commissions such as code enforcement officers and community service officers.
D. If the vehicle is not removed within 48 hours from the time the notification sticker is attached, the law enforcement officer may take custody of the vehicle and provide for the vehicle’s removal to a place of safety. A vehicle that does not pose a safety hazard may remain on the roadside for more than 48 hours if the owner or operator is unable to remove it from the place where it is located and so notifies law enforcement officials and requests assistance for removal of the vehicle.
E. In addition, a violation of this section shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a penalty not to exceed the amount of $20.00, in addition to other costs and assessments provided by law. [Ord. 543 § 1, 2011; Ord. 467 § 2, 2008.]

10.16.020 Use of City rights-of-way – Display of merchandise prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to place or cause or suffer to be placed by any person in his or her employ or under his or her control, any vehicles, goods, wares, products, clothing, merchandise, produce, food products, or any other items of any type or nature, whether of the same description or not, on any City street, sidewalk, crosswalk or public right-of-way, whether in front of or alongside of his/her place of business or elsewhere on the public right-of-way, for the purpose of display, sale, presentation, or any other activity in connection with the intent to sell or offer the same for sale, other than actions while in the actual course of receipt or delivery. It is unlawful for any person to use any portion of the City street, sidewalk, crosswalk or public right-of-way, whether in front of or alongside of his/her place of business or elsewhere on the public right-of-way for the purpose of measuring, packaging, weighing, storing or otherwise providing for and making available for sale. Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000, in addition to other costs and assessments provided by law. [Ord. 35 § 2, 1996.]

10.16.030 No oversize or commercial vehicles on residential streets.
No person shall park any vehicle which is more than 80 inches in width or any commercial vehicle larger than a three-quarter-ton pick-up on any street, alley or public right-of-way in any residential neighborhood in the City. For the purposes hereof, a residential neighborhood shall mean an area where the majority of property in the vicinity is used for residential purposes and/or open space uses and is zoned for residential purposes or open space uses; provided, that it shall be a defense to a violation of this section that the vehicle was parked directly adjacent to and on the same side of the street as property on which a commercial business, other than a home occupation, is located; and it shall be a defense to a violation of this section that during the entire time that the vehicle was parked in the residential neighborhood the operator of the vehicle was actively engaged in making a delivery or providing services to residents in the immediate vicinity of where the vehicle was parked. The penalty for parking in violation of this section shall be a fine of up to $250.00, with a minimum fine of $100.00 per violation, in addition to other costs and assessments provided by law. A violation of this section shall be considered an infraction and shall be processed in accordance with the state statutes regarding infractions. Each 24-hour period during which a violation occurs constitutes a separate infraction. [Ord. 140 § 1, 1997; Ord. 35 § 3, 1996.]

10.16.040 Interference with Postal Service.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in front of, adjacent or in such proximity to any mailbox, postal drop box, or other similar postal receptacle so as to interfere with the delivery of mail by the United States Postal Service. The penalty for parking in violation of this section shall be $35.00, in addition to other costs and assessments provided by law. A violation of this section shall be considered an infraction and shall be processed in accordance with the state statutes regarding infractions. [Ord. 35 § 4, 1996.]

10.16.050 Pedestrian obstruction in roadways.
A. As used in this section:
    1. “Curb” means the lateral lines of a roadway, whether constructed above grade or not, which are not intended for vehicular travel.
    2. “Roadway” means that portion of the public street including the vertical airspace above such portion of the public street, which is improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the curb, berm or shoulder.
B. No person shall intentionally interrupt or obstruct the movement of vehicle or bicycle travel by walking on, standing on or going into any roadway used for vehicle or bicycle travel and contacting any vehicle, bicycle or occupant therein or halting the travel of such vehicle, bicycle or occupant therein.
C. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. [Ord. 669 § 1, 2017; Ord. 35 § 5, 1996.]

10.16.060 Parking restrictions – Authority to identify restrictive zones.
The City Manager or designee is authorized to identify and designate by appropriate signage parking restrictions, time limitations and parking prohibitions for certain streets of the City, in order to provide for reasonable parking availability and safe use of City streets. The penalty for violations of posted parking restrictions, prohibitions, or time periods shall be $10.00, in addition to other costs and assessments provided by law. A violation of this section shall be considered an infraction and shall be processed in accordance with the state statutes regarding infractions. It is provided however that the provisions of this section shall not apply to violations of parking regulations specifically set forth and provided for in other sections of the City Code. [Ord. 35 § 6, 1996.]

10.16.070 Avoidance of intersections penalty.
A. It is unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle on the highways of the City to proceed across any private property for the purpose of avoiding any intersection or any traffic control device controlling the intersection, unless so directed by lawful authority.
B. A violation of this section shall be a traffic infraction punishable by a base monetary penalty of $37.00 plus assessments with an increased base penalty of $62.00 plus assessments if an accident occurs as a result of the underlying infraction pursuant to IRLJ 6.2d. [Ord. 409 § 1, 2006.]

10.16.080 Inattentive driving penalty.
A. It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in an inattentive manner over the highways of the City.
B. For the purpose of this section, “inattentive” means the operation of a vehicle upon the public highways of the City in a lax, slack or careless manner likely to cause an accident. Operation of a vehicle in a lax, slack or careless manner may be evidenced by activity which would have been avoidable but for the driver’s divided attention, that does not necessarily rise to the level of negligent driving, but which endangers or is likely to endanger any person or property.
C. A violation of this section shall be a traffic infraction punishable by a base monetary penalty of $37.00 plus assessments with an increase to $62.00 plus assessments if an accident occurs as a result of the underlying infraction pursuant to IRLJ 6.2d. [Ord. 409 § 1, 2006.]

Chapter 10.22 BICYCLE HELMETS

Sections:
10.22.010    Definitions.
10.22.020    Bicycle helmet required.
10.22.030    Bicycle races and events – Bicycle helmet required.
10.22.040    Bicycle leasing or loan – Bicycle helmet required.
10.22.050    Helmet sales – Safety standards.
10.22.060    Penalties – Traffic infraction.
10.22.070    Enforcement.
10.22.080    Information and education.

10.22.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
“Bicycle” means every device propelled solely by human power upon which a person or persons may ride, having two tandem wheels, either of which is 12 inches or more in diameter, or three wheels, any one of which is more than 20 inches in diameter (RCW 46.04.071). Within this chapter, the term “bicycle” shall include any attached trailers, side cars, and/or other device being towed by a bicycle.
“Guardian” means a parent, legal guardian, an adult with custody, or temporary guardian, who maintains responsibility, whether voluntary or otherwise, for the safety and welfare of a person under the age of 18 years.
“Helmet” means a head covering that meets or exceeds safety standards adopted by Standard Z-90.4 set by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), or the Snell Foundation, or such subsequent nationally recognized standard for bicycle helmet performance as the City may adopt.
“Public area” means public streets, bicycle paths, parks, or any right-of-way or publicly owned facility under the jurisdiction of the City. [Ord. 96 § 1, 1996.]

10.22.020 Bicycle helmet required.
A. Any person bicycling or riding as a bicycle passenger on or in tow of a bicycle upon any public area in the City shall wear an approved bicycle helmet designed for safety that meets or exceeds the standards adopted in LMC 10.22.010, and shall have either the neck or chin strap of the helmet fastened securely while the bicycle is in motion.
B. No person shall transport another person on or in tow of a bicycle upon any public area in the jurisdiction of the City, unless the passenger is wearing a helmet that meets the requirements of this chapter.
C. A parent or guardian is responsible for requiring that a child under the age of 16 years wears an approved bicycle helmet while bicycling or riding as a passenger on a bicycle in any public area in the City, and has the neck or chin strap of the helmet fastened securely. [Ord. 96 § 1, 1996.]

10.22.030 Bicycle races and events – Bicycle helmet required.
A. Any person managing a bicycle race, an organized event involving bicycling, or a bicycle tour in the public areas of the City shall require that all participants on or in tow of bicycles wear approved bicycle helmets.
B. The person managing any such event shall include the bicycle helmet requirement in any promotional brochures and on registration materials. [Ord. 96 § 1, 1996.]

10.22.040 Bicycle leasing or loan – Bicycle helmet required.
A. Any person engaging in the business of renting or loaning (e.g., “a test drive”) any bicycle for use in any public place in the City shall supply the persons leasing or using bicycles with approved bicycle helmets as defined herein, along with the bicycles, unless the bicycle riders and passengers possess approved bicycle helmets of their own, and offer proof thereof, for use with the bicycle.
B. The rental papers (contract, agreement, or receipt) must advise the person renting the bicycle of the bicycle helmet requirements of this chapter.
C. It is a defense to this section for a person wearing an unapproved bicycle helmet that the helmet was furnished in conjunction with his or her lease of a bicycle by a person engaged in the business of renting bicycles, and that the helmet was fastened securely while bicycling. [Ord. 96 § 1, 1996.]

10.22.050 Helmet sales – Safety standards.
A. No person shall sell or offer for sale a bicycle helmet that does not meet or exceed the safety standards set by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Standard Z-90.4, or the Snell Foundation, or such subsequent nationally recognized standard for bicycle helmet performance as the City may adopt.
B. It is a defense that the sale or offer for sale was an isolated sale of used merchandise made by an individual who was not engaged in the business of selling or repairing recreational equipment, such as a seller at a garage or rummage sale. [Ord. 96 § 1, 1996.]

10.22.060 Penalties – Traffic infraction.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall have committed a traffic infraction and shall be liable for monetary penalties as set forth in Chapter 46.63 RCW, not to exceed $25.00.
B. The Court may waive, reduce, or suspend the penalty and clear the notice of violation as a warning for an individual who has not received a notice of violation of this chapter within one year, and provides proof that he or she has acquired an approved bicycle helmet at the time of appearance in Court.
C. Each child under 16 not meeting the requirements of LMC 10.22.020 shall represent a separate violation.
D. Each rental and each event under LMC 10.22.040 shall be a separate violation. [Ord. 96 § 1, 1996.]

10.22.070 Enforcement.
A. The law enforcement agency of the City shall be responsible to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, law enforcement officers may at their discretion:
    1. Enter, during business hours, the premises of a business selling, repairing, or renting bicycles or selling sporting or recreation equipment, to determine compliance with this chapter;
    2. Post notice outside the premises of a business that offers for sale, rent, or other public use, bicycle helmets that do not meet the safety standards of this chapter, so that the public is informed; and
    3. Stop a bicycle race, an organized event involving bicycling, or a bicycle tour that takes place in a public area, when there is conspicuous disregard for the requirements of this chapter, involving multiple infractions. [Ord. 96 § 1, 1996.]

10.22.080 Information and education.
A. Information about the need for bicycle helmets, safe helmet use, safe bicycle operation, and existing bicycle safety programs is available at City Hall.
B. The City encourages any person engaging in the business of selling bicycles to include information on bicycle safety and the bicycle helmet requirements of this chapter with each bicycle sold.
C. The City encourages any person engaging in the business of selling bicycle helmets to include information on safe helmet usage with each helmet sold. [Ord. 96 § 1, 1996.]

Chapter 10.24 TRAFFIC CONGESTION AREAS – CRUISING

Sections:
10.24.010    Definitions.
10.24.020    Designation of traffic congestion areas.
10.24.030    Traffic congestion areas – Posting of signs.
10.24.040    Traffic congestion areas designation – Duration.
10.24.050    Traffic congestion areas – Violation.
10.24.060    Exemptions.
10.24.070    Violation – Penalty.

10.24.010 Definitions.
“Cruising” is the repeated passage of a motor vehicle on or across a portion of a street or way open to the public.
“Traffic congestion area” is any portion of a street or way open to the public affected by traffic congestion caused in whole or part by cruising and declared to be a “traffic congestion area” by the City Manager or designee. [Ord. 76 § 1, 1996.]

10.24.020 Designation of traffic congestion areas.
The City Manager or designee shall declare all or a portion of a street or way open to the public to be a “traffic congestion area” when, in his or her discretion:
A. Cruising has slowed average vehicular speed to less than one-half of the posted speed limit; or
B. Cruising interferes with the ingress and egress of any vehicle being driven into and out of any location (e.g., parking lot) within a designated traffic congestion area; or
C. Cruising interferes with buses or taxi cabs in areas containing public transit routes or stops; or
D. Cruising is likely to delay emergency vehicles from responding to locations within the designated traffic congestion area. [Ord. 76 § 1, 1996.]

10.24.030 Traffic congestion areas – Posting of signs.
A. When a street or way open to the public is designated a traffic congestion area pursuant to this chapter, the City Manager or designee shall post along the street or way so designated, in a conspicuous position, signs identifying the street or way open to the public as a traffic congestion area.
B. The signs shall be placed so as to reasonably notify passing drivers that a motor vehicle passing through a designated traffic congestion area more than two times in the same direction within a two-hour period is a violation of law.
C. Signs identifying an area as a traffic congestion area shall be at least three feet by three feet and shall state: “NOTICE – THIS IS A TRAFFIC CONGESTION AREA. THE DRIVER OF ANY VEHICLE PASSING THROUGH THIS AREA IN THE SAME DIRECTION MORE THAN TWO (2) TIMES IN ANY TWO (2) HOUR PERIOD SHALL BE GUILTY OF A MISDEMEANOR AND SUBJECT TO A PENALTY OF $250.00.”
D. The lettering of the phrase contained on the signs erected pursuant to this chapter shall be two and a one-half inches in height and two inches in width and shall be of a reflective material so as to be visible in the evening hours. [Ord. 76 § 1, 1996.]

10.24.040 Traffic congestion areas designation – Duration.
The designation of a street or a way open to the public as a traffic congestion area shall remain in effect for a period of four hours in any given 24-hour period, and may be extended for an additional four-hour period by the City Manager or designee when, in the discretion of the City Manager or designee, such an extension will serve the public’s health and/or safety interests. [Ord. 76 § 1, 1996.]

10.24.050 Traffic congestion areas – Violation.
Except as provided for in LMC 10.24.060, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or permit a motor vehicle under his or her control to pass more than two times in the same direction within any two-hour period on a street or way open to the public and designated as a traffic congestion area in accordance with this chapter. [Ord. 76 § 1, 1996.]

10.24.060 Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to:
A. Any publicly owned vehicle of any city, county, public district, state, or federal agency; or
B. Any vehicle licensed for the purpose of public transportation, including but not limited to buses and taxi cabs; or
C. Any emergency vehicle, including but not limited to police cars, fire engines, ambulances, or tow trucks; or
D. Any vehicle being driven within a designated traffic congestion area for necessary commercial or medical reasons; or
E. Any person who can demonstrate that he or she lives within a designated traffic congestion area. [Ord. 76 § 1, 1996.]

10.24.070 Violation – Penalty.
Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor subject to a maximum penalty of $250.00. [Ord. 76 § 1, 1996.]

Chapter 10.28 IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES DRIVEN BY DRIVERS WITH SUSPENDED LICENSES

Sections:
10.28.010    Removal by police officer.
10.28.020    Towing and storage.
10.28.030    Administrative fee.
10.28.040    Owner of impounded vehicle to be notified.
10.28.050    Redemption of impounded vehicles.
10.28.060    Post-impoundment hearing procedure.
10.28.070    Rules and regulations.
10.28.080    Severability.

10.28.010 Removal by police officer.
A. Whenever the driver of a vehicle is arrested or cited for a violation of RCW 46.20.342, 46.20.345, 46.61.502 or 46.61.504, which sections have been adopted as a part of the City’s Model Traffic Ordinance pursuant to Chapter 308-330 WAC through Chapter 10.04 LMC, or subsequent amendments thereto, the vehicle may be subject to summary impoundment at the direction of a police officer.
B. If the vehicle was impounded because the driver was arrested for a violation of driving while license suspended (DWLS) in the third degree, as defined in RCW 46.20.342(1)(c), and the records of the Washington State Department of Licensing (DOL) show the driver has no prior convictions of RCW 46.20.342 or other similar local ordinance, the impounded vehicle may be released as soon as all requirements of LMC 10.28.030 and 10.28.050(A) are met.
C. If the vehicle was impounded because the driver was arrested for a violation of DWLS in the third degree, and the records of the DOL show that the driver has one or more prior convictions of a violation of RCW 46.20.342 or similar local ordinance within the past five years, the vehicle may be impounded for 30 days.
D. If the vehicle was impounded because the driver was arrested for DWLS in the first or second degree, as defined in RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or 46.20.342(1)(b), and the records of the DOL show that the driver has no prior convictions for a violation of RCW 46.20.342 or similar local ordinance within the past five years, the vehicle may be impounded for 30 days.
E. If the vehicle was impounded because the driver was arrested for DWLS in the first or second degree, as defined in RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or 46.20.342(1)(b), and the records of the DOL show that the driver has one prior conviction for a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or 46.20.342(1)(b) or similar local ordinance within the past five years, the vehicle may be impounded for 60 days.
F. If the vehicle was impounded because the driver was arrested for DWLS in the first or second degree, as defined in RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or 46.20.342(1)(b), and the records of the DOL show that the driver has two or more prior convictions for a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or 46.20.342(1)(b) or similar local ordinance within the past five years, the vehicle may be impounded for 90 days.
G. If the vehicle was impounded because the driver was arrested for a violation of RCW 46.20.345, the vehicle may be impounded for 30 days.
H. If the vehicle was impounded because the driver was arrested for a violation of RCW 46.61.502 or 46.61.504, driving under the influence or having physical control of a vehicle while under the influence, as adopted by the Model Traffic Ordinance in WAC 308-330-307 through LMC 10.04, the vehicle may be impounded for a period of 12 hours. The vehicle may be released after this 12-hour impound as soon as the requirements of LMC 10.28.030 and 10.28.050(A) are met.
I. When an arrest is made for a violation of RCW 46.20.342, if the vehicle is a commercial vehicle and the driver of the vehicle is not the owner of the vehicle, before the summary impoundment directed under subsection A of this section, the police officer shall attempt in a reasonable and timely manner to contact the owner of the vehicle and may release the vehicle to the owner if the owner is reasonably available, as long as the owner was not in the vehicle at the time of the stop and arrest and the owner has not received a prior release under this subsection or under LMC 10.28.050.
J. A rental car business or a motor vehicle dealer or lender with a perfected security interest may immediately redeem a vehicle it owns that has been impounded pursuant to this section by payment of the costs of removal, towing and storage. Upon such payment the vehicle will not be held for the period of impoundment stated in this section. [Ord. 511 § 1, 2010; Ord. 316 § 1, 2003; Ord. 194 § 1, 1999.]

10.28.020 Towing and storage.
The Chief of Police is authorized to prepare specifications for towing and storage of vehicles, including instructions to towing companies, containing such provisions as the Chief of Police shall deem advisable and not in conflict with this chapter. The specifications shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Manager. [Ord. 316 § 2, 2003; Ord. 214 § 1, 1999; Ord. 194 § 1, 1999.]

10.28.030 Administrative fee.
A. If a vehicle is impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, an administrative fee of $100.00 shall be paid prior to the redemption of the vehicle as provided by this chapter.
B. The administrative fee shall be paid to the Lakewood Finance Department, and shall be redeemed to the Finance Department in the manner directed by the Finance Director. The administrative fee shall be for the purpose of offsetting, to the extent practical, the cost of the City and its Police Department for implementing, enforcing and administering the provisions of this chapter and shall be deposited in the appropriate account. [Ord. 316 § 3, 2003; Ord. 214 § 2, 1999; Ord. 194 § 1, 1999.]

10.28.040 Owner of impounded vehicle to be notified.
A. Not more than 24 hours after impoundment of any vehicle, the tow contractor shall mail a notice by first class mail to the last known legal and registered owners of the vehicles, as may be disclosed by the vehicle identification number, and as provided by the DOL. The notice shall include the name of the impounding tow firm, its address, and telephone number. The notice shall include the location and time of the impound, and by whose authority the vehicle was impounded. The notice shall include the written notice of the right of redemption and opportunity for a hearing to contest the validity of the impound or the amount of towing and storage charges. The notice shall state the length of the impound.
B. The notice required in subsection A of this section shall state that a person who desires to redeem a vehicle impounded must, within five days of the impound at the request of the tow truck operator, pay a security deposit to the tow truck operator of not more than half of the applicable impound storage rate for each day of the proposed suspended license impound to ensure payment of the costs of the removal, towing, and storage of the vehicle pursuant to RCW 46.55.120(1)(b).
C. The notification required in subsection A of this section shall state that if the security deposit is not posted within five days of the impound the vehicle will immediately be processed and sold at auction as an abandoned vehicle pursuant to RCW 46.55.130(1). The notice shall state the requirements set out in LMC 10.28.050 regarding the payment of the costs of removal, towing, and storage as well as providing proof of satisfaction of any penalties, fines, or forfeitures before redemption. The notice must also state that the registered owner is ineligible to purchase the vehicle at the abandoned vehicle auction, if held.
D. If the date on which a notice required by subsection A of this section is to be mailed falls upon a Saturday, Sunday, or postal holiday, the notice may be mailed on the next day that is neither a Saturday, Sunday, nor a postal holiday.
E. Similar notice shall be given to each person who seeks to redeem an impounded vehicle, except that if a vehicle is redeemed prior to the mailing of notice, then notice need not be mailed.
F. The Lakewood Police Department shall give written notification to the last registered and legal owner that the investigatory hold has been removed, except that if a vehicle is redeemed following notice by telephone and prior to the mailing of notice, then notice need not be mailed. In addition, the Police Department shall notify the towing contractor, by telephone, fax or in writing, of the authorization to release such vehicle.
G. As provided for in RCW 46.55.120(4), as now stated or hereinafter amended, notwithstanding the statements contained in the notice described above, the legal owner of a vehicle or personal property subject to impound under this section may redeem such property before the start of an auction by payment of the applicable towing, administrative and storage fees, as well as all applicable or necessary fines and interest. [Ord. 511 § 2, 2010; Ord. 214 § 3, 1999; Ord. 194 § 1, 1999.]

10.28.050 Redemption of impounded vehicles.
A. Only the registered owner, a person authorized by the registered owner, or one who has purchased the vehicle from the registered owner, who produced proof of ownership or authorization and signs a receipt therefor, may redeem an impounded vehicle. A person redeeming a vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter must, prior to redemption, establish that he or she has a valid driver’s license and is in compliance with RCW 46.30.020. A vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter can be released only pursuant to a written order from the Police Department or a court.
B. Any person so redeeming a vehicle impounded by the City shall pay the towing contractor for costs of impoundment (towing and storage) and shall pay the City an administrative fee prior to redeeming such vehicle. Such towing contractor shall accept payment as provided in RCW 46.55.120(1)(b), as now or hereafter amended. If the vehicle was impounded pursuant to this chapter and was being operated by the registered owner when it was impounded, it may not be released to any person until any penalties, fines, or forfeitures owed by the registered owner have been satisfied. The administrative fee stated in LMC 10.28.030 shall be paid to the Lakewood Finance Department.
C. The Chief of Police or designee is authorized to release a vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter, prior to the expiration of any period of impoundment, upon petition of the spouse of the driver based on economic or personal hardship to such spouse resulting from the unavailability of the vehicle, and after consideration of the threat to public safety that may result from release of the vehicle, including but not limited to, the driver’s criminal history, driving record, license status and access to the vehicle. If such release is authorized, the person redeeming the vehicle still must satisfy all other requirements of this section. A vehicle may be released prior to the expiration of the impound period if the owner of the vehicle was not the driver, the owner did not know the driver’s license was suspended or revoked, and the owner has not received a prior release under this section or under LMC 10.28.010(I). Other than for the reasons expressed above, in order to avoid discriminatory application, early release of an impounded vehicle shall be denied in all other circumstances without discretion.
D. Any person seeking to redeem a vehicle impounded as a result of a traffic arrest, pursuant this chapter, has a right to a hearing, before the Police Chief or designee, as the administrative hearings officer, to contest the validity of an impoundment or the amount of towing and storage charges, if such request for hearing is in writing, in a form approved by the Chief of Police and signed by such person, and is received by the Chief of Police within 10 days (including Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays) of the latter of the date the notice was mailed to such person pursuant to LMC 10.28.040, or the date the notice was given to such person by the registered tow truck operator, pursuant to RCW 46.55.120(2)(a). Such hearing shall be provided as follows:
    1. If all the requirements to redeem the vehicle, including expiration of any period of impoundment under LMC 10.28.010, have been satisfied, then the impounded vehicle shall be released immediately, and a hearing as provided for in LMC 10.28.060 shall be held within 90 days of the written request for hearing.
    2. If all of the requirements to redeem the vehicle, including expiration of any period of impoundment under LMC 10.28.010, have not been satisfied, then the impounded vehicle shall not be released until after the hearing which, pursuant to LMC 10.28.060, shall be held within 10 business days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) of the written request for hearing.
    3. Any person seeking a hearing who has failed to request such hearing within the time specified in LMC 10.28.060, may petition the Chief of Police for an extension to file a request for hearing. Such extension shall only be granted upon the demonstration of good cause as to the reason(s) the request for hearing was not timely filed. For the purposes of this section, good cause shall be defined as circumstances beyond the control of the person seeking the hearing, that prevented such person from filing a timely request for hearing. In the event such extension is granted, the person receiving such extension shall be granted a hearing in accordance with this chapter.
    4. If a person fails to file a timely request for hearing, and an extension to file such a request has not been granted, the right to a hearing is waived, the impoundment and the associated costs of impoundment are deemed to be proper, and the City shall not be liable for towing and storage charges arising from the impoundment.
    5. In accordance with RCW 46.55.240(1)(d), a decision made by the Police Chief or designee, as administrative hearings officer, may be appealed to the Lakewood Municipal Court for final judgment. The hearing on the appeal, under this subsection, shall be de novo. A person appealing such a decision must file a request for an appeal in the Municipal Court within 15 days after the decision of the administrative hearings officer, and must pay a filing fee in the same amount required for the filing of a suit in the Pierce County District Court. If a person fails to file a request for an appeal, within the time specified by this section, or does not pay the filing fee, the right to an appeal is waived and the administrative hearings officer’s decision is final. [Ord. 511 § 3, 2010; Ord. 316 § 4, 2003; Ord. 214 § 4, 1999; Ord. 194 § 1, 1999.]

10.28.060 Post-impoundment hearing procedure.
Hearings requested pursuant to LMC 10.28.050 shall be held by the Police Chief or designee, as administrative hearings officer, who shall determine whether the impoundment was proper, and whether the associated towing, storage, and administrative fees were proper.
A. At the hearing, an abstract of the driver’s driving record is admissible, without further evidentiary foundation, and is prima facie evidence of the status of the driver’s license, permit, or privilege to drive and that the driver was convicted of each offense shown on the abstract. In addition, police officers may testify as to whom they believe to be the legal or registered owner of the vehicle and the basis or source of the information upon which they base this belief.
B. If the impoundment is found to be proper, the Police Chief or designee, as administrative hearings officer, shall enter an order so stating. In the event that the costs of impoundment (towing, storage, and special fees) have not been paid, or any other applicable requirements of LMC 10.28.050 have not been satisfied, or any period of impoundment under LMC 10.28.010 has not expired, the administrative hearings officer’s order shall also provide that the impounded vehicle shall be released only after payment to the City of any fines imposed on any underlying traffic infraction, satisfaction of any other applicable requirements of LMC 10.28.050, after payment of the costs of impoundment to the towing company, and after the expiration of any period of impoundment under LMC 10.28.010. In the event that the Police Chief or designee, as administrative hearings officer, grants time payments, the City shall be responsible for paying the costs of impoundment to the towing company. The Police Chief or designee, as administrative hearings officer, shall grant time payments only in cases of extreme financial need, and where there is an effective guarantee of payment.
C. If the impoundment is found to be improper, the Police Chief or designee, as administrative hearings officer, shall enter an order so stating, and order the immediate release of the vehicle. If the costs of impoundment have already been paid, the Police Chief or designee, as administrative hearings officer, shall enter judgment against the City and in favor of the person who has paid the costs of impoundment in the amount of the costs of the impoundment and any administrative fee.
D. In the event that the Police Chief or designee, as administrative hearings officer, finds that the impound was proper, but that the towing, storage, and/or special fees charged for the impoundment were improper, the administrative hearings officer shall determine the correct fees to be charged. If the costs of impoundment have been paid, the administrative hearings officer shall notify the City to reimburse the person who has paid the costs of impoundment for the amount of overpayment and any filing fee.
E. No determination of facts made at a hearing, under this section, shall have any collateral estoppel effect on a subsequent criminal prosecution, and shall not preclude litigation of those same facts in a subsequent criminal prosecution.
F. An appeal of the administrative hearings officer’s decision in the Municipal Court shall be subject to and conducted according to the procedures of this section. [Ord. 316 § 5, 2003; Ord. 194 § 1, 1999.]

10.28.070 Rules and regulations.
The City Manager, in consultation with the Finance Director and the Chief of Police, shall promulgate rules and regulations consistent with this chapter to provide for the fair and efficient administration of this chapter and to provide for the fair and efficient administration of any vehicle impoundment, redemption, or release or any impoundment hearing under this chapter. [Ord. 214 § 5, 1999; Ord. 194 § 1, 1999.]

10.28.080 Severability.
If any portion of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. [Ord. 194 § 1, 1999.]

Title 11 RESERVED

Title 12 PUBLIC WORKS*

Chapters:
12.01        Administration
12.02        Organization and Enforcement
12.03        Standard Specifications, Guidelines, and Regulations
12.04        Permits
12.05        Procedures
12.06        Project Closeout
12.07        Right-of-Way
12.08        Use of Streets and Right-of-Way – Parades, Motorcades, Runs and Assemblies
12.09        Transportation Facilities
12.10        Site Development Provisions
12.11        Storm Water Management
12.12        Street and Alley Vacation Procedures
12.13        Commute Trip Reduction
12.14        Definitions and Abbreviations
12.15        Sanitary Sewer Connection
12.16        Transportation Benefit District
12.17        Local Improvement Districts
12.18        Complete Streets Policy
* Prior legislation note: Ord. 501 repealed this title and enacted a Title 12A. Prior to its repeal and reenactment, the title was based on the provisions of Ords. 48, 49, 63, 74, 99, 155, 197 and 377.

Chapter 12.01 ADMINISTRATION

Sections:
12.01.010    Title.
12.01.020    Purpose.
12.01.030    Scope.
12.01.040    Provisions of this title not exclusive.
12.01.050    Conflicting provisions.
12.01.060    Severability.

12.01.010 Title.
This title shall be known as the Lakewood Public Works Code, may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “these regulations.” The term “these regulations” shall also include other provisions of the Lakewood Municipal Code (LMC) that are referenced herein. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.01.020 Purpose.
These regulations establish criteria for review and analysis by the City Engineer, and/or the designee thereof, of all development proposals including but not limited to the following: grading, formal subdivision, short subdivision, commercial building, binding site plans, mobile home parks, utility or other work within City right-of-way, or other projects. All development proposals, whether public or private, which are submitted to the City for review, shall conform to these regulations, which are to be used as the basis for review, design, and construction.
These regulations cannot address all situations. They are intended to assist, but not to substitute for professional engineers to submit competent work. It is expected that the applicant’s professional engineer will bring to each project the best of his/her skills and abilities to ensure that each project is thoroughly analyzed and designed correctly, accurately, and in compliance with generally accepted engineering practices. These regulations are not intended to unreasonably limit any innovative or creative effort in design and construction which could result in better quality, cost savings, or improved performance of a development project.
The purpose of these regulations is to ensure that minimum public safety requirements are met and to provide the most effective and appropriate design elements for the function each project serves. The appropriate design elements should address safety, welfare, appearance, and economics of a facility design and be consistent with City comprehensive plan policies.
These regulations are based on the premise that development should not impact adjacent and/or downstream property owners compared to the predevelopment condition. The project engineer shall show by calculations, plans, and engineering data that the proposed project meets the requirements of these regulations.
It is not the intent of these regulations to make the City of Lakewood a guarantor or protector of public or private property in regard to land development activity. [Ord. 583 § 1, 2014; Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.01.030 Scope.
This code establishes the standards for construction, improvement and maintenance of street system improvements and storm drainage facilities, utilities, grading and clearing, emergency vehicle access, and related amenities, whether such activities occur on public rights-of-way or on private lands. Further, this code establishes procedures to administer these standards. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.01.040 Provisions of this title not exclusive.
Other provisions of the LMC apply to the development or improvement of real property. The provisions of this title are not exclusive. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.01.050 Conflicting provisions.
In the case where any provision of this title is or could be construed as being in conflict with any other provision of the LMC or any of the manuals adopted by reference herein, the provision of this title shall control, and the provisions of the LMC shall, to the fullest extent reasonably possible, be construed and interpreted consistent with the purposes of this title. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.01.060 Severability.
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this title are severable. If any such section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction in a valid judgment or decree, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this title, which shall continue in full force and effect. Further, if any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this title is adjudged invalid or unconstitutional as applied to a particular property, use, building, or other structure, the application of said portion of this title to other property, uses, buildings, or structures shall not be affected. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

Chapter 12.02 ORGANIZATION AND ENFORCEMENT

Sections:
12.02.010    Authority.
12.02.020    Violations.
12.02.030    Enforcement measures.
12.02.040    Inspections.
12.02.050    Public nuisance.
12.02.060    Serving of orders.
12.02.070    Contents of order.
12.02.080    Appeals.

12.02.010 Authority.
The City Engineer, or the designee thereof, is hereby authorized to interpret and enforce these regulations consistent with the regulations of this chapter. The City Engineer is authorized to interpret all technical codes referenced herein or incorporated by reference into these regulations. The City Engineer has authority to resolve disputes or questions of fact in connection with work covered by these regulations or the issuance, conditioning or denial of permits and applications. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.02.020 Violations.
It shall be a violation of this title for any person to:
A. Use, construct, locate or demolish any structure, land, sign or property within the City without first obtaining the permits or authorizations required by this title.
B. Use, construct, locate or demolish any structure, land, sign or property within the City in any manner that is not permitted by the terms of any permit or authorization issued pursuant to these regulations.
C. Remove or deface any sign, notice, complaint or order required by or posted in accordance with this title, Chapter 14.02 LMC, Environmental Rules and Procedures, or other City ordinances.
D. Misrepresent any material fact in any application, plans or other information submitted to obtain any land use authorization.
E. Fail to comply with the requirements of these regulations or any applicable state or local law or regulation.
Except as specified elsewhere, a violation of this title is a misdemeanor crime, punishable by imprisonment in jail for a term of up to 90 days, by a fine of up to $1,000, or by both such imprisonment and fine. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.02.030 Enforcement measures.
The City Manager or designee is authorized and empowered to ensure compliance with and enforce the provisions of this title to the fullest extent of the law. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.02.040 Inspections.
The City Engineer, or designee thereof, and all inspectors or employees of the City shall at all reasonable times have and be granted access to any premises, dock, building, storeroom, warehouse, property or residence for the purpose of inspecting same and ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this title. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.02.050 Public nuisance.
A. Any building, project or land found in violation of these regulations is deemed to be a public nuisance and a danger to the public health and/or safety. Failure to remedy violations of these regulations after lawful notice to do so shall be a misdemeanor crime punishable as provided in Chapter 1.44 LMC and LMC 8.16.040. Notices declaring violations of these regulations to be a public nuisance shall be written and served as provided for in this title.
B. The City Engineer, or designee thereof, shall have the power and authority to order verbally and/or in writing the owner, occupant or user of property to correct and remove such nuisances at the expense of such owner, occupant, or user within such time as the City Engineer, or designee thereof, may order.
C. In the event of the refusal or failure to remove such nuisance within said time, the City Manager or designee may cause such nuisance to be abated at the expense of such person or persons, which cost may be recovered by the City from such person or persons in an action brought in the name of the City to recover the same in any court of competent jurisdiction. The City Engineer, or designee, is also authorized to file a lien against the property on which the nuisance was abated in the amount of the City’s costs in abating the nuisance, and to enforce said lien against the property. In any such abatement by the City, the City shall also be entitled to interest accruing at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the time of the expenditure of funds by the City for such abatement. The authority for enforcement provided herein shall be in addition to and as an alternative to the authority of the City to prosecute violations of City Codes as misdemeanors, gross misdemeanors or infractions. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.02.060 Serving of orders.
A. Written orders made pursuant to this title shall be served on a person, owner, agent or occupant of a premises or property, and shall be deemed to have been served under any of the following conditions:
    1. Such order is delivered to such person by any authorized representative of the City Engineer or designee;
    2. Such order is mailed (by registered mail) to the owner, representative of the owner, or the last known occupant of the premises;
    3. Such order, properly signed, is posted by an authorized representative of the City Engineer or designee upon any portion of such premises visible from a public place.
B. If the whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the City Engineer or designee after reasonable diligence, the City Engineer or designee shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the order shall be served by publishing the same twice, once each week for two consecutive weeks, in the official newspaper of the City. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.02.070 Contents of order.
The order shall contain the following information:
A. Name of owner or other persons or parties interested;
B. Street address and legal description of the premises;
C. General description of the premises considered a nuisance;
D. A statement or list of items in violation of this chapter;
E. A reasonable time for correction of the violation;
F. A copy of the order shall be filed with County Auditor, which filing shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens orders provided by law. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.02.080 Appeals.
Any person or agency aggrieved by any act or decision of the City under these regulations may appeal to the City of Lakewood Hearing Examiner pursuant to the provisions of LMC 18A.02.740(C)(2). Such appeal must be made in writing, served upon the City Clerk of the City, and must be accompanied by the Hearing Examiner fee in the amount specified in the City’s fee schedule. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

Chapter 12.03 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS, GUIDELINES, AND REGULATIONS

Sections:
12.03.010    Engineering Standards Manual.
12.03.020    Adopted guidelines and regulations.

12.03.010 Engineering Standards Manual.
These regulations make reference to the “Engineering Standards Manual,” a document published by the City of Lakewood. This document includes construction specifications, standardized details, and design standards referred to in these regulations and are enforceable through the provisions of these regulations. The Engineering Standards Manual and any amendments thereto are available to the public upon request and at least one copy of the Engineering Standards Manual shall be kept on file in the Office of the City Clerk. The specifications include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. Street widths, curve radii, alignments, street layout, street grades, pavement design;
B. Intersection design, sight distance and clearance, driveway location;
C. Sidewalk placement and standards, length of cul-de-sacs, street-end designs;
D. Surface water and storm water specifications;
E. Traffic control and safety markings, signs, signals, street lights, turn lanes and other devices; and
F. Other improvements or features within the public right-of-way. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.03.020 Adopted guidelines and regulations.
Except where these regulations and the Engineering Standards Manual provide otherwise, design detail, construction, and materials shall be in accordance with the following publications’ current editions:
A. A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
B. Design Manual, published by the Washington State Department of Transportation.
C. Highway Runoff Manual, published by the Washington State Department of Transportation.
D. Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), published by the U.S. Department of Transportation as adopted and amended by the state of Washington.
E. Pierce County Stormwater Management and Site Development Manual.
F. Soil Survey of Pierce County Area, Washington, published by the Natural Resources Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture.
G. Standard Plans for Street, Bridge and Municipal Construction, published by the Washington State Department of Transportation.
H. Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges, published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
I. Standard Specifications for Street, Bridge and Municipal Construction, published by the Washington State Department of Transportation and the Washington State Chapter of the American Public Works Association.
J. Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington, published by the Washington State Department of Ecology, and including Appendix 1 of the Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit, or approved equivalent.
K. Trip Generation Manual, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers.
L. Highway Capacity Manual, published by the Transportation Research Board.
M. WSDOT Pavement Guide, published by the Washington State Department of Transportation.
N. ADA Accessibility Guidelines, published by the United States Access Board. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

Chapter 12.04 PERMITS

Sections:
12.04.010    General provisions.
12.04.020    Deviations.
12.04.030    Major variance procedures.
12.04.040    Site development permit.
12.04.050    Right-of-way permit.
12.04.060    Right-of-way vacation petition.
12.04.070    Oversize load permit.
12.04.080    Miscellaneous permits.

12.04.010 General provisions.
A. Permits shall be required for all construction and usage activities as described within this chapter. Site development permits shall be valid for two years from the approval date, and may be extended for up to one additional year. Right-of-way permits shall be valid for six months, and may be extended for one additional six-month period upon expiration of the time limits contained therein.
B. If a permit has not been renewed or extended within the appropriate period of time, such permit shall be considered expired and a new application shall be submitted.
C. All construction activities within City rights-of-way shall require a permit and the posting of a financial guarantee, unless the City Engineer determines such a guarantee to be unnecessary. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.04.020 Deviations.
A deviation from the engineering standards is a mechanism to allow the City Engineer to grant an adjustment in the application of engineering standards. The deviation process follows the Process I application procedures, described in LMC 18A.02.540, except the City Engineer is responsible for the administrative decision.
An administrative decision on a request for a deviation shall be in writing and may be appealed pursuant to the appeal procedures outlined in LMC 18A.02.740.
Deviations may be granted when the proposal is based on engineering principles designed to solve or improve a site-specific issue that achieves results similar to or greater than those described in these regulations.
Criteria for granting a deviation are:
A. The granting of such deviation will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious or create adverse impacts to the property or other property(s) and improvements in the vicinity and in the zone in which the subject property is situated.
B. A deviation from engineering standards shall only be granted if the proposal meets the following criteria:
    1. Conform to the intent and purpose of these regulations;
    2. Produce a compensating or comparable result which is in the public interest;
    3. Meet the objectives of safety, function and maintainability based upon sound engineering judgment.
C. Deviations from road standards shall meet the objectives for public safety as identified in the International Fire Code (IFC). Any deviation from road standards, which does not meet the IFC, shall also require concurrence by the Fire Marshal.
D. Deviations from drainage standards shall meet the objectives for appearance, quality, and environmental protection.
E. Deviations from drainage standards shall be shown to be justified and required for the use and situation intended.
F. Deviations from drainage standards for facilities that request use of an experimental water quality facility or flow control facilities shall meet these additional criteria:
    1. The new design is likely to meet the identified target pollutant removal goal or flow control performance based on limited data and theoretical consideration;
    2. Construction of the facility can, in practice, be successfully carried out;
    3. Maintenance considerations are included in the design, and costs are not excessive or will be borne and reliably performed by the applicant or property owner.
G. Any deviation from utility standards, for utilities not owned and operated by the City, shall require concurrence by the utility provider. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.04.030 Major variance procedures.
Proposed variances that do not meet the deviation criteria shall be subject to the major variance process as described in Chapter 18A.10 LMC. [Ord. 583 § 2, 2014; Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.04.040 Site development permit.
No person, party, firm, corporation, or entity shall do any grading, filling, cutting and clearing, excavating, or ditching, or create an impervious surface, unless the work is in accordance with a valid permit from the City issued pursuant to the provisions of these regulations. Each site shall require a separate permit. Applications for site development permits shall be made on forms that the City provides and will be considered incomplete unless submitted with all fees indicated in the City’s fee schedule.
All forested land within the City of Lakewood is designated “likely to be converted,” or is to be preserved in its natural state as greenbelts, parks, or open space. Therefore, only Class IV Department of Natural Resources permits shall be issued within the City limits. All DNR permits will require an additional City permit. The City Engineer may require the posting of security to assure compliance with requirements of this permit, which may include but are not limited to provisions for minimizing off-site soil erosion, noise disturbance, and fire danger. The City permit will not be issued until a development plan has been approved, and the applicant has demonstrated that he/she has the financial resources to proceed with the development project. Any cutting or removal of timber without a permit will be subject to the penalties outlined in this code.
Short plats, formal plats, mobile home parks, and other development projects that indicate new roads to be developed are required to obtain a permit. The permit issuance, payment of fees, and plan review shall be completed prior to plat approval or issuance of building permits. [Ord. 583 § 3, 2014; Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.04.050 Right-of-way permit.
City right-of-way shall not be blocked, occupied, privately improved or used for access or other purposes unless a permit has been issued for such use. Permits issued pursuant to this section shall not be construed to convey any vested private right or ownership interest in any City right-of-way. Every right-of-way permit shall state on its face that any City right-of-way subject to the permit shall be open to use by the general public except in those cases where specific conditions require the closure of the right-of-way to the public for safety reasons. Applications for right-of-way permits shall be made on forms that the City provides and will be considered incomplete unless submitted with all fees indicated in the City’s fee schedule. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.04.060 Right-of-way vacation petition.
The owners of an interest in any real property abutting upon any street or alley who may desire to vacate the street or alley, or any part thereof, may petition the City Council to vacate the public interest of that street or alley. The street vacation process is described in Chapter 12.12 LMC. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.04.070 Oversize load permit.
All vehicles in excess of the legal size, weight or load limitations according to Chapter 46.44 RCW shall obtain an oversize load permit prior to operating on Lakewood streets.
A. For applicants transporting the same oversize/overweight load on both a state highway and City streets, the applicant shall:
    1. Obtain and fill out City of Lakewood oversize load permit application available from the Public Works Department. Note route through City streets, date, and approximate time of travel.
    2. Attach WSDOT Special Motor Vehicle Oversize/Overweight Permit.
    3. Pay permit fee.
B. For applicants transporting an oversized/overweight load on only City streets, the applicant shall:
    1. Obtain and fill out City of Lakewood oversize load permit application available from the Public Works Department. Note route through City streets, date, and approximate time of travel.
    2. Pay permit fee.
    Allow for two business days to process the permit. [Ord. 583 § 4, 2014; Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.04.080 Miscellaneous permits.
See Chapter 12.08 LMC for details on parades, motorcades, runs, and assemblies.
Any permit work not covered by the fee schedule, if performed by an employee, will be based on actual hourly costs, plus benefits at 30 percent, operating costs at 16 percent and central services costs at 16 percent. [Ord. 648 § 1, 2016; Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

Chapter 12.05 PROCEDURES

Sections:
12.05.010    Responsibility of applicant.
12.05.020    Environmental considerations.
12.05.030    Right-of-way inspections.
12.05.040    Site development inspections.
12.05.050    Dedications.
12.05.060    Dedication of land for right-of-way.
12.05.070    Private to public street dedication.
12.05.080    Easements.
12.05.090    Financial guarantees.

12.05.010 Responsibility of applicant.
All development proposals submitted to the City for review and approval shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered in the state of Washington. The City will review the engineer’s work for compliance with these regulations. Should errors, omissions, or inaccurate data related to the engineer’s work come to the City’s attention, the engineer shall agree to be responsible for correcting all substantive deficiencies and shall agree to be responsible for any damages resulting from defective work conducted in reliance upon the engineer’s work.
Prior to a development using or proposing to use an existing easement, the applicant shall research and provide to the City all information applicable to that easement. An affidavit shall be signed confirming all information was submitted to the best of the applicant’s knowledge.
All surveying and staking shall be performed by or at the direction of a professional land surveyor licensed by the state of Washington. Construction staking shall be sufficient to allow the City Engineer to verify conformance to the approved plans. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.05.020 Environmental considerations.
An environmental checklist shall be submitted to the City Environmental Official for the work shown on the street and/or storm drainage construction plans submitted to the City for review and approval unless the proposed work is part of a project for which an environmental checklist has already been submitted or the work is categorically exempt per City environmental regulations or Chapter 197-11 WAC. A determination of nonsignificance or a final environmental impact statement shall be issued for the work and any comment period and appeal periods shall have expired before the project plans are given final approval by the City. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.05.030 Right-of-way inspections.
For all right-of-way construction (existing or proposed right-of-way), inspections will be done by the City Engineer, or the designated inspectors for the City Engineer. The applicant shall notify the City at least two business days in advance of each of the following required inspections:
Inspection No. 1: Clearing and grubbing, embankment and excavation, and temporary water detention/retention and siltation control.
Inspection No. 2: Complete drainage system prior to cover; including pipe connections, connections to structures, compaction, etc.
Inspection No. 3: General street; when the drainage system, underground utilities, and street grading to suitable subgrade are complete.
Inspection No. 4: General street; when the crushed gravel surfacing has been placed.
Inspection No. 5: General street; curb, gutter and sidewalk and other appurtenances if required by the approved plans.
Inspection No. 6: General street; while the paving is in progress.
Inspection No. 7: Overall street; after paving, cleaning of drainage system and all necessary cleanup, striping, buttoning, monumentation, and all street delineation work.
Lack of inspection(s) does not relieve the applicant from ensuring proper construction and/or compliance with the approved plans and specifications. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.05.040 Site development inspections.
The applicant shall be responsible for ensuring conformance to plans for all site development work and storm water management facilities. The applicant shall notify the City at least two business days in advance of each of the following required inspections:
Inspection No. 1: Installation of erosion control facilities prior to clearing.
Inspection No. 2: Completion of clearing.
Inspection No. 3: Upon completion of excavation, filling, and earthwork.
Inspection No. 4: Completion of project.
Inspection No. 5: Work in City right-of-way per LMC 12.05.030.
The project engineer shall be responsible for inspection and approval of the storm drainage system per LMC 12.06.020.
The City has the right to inspect private storm water facilities at any time. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.05.050 Dedications.
The applicant shall submit all necessary deeds, easements, etc., to the City for acceptance. The applicant shall bear all cost and responsibility for submitting or recording accepted documents to the Pierce County Auditor’s Office. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.05.060 Dedication of land for right-of-way.
In order to protect the public safety and to aid in the safe movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, where the existing width for any right-of-way adjacent to a development site is less than the minimum standards listed in the tables within the Engineering Standards Manual, additional right-of-way dedication shall be required for the following:
A. All new construction.
B. All additions, alterations or tenant improvements.
C. All subdivisions.
D. All single-family or duplex homes if located on an arterial street.
E. Reference Article II of Chapter 12.09 LMC (Road Improvements). [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.05.070 Private to public street dedication.
The City has no obligation to accept any private street into the City’s street system for dedication or maintenance. It shall be the applicant’s responsibility to submit a preliminary site plan showing the street(s) proposed for dedication to the City. The applicant shall receive the City’s written approval before proceeding with street construction plans.
All construction work shall be completed to City standards and/or financial guarantee(s) submitted to the City in the form and amount as required by these regulations before the City will accept the street for dedication and maintenance.
Once the street has been dedicated to the City and accepted for maintenance, the street shall remain open for public use and may not be closed except by the City, as provided by RCW 47.48.010, 47.48.020, and 47.48.031. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.05.080 Easements.
Easements shall be recorded for facilities used by a limited number of parties when approved by the City Engineer. All easements shall specify the maintenance responsibility in the recording documents. Examples of situations where easements may be used include, but are not limited to:
A. Access for ingress and egress (driveways), or utilities serving a neighboring property.
B. Design features of a street necessitating the granting of slope, wall, and drainage easements.
C. Nonmotorized easements to facilitate pedestrian circulation between neighborhoods, schools, shopping centers and other activity centers. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.05.090 Financial guarantees.
A. The City, in its sole discretion, may require a cash guarantee, or an irrevocable letter of credit to the City to ensure the subsequent completion and continued maintenance of all conditions to which a permit is subject. The guarantee or its equivalent shall be in a form acceptable to the City and shall represent a percentage of the estimated cost of design, materials, and labor related to the project in question, based on the estimated costs on the last day covered by the guarantee, of installing, replacing, or repairing, as appropriate, the improvements covered by the security, as agreed to by the Community Development Director and City Engineer. The cost estimate shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer prior to acceptance by the City of the guarantee or its equivalent. Guarantees shall be calculated as follows:
    1. Amount and Duration of Guarantees. One hundred fifty percent of the costs specified above, for the duration specified by the City, or until all improvements are installed and accepted by the City, whichever is less.
    2. Maintenance Guarantee (if Required). Twenty percent of the costs specified above, for the duration specified by the City, or until the City is satisfied that maintenance shall continue, whichever is less. However, the guarantee or equivalent may be extended by the City if repairs are made at the end of the guarantee period which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director or City Engineer, require additional guarantee of workmanship.
The cash guarantee or equivalent security may be required by, and presented to, the City upon request for a final project inspection or issuance of certificate of occupancy when required site work, improvements, or landscaping have not been completed. A separate guarantee may be established for landscaping, if deemed necessary by the Community Development Director or City Engineer. All securities shall be held until released by the Community Development Director or City Engineer.
B. In each case where a security is posted, the applicant and the City Manager shall sign a security agreement, approved in form by the City Attorney. The agreement shall provide the following information:
    1. A description of the work or improvements covered by the security; physical address of development property; permit number(s).
    2. Either the period of time covered by the security or the date after which the City will use the proceeds of the security to complete the required work or improvements.
    3. The amount and nature of the security and the amount of any cash deposit.
    4. Name, title, and address of applicant; name and address of financial institution; account number if applicable.
    5. The rights and duties of the City and applicant.
    6. An irrevocable license to run with the property to allow the employees, agents, or contractors of the City to enter the subject property for the purpose of inspecting and, if necessary, performing the work or making the improvements covered by the security.
    7. The mechanism by and circumstances under which the security shall be released. At a minimum, after the work or improvements covered by a security have been completed, or at the end of the time covered by a maintenance security, the applicant may request that the City release the security. If the applicant has complied with the security agreement and any applicable permit conditions, the Community Development Director or City Engineer shall release the remaining security. If the work has not been completed or repairs not made, then the City shall not release the security until such work is completed. Partial release of the security may be allowed; provided, that a security is retained equal to 150 percent of the cost of the remaining work.
C. If, during the period of time covered by a maintenance security, or after the date by which the required work or improvements are to be completed under a security, the City Engineer determines that the security agreement has not been complied with, the City Engineer shall so notify the applicant. The notice shall state the following:
    1. The work that shall be done or the improvements that shall be made to comply with the security agreement; and
    2. The amount of time that the applicant has to commence and complete the required work or improvements; and
    3. That, if the work or improvements are not commenced and completed within the time specified, the City will use the proceeds of the security to have the required work or improvements completed.
If the work or improvements covered by the security are not completed within the time specified in the notice, the City shall obtain the proceeds of the security and shall cause such work to be completed. Applicant shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the City in administering, maintaining, or making the improvements covered by the security. The City shall release or refund any proceeds of a security remaining after subtracting all costs for doing the work or making the improvements covered by the security, including City staff time. The applicant shall reimburse the City for any amount expended by the City that exceeds the proceeds of the security. The City may file a lien against the subject property for the amount of any excess. In each case where the City uses any of the funds of a security, it shall give the applicant an itemized statement of all funds used. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

Chapter 12.06 PROJECT CLOSEOUT

Sections:
12.06.010    Record (as-built) drawings.
12.06.020    Certification from engineer (storm drainage system).
12.06.030    City acceptance.
12.06.040    One-year guarantee period.

12.06.010 Record (as-built) drawings.
Record drawings (sometimes referred to as “as-built” drawings) shall be required for all development as deemed necessary by the City Engineer. A full-size set of record drawings shall be reviewed, edited (e.g., strike-throughs, clouds, etc.), stamped, and signed by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor, and submitted prior to the City’s acceptance of any improvement. Along with a hard copy, a digital copy of the record drawings produced using AutoCAD software (most recent edition) shall also be provided to the City. Each sheet of the record drawings shall include the following statement located at the bottom right-hand corner of the sheet when possible:“These plans are record drawings and the information shown accurately reflects existing field conditions as of this date: _____________.”
The following, as applicable, shall be included in all record drawing submittals:
A. Roadway centerline stationing at minimum 50-foot spacing. Stationing shall include elevations and horizontal control in state plane coordinates.
B. Right-of-way lines and property lines.
C. Locations, widths, and composition of travel lanes, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, medians, planter strips, irrigation systems, shoulders and bike lanes.
D. Street light locations and types.
E. Utility locations.
F. Street names.
G. Pavement markings and street signs.
H. Type and widths of easements.
I. Catch basin type, location, rim elevation, bottom elevation, and inlet/outlet invert elevation.
J. Storm drain pipe size, composition, location, and invert slope.
K. Detention/retention/infiltration facility location, and inlet/outlet locations and elevations. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.06.020 Certification from engineer (storm drainage system).
Prior to final inspection and approval of work under site development permits, the project engineer shall submit a letter to the City certifying that the storm drainage system has been completed. The letter of certification shall be stamped and signed by the project engineer and shall be worded as follows:I have inspected the constructed storm drainage control facility located on the project known as ________________________ and based on the standard of care and expertise which is usual and customary in this community for professional engineers, I find that it substantially conforms to the terms and conditions of the site development permit and the accepted design for the project.
The certification letter shall reference, if applicable, the building permit number(s), site development permit number, plat name, project name, street address, and the section, township, and range. Any alterations to the system which vary from the accepted design shall be listed in the certification letter or noted on record drawings as required by the City Engineer. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.06.030 City acceptance.
A project is final when a certificate of occupancy is issued by the City or after the project’s final inspection is approved (when not associated with a building permit or a subdivision). [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.06.040 One-year guarantee period.
The applicant shall be responsible for correcting all defects in workmanship and material within one year after final acceptance of this work by the City. The applicant shall start work to remedy such defects within seven calendar days of written notice of discovery thereof by the City and shall complete such work within the time stated in the notice. In emergencies, where damage may result from delay or where loss of services may result, such corrections may be made by City, in which case the cost shall be borne by applicant. In the event the applicant does not accomplish corrections at the time specified, the work will be otherwise accomplished and the cost of same shall be paid by applicant.
When corrections of defects are made, the applicant shall then be responsible for correcting all defects in workmanship and materials in the corrected work for one year after acceptance of the corrections by City. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

Chapter 12.07 RIGHT-OF-WAY

Sections:
12.07.010    Objects or activity within the right-of-way.
12.07.020    Equipment and materials within the right-of-way.
12.07.030    Coordination requirements.
12.07.040    Vehicles – Escape of load.
12.07.050    Unlawful to deposit material on right-of-way.
12.07.060    Identification of owner – Evidence of dumping material.

12.07.010 Objects or activity within the right-of-way.
A. No person, organization, or agency shall place, erect, or install any object of any nature whatsoever, within a City right-of-way without a right-of-way permit issued by the City Engineer. Any such object now in place within a City street right-of-way without written permission of the City Engineer is declared illegal and a public nuisance; provided, that this section shall not apply to mailboxes and attached newspaper boxes, placed on the right-of-way, where these are placed as far removed from the driving portion of the right-of-way as possible, except that said placement shall be subject to approval of the City Engineer.
B. The adjoining property owner, or any person placing any object or doing any work within the right-of-way in violation of these regulations, shall be responsible for the removal of the object and repair of the right-of-way to the satisfaction of the City Engineer within 48 hours of receipt of written notice from the City.
C. If the object is not removed or work repaired within 48 hours and it unreasonably hampers or prevents the proper use of the right-of-way, it may be removed by the City at the cost of the person(s) placing the object or working in the right-of-way. The notice requirement may be waived and the object may be immediately removed by the City if it presents an immediate threat of physical harm to persons or property. Placing an object or obstruction within the right-of-way or failing to remove an object or work from a right-of-way after notice that such object or work must be removed is a misdemeanor crime, punishable by imprisonment in jail for a term of up to 90 days, by a fine of up to $1,000, or by both such imprisonment and fine, when such object or work hampers or prevents proper use of the right-of-way. The property owner or person responsible for obstructing or placing an object in the right-of-way shall be responsible for the costs of such removal.
D. Any object or encroachment in the right-of-way which does not interfere with the proper and legitimate use of such right-of-way constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction as defined in LMC 1.48.010, punishable by a fine of up to $500.00. Each day, location, violator and incident shall constitute a separate civil infraction. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.07.020 Equipment and materials within the right-of-way.
During nonworking hours all project sites are to be left in a manner that allows the public to safely use all right-of-way. Equipment and materials are not allowed in the right-of-way during nonworking hours unless they are placed in a safe location or protected by permanent guardrails, lighted barricades, or temporary concrete barriers. The use of temporary concrete barriers in the right-of-way is permitted only if the City Engineer approves the installation and location. During work hours, only materials or equipment necessary for construction are allowed in the right-of-way or roadway. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.07.030 Coordination requirements.
At the time of application for a right-of-way permit, the applicant shall notify all other public and private utility entities known to be using or proposing to use the same right-of-way of the proposed timing of such construction. Within seven days of receiving this notification, any such entity notified may request a delay of the proposed construction to coordinate other right-of-way construction with the applicant.
The City Engineer may approve a delay of up to 90 days, except in case of emergencies, if he/she determines that such delay will reduce the inconvenience to City street users from construction activities and that the delay will not create undue economic hardship on the applicant. The City Engineer shall also coordinate the approval with City street improvements and maintenance and may also delay the construction under the same circumstances. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.07.040 Vehicles – Escape of load.
No vehicle shall be driven or moved on a public highway of the City unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load or contents from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water may be sprayed on streetways in the cleaning and maintaining of such streetways by public authority having such jurisdiction. Any person operating a vehicle from which any objects have fallen or escaped shall immediately cause the highway to be cleaned of all such objects. A violation of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction as defined in LMC 1.48.010, punishable by a fine of up to $500.00. Each day, location, violator and incident shall constitute a separate civil infraction. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.07.050 Unlawful to deposit material on right-of-way.
It is unlawful for any person to deposit any materials, or allow any materials to be deposited or to remain upon any public right-of-way of the City or upon private or public property adjoining the highway on either side of the right-of-way, except at duly designated dumping places as set out and so marked and authorized by the City Council. Any person violating this section shall be responsible for the removal of the material within 48 hours after being given written notice from the City that such materials must be removed. If the materials are not removed within 48 hours, the violator shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the City in removing the materials. A violation of this section constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction as defined in LMC 1.48.010, punishable by a fine of up to $500.00. Each day, location, violation and incident shall constitute a separate civil infraction. Materials placed or allowed to remain upon public right-of-way are a public nuisance. (LMC 12.02.050.) [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.07.060 Identification of owner – Evidence of dumping material.
Whenever materials of any nature are found upon private or public property adjoining any public highway or on any right-of-way of the City, the adjoining property owner shall be responsible for the removal of such items. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

Chapter 12.08 USE OF STREETS AND RIGHT-OF-WAY – PARADES, MOTORCADES, RUNS AND ASSEMBLIES*

Sections:
12.08.010    Purpose.
12.08.015    Definitions.
12.08.020    Application submittal.
12.08.030    Insurance required.
12.08.040    Performance bond.
12.08.050    Application review.
12.08.060    Approval/denial of application.
12.08.070    Appeal procedure.
12.08.080    Officials to be notified.
12.08.090    Revocation of permit.
* Prior legislation note: Ord. 501 repealed provisions concerning parades, motorcades, runs and assemblies that were formerly in Chapter 12.22, based on the provisions of Ord. 74.

12.08.010 Purpose.
Free speech is a fundamental right of the American people, and the provisions of this section shall be broadly interpreted to support this right. The purpose of this section is to place reasonable and necessary time, place and manner restrictions upon use of the City’s streets for the purpose of protecting the public safety and welfare. No permit shall be required for peaceful assembly and speech on private or public property that does not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic or safe ingress and egress to any building although such are encouraged to allow the City to support the safe completion of the event. Permits provided under these circumstances shall not be subject to the permitting requirements of this chapter, but shall serve notice to the City of the anticipated event. The City official or officials responsible for issuance of a permit under this section shall be authorized to suspend the application of any particular section of this chapter or waive compliance with any of the stated requirements, including payment of fees or provision of insurance where such requirements potentially inhibit the exercise of Constitutional Rights. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.08.015 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
“Assembly” means a gathering of people for the purpose of presenting or viewing an exhibition, theatrical presentation, dance or other public, political or religious event, held on any public street, highway, alley, sidewalk or publicly owned parking lot.
“Motorcade” means an organized procession containing 10 or more motor vehicles, except funeral processions, upon any public street, highway, sidewalk, alley, or publicly owned parking lot.
“Parade” means a march or procession consisting of people, animals, bicycles, vehicles, or any combination thereof except funeral possessions, upon any public street, highway, sidewalk, alley or publicly owned parking lot which does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations or controls.
“Run” means an organized racing event comprised of 10 or more persons on foot, bicycles, wheelchairs, beds, or any other nonmotorized vehicles or combinations thereof upon a public street, highway, sidewalk, alley or publicly owned parking lot. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.08.020 Application submittal.
Any individual or organization planning any parade, motorcade, run or assembly which will or may disrupt normal traffic flow or usage of any public street, highway, sidewalk, alley or publicly owned parking lot within the City of Lakewood, shall obtain a permit from the City of Lakewood. The permit application shall be submitted no less than 30 days prior to the start of the event unless the 30-day time period is reduced or waived by the City Manager or designee. The application shall be on a form provided by the City of Lakewood and shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
A. The name and address of the sponsoring person, persons or organization;
B. The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons in charge of the event;
C. The nature and purpose of the event;
D. Estimated number of persons, participants, vehicles and spectators;
E. The number of persons and/or vehicles furnished by the sponsoring organization to patrol the event;
F. A time schedule and description of the event or events;
G. A map or scale drawing showing the boundaries of the event, the route of the event, the direction of travel, and all areas to be used by participants, officials and spectators of the event. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.08.030 Insurance required.
The person or organization sponsoring the parade, motorcade, run or public assembly shall, prior to obtaining authorization from the City, provide a certificate of insurance showing that the person or organization has obtained public liability and property damage insurance in amounts not less than the minimum set by the City Manager. The City of Lakewood shall be named as an additional insured and shall be notified by the insurer at least 10 days prior to the cancellation of this insurance. Any waiver of this requirement cannot be construed as acceptance of liability for the event on the part of the City, nor should the event, via such waiver, be treated as covered by the City’s insurance. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.08.040 Performance bond.
No permit shall be issued for any parade, motorcade, run or assembly until the permittee shall file with the City of Lakewood a bond or deposit to pay for any costs reasonably anticipated to be incurred in removing debris, litter or papers from the street, highway, sidewalk, alley, or publicly owned parking lot as a result of the parade, motorcade, run or public assembly; provided, that the City Manager or designee may make specific finding that such a bond may inhibit the expression of free speech in violation of the U.S. Constitution and therefore waive the bond for a specific event. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.08.050 Application review.
Each application for a permit to hold a parade, motorcade, run or assembly shall, when applicable, be reviewed by the City Manager or designee or other appropriate representatives of the City to determine compliance with the following requirements:
A. The proposed parade, motorcade, run or assembly will not jeopardize life and/or property;
B. The event as described on the application requires no supervision or patrol; or the event requires supervision or patrol and the application adequately describes the method of providing same without cost or participation from the City. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.08.060 Approval/denial of application.
A. The City Manager or designee shall approve, approve as amended, or disapprove all applications not less than 15 days prior to the proposed event, with any disapprovals or conditions placed upon a permit being provided to the applicant in writing.
B. Decisions on approvals or conditions placed upon permits under this section shall be made without regard to the message, purpose or content of speech presented at the event.
C. As a condition of approval, the sponsor may be required to post notice in a local newspaper and/or at the proposed site of the event. The City Manager or designee may close for general use any public street, highway, alley, sidewalk or publicly owned parking lot in whole or in part, for the purpose of the event.
D. A permit may be conditioned, amended or denied upon written findings that:
    1. The time, route and size of the assembly, motorcade, parade or run will unreasonably and unsafely disrupt the movement of other vehicular or pedestrian traffic;
    2. The assembly, motorcade, parade or run is of a size or nature that requires the diversion of so great a number of law enforcement officers of the City to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto that allowing the assembly, motorcade, parade or run would deny reasonable law enforcement protection to the City;
    3. Such assembly, motorcade, parade or run will interfere with another assembly, motorcade, parade or run for which a permit has been issued; or
    4. The assembly, motorcade, parade or run will impact principal arterial streets or minor arterial streets, as defined in Article I of Chapter 12.09 LMC, so that the arterial streets may become congested, so that police response or emergency vehicle access will be delayed, or so that entrances or exits to interstate highways would be blocked or congested.
E. Based upon the factors stated in subsection D of this section, it is within the discretion of the City Manager or designee to require amendments to the time, date, location or route proposed in the application for an assembly, motorcade, parade or run permit. A permit under this section shall be denied only upon specific findings of fact that state that no other reasonably alternative venue, time or location could safely accommodate the permit as requested. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.08.070 Appeal procedure.
The applicant may appeal the denial or conditions placed upon a permit within five days after notice of denial or imposition of conditions by filing written notice of appeal with the City Clerk. The City Manager, or the designee thereof, shall have discretion with regard to whether the conditions or denial is appropriate or whether conditions can be waived to facilitate the event. Any applicant aggrieved by a decision of the City Manager in regard to a permit or the appeal of permit conditions shall have recourse to a court of competent jurisdiction in the form of injunctive or declaratory relief. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.08.080 Officials to be notified.
Immediately upon the granting of a permit for a parade, motorcade, run or public assembly, the City Manager or designee shall send a copy thereof to the appropriate representative of the departments of the City and other appropriate agencies such as local fire districts and the Washington State Patrol. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.08.090 Revocation of permit.
Any permit for a parade, motorcade, run or public assembly issued pursuant to this chapter may be summarily revoked by an official of the City when such event becomes manifestly unsafe to life, safety or the public welfare. Such a permit may be summarily revoked by a City official when the activities of the participants in the event causes harm to public or private property. Revocation of a permit under the circumstances contemplated herein shall be by a public order to disperse. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

Chapter 12.09 TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES

Sections:
12.09.010    General provisions.
Article I.  Streets
    12.09.021    Street classification and plan.
    12.09.022    Principal arterials.
    12.09.023    Minor arterials.
    12.09.024    Collector arterials.
    12.09.025    Local access street system.
    12.09.026    Minimum street standards.
    12.09.027    Roadway level of service.
    12.09.028    Traffic studies.
Article II. Road Improvements
    12.09.031    Street frontage improvements.
    12.09.032    Other road improvement requirements.
Article III. Private Streets
    12.09.061    Certification.
    12.09.062    Completion.
    12.09.063    Maintenance.
    12.09.064    Conditions of recording.
Article IV. Other Provisions
    12.09.070    Traffic control.
    12.09.080    Street trees.
    12.09.090    Sidewalks, walkways, paths, and trails.

12.09.010 General provisions.
The purpose of this chapter is to classify streets and establish requirements for engineering regulations and standards to implement the comprehensive plan. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

Article I. Streets

12.09.021 Street classification and plan.
Streets and highways are most effectively classified by their function according to the character of service they are intended to provide. The primary function of streets and highways is to provide mobility and access, and the degree to which these functions are provided is considered an integral part of classifying streets. The functional classification system creates a hierarchy of classified streets.
The City functional classification system directly addresses all streets that are under the jurisdiction of the City. State highways under the jurisdiction of the Washington State Department of Transportation are all legally designated arterials (RCW 46.61.195).
For purposes of comprehensive planning and this code, and pursuant to RCW 35.78.010, the City of Lakewood has classified and designated its City streets in three general categories, principal arterials, minor arterials, and local access roads. These classifications have the same meanings, respectively, as the terms major arterial, secondary arterial and access streets as those terms are used in RCW 35.78.010. The City of Lakewood has further designated a fourth category, collector arterial, as shown in this code and as used in the City’s comprehensive plan. Lakewood’s street designations are consistent with the federal functional classification system for city streets. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.09.022 Principal arterials.
Principal arterials provide service for principal traffic movements within the City. They serve centers of activity; intra-area travel between Lakewood and other suburban centers between larger communities, and between principal trip generators. Principal arterials serve the longest trips and carry the principal portion of trips entering and leaving the overall area. Typically they are the highest traffic volume corridors in the City. The design year ADT is generally more than 15,000 vehicles per day. They frequently carry important intra-urban and inter-city bus routes.
The spacing of principal arterials usually varies from about one mile in highly developed business areas to five miles or more in rural areas. Service to abutting land should be subordinate to the provision of travel service to principal traffic movements; this service should be incidental to the primary functional responsibility of the street. Desirably it is located on community and neighborhood boundaries or adjacent to but not through principal shopping centers, parks, and other homogeneous areas.
+-------------------------+----------------------------+---------------------------+
|       Street Name       |            From            |            To             |
+-------------------------+----------------------------+---------------------------+
| Bridgeport Way W/SW     | McChord Drive (South City  | Leach Creek (North City   |
|                         | Limits)                    | Limits)                   |
+-------------------------+----------------------------+---------------------------+
| Custer Road SW and W    | 88th Street SW             | 74th Street W             |
+-------------------------+----------------------------+---------------------------+
| Gravelly Lake Drive     | I-5 Northbound On-Ramp     | Bridgeport Way W          |
+-------------------------+----------------------------+---------------------------+
| Lakewood Drive SW       | Bridgeport Way SW          | 74th Street W (North City |
|                         |                            | Limits)                   |
+-------------------------+----------------------------+---------------------------+
| Military Road SW        | 107th Avenue SW (West City | Washington Boulevard SW   |
|                         | Limits)                    |                           |
+-------------------------+----------------------------+---------------------------+
| South Tacoma Way        | 112th Street S             | South 80th Street (North  |
|                         |                            | City Limits)              |
+-------------------------+----------------------------+---------------------------+
| Steilacoom Boulevard SW | Far West Drive (West City  | South Tacoma Way          |
|                         | Limits)                    |                           |
+-------------------------+----------------------------+---------------------------+
| Washington Boulevard SW | Military Road SW           | Gravelly Lake Drive SW    |
+-------------------------+----------------------------+---------------------------+
| 74th Street W           | Custer Road W              | Lakewood Drive SW         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------+---------------------------+
| 88th Street SW          | Steilacoom Boulevard SW    | Custer Road SW            |
+-------------------------+----------------------------+---------------------------+
| 100th Street SW         | Bridgeport Way SW          | South Tacoma Way          |
+-------------------------+----------------------------+---------------------------+
| 112th Street S          | South Tacoma Way           | Steele Street S           |
+-------------------------+----------------------------+---------------------------+
[Ord. 635 § 1, 2016; Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.09.023 Minor arterials.
Minor arterials interconnect with and augment the principal arterial system. Minor arterials connect principal arterials to collector arterials and small generators. They provide service to medium-size trip generators, such as less intensive commercial development, high schools and some junior high/grade schools, warehousing areas, active parks and ball fields, and other land uses with similar trip generation potential. They distribute travel to smaller geographic areas and communities than those identified with the principal arterial system. They provide service to trips of moderate length of a somewhat lower level of travel mobility than principal arterials. The design year ADT is approximately 5,000 to 20,000.
Spacing of minor arterials is usually less than one mile in fully developed areas. They provide intra-community continuity and are typically a continuous street with a direct rather than a meandering alignment. They may carry local bus routes. Minor arterials allow for more emphasis on land access than the principal arterial system. They usually do not penetrate identifiable neighborhoods.
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
|      Street Name       |            From            |             To             |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Ardmore Drive SW       | Steilacoom Boulevard SW    | Whitman Avenue SW          |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Butte Drive SW         | 116th Street SW            | 104th Street SW            |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Custer Road SW         | Steilacoom Boulevard SW    | 88th Street SW             |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Edgewood Avenue SW     | North Gate Road SW         | Washington Boulevard SW    |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Far West Drive SW      | 112th Street SW            | Steilacoom Boulevard SW    |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Garnet Lane SW         | Onyx Drive SW              | 83rd Avenue SW             |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Gravelly Lake Drive SW | Bridgeport Way SW          | Steilacoom Boulevard SW    |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Hipkins Road SW        | 104th Street SW            | Steilacoom Boulevard SW    |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Interlaaken Drive SW   | Short Lane SW              | Holly Hedge Lane SW        |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Lakeview Avenue SW     | 111th Street SW            | Steilacoom Boulevard       |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Main Street SW         | Gravelly Lake Drive        | 108th Street SW            |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Motor Avenue SW        | Lexington Avenue SW        | Whitman Avenue SW          |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Mount Tacoma Drive SW  | Holly Hedge Lane SW        | Lexington Avenue SW        |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Mount Tacoma Drive SW  | Motor Avenue SW            | Bridgeport Way SW          |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Murray Road SW         | Fort Lewis Gate Entrance   | I-5 Northbound On-Ramps    |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| North Gate Road SW     | Nottingham Road SW         | Edgewood Avenue SW         |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| North Thorne Lane SW   | Union Avenue SW            | I-5 Northbound On-Ramps    |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Nyanza Road SW         | Gravelly Lake Drive SW (S) | Gravelly Lake Drive SW (N) |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Pacific Highway SW     | Gravelly Lake Drive SW     | South Tacoma Way           |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Phillips Road SW       | Steilacoom Boulevard SW    | Onyx Drive SW              |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Short Lane SW          | 104th Avenue SW            | Interlaaken Drive SW       |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Union Avenue SW        | Berkeley Street SW         | North Thorne Lane SW       |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Vernon Avenue SW       | Veterans Drive SW          | 116th Street SW            |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Veterans Drive SW      | Nottingham Avenue          | Gravelly Lake Drive SW     |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Whitman Avenue SW      | Motor Avenue SW            | Ardmore Drive SW           |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| 40th Avenue SW         | 100th Street SW            | 96th Street SW             |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| 75th Avenue W          | Bridgeport Way W           | Lakewood Drive W           |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| 83rd Avenue SW         | Steilacoom Boulevard SW    | Garnett Lane SW            |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| 84th Street S          | South Tacoma Way           | Tacoma Mall Boulevard S    |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| 87th Avenue SW         | Steilacoom Boulevard SW    | Onyx Drive SW              |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| 93rd Street SW         | Whitman Avenue SW          | Bridgeport Way SW          |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| 96th Street S          | 40th Avenue SW             | Lakewood East City Limits  |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| 100th Street SW        | Gravelly Lake Drive SW     | Bridgeport Way SW          |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| 104th Street SW        | Butte Drive SW             | Hipkins Road SW            |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| 108th Street SW        | Main Street                | Pacific Highway SW         |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| 111th Street SW        | 112th Street SW            | Lakeview Avenue SW         |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| 112th Street SW        | Gravelly Lake Drive SW     | 111th Street SW            |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| 112th Street SW        | Military Road SW           | Farwest Drive SW           |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
| 150th Street SW        | Murray Road SW             | Lakewood East City Limits  |
+------------------------+----------------------------+----------------------------+
[Ord. 635 § 2, 2016; Ord. 503 § 3, 2009.]

12.09.024 Collector arterials.
Collector arterials distribute trips from principal and minor arterials to the ultimate destination, or may collect traffic from local streets and channel it into the principal and minor arterial systems. They carry a low proportion of traffic traveling through the entire subarea; carry a high proportion of local traffic with an origin or destination within that area. Design year ADT is approximately 2,000 to 8,000. They may be on a somewhat meandering alignment and need not be particularly long or continuous.
Spacing is typically about one-quarter mile in developed areas. Collector arterials provide land access service and traffic circulation within residential neighborhoods, commercial, and industrial areas. They may penetrate identifiable residential neighborhoods.
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
|       Street Name       |          From           |            To            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Alferetta Drive SW      | Dekoven Drive SW        | Gravelly Lake Drive SW   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Amber Drive SW          | Zircon Drive SW         | Sapphire Drive SW        |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Angle Lane SW           | Elwood Drive SW         | Hipkins Road SW          |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Avondale Road SW        | Brook Lane SW           | Gravelly Lake Drive SW   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Berkeley Street SW      | I-5 Northbound On-Ramps | Portland Avenue SW       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Bristol Avenue SW       | Lakewood Towne Center   | 100th Street SW          |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Clover Creek Drive SW   | Pacific Highway SW      | Hillcrest Drive SW       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Coral Lane SW           | Sapphire Drive SW       | Onyx Lane SW             |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Dekoven Drive SW        | Meadow Road SW          | Lake Grove Street SW     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Dresden Lane SW         | Elwood Drive SW         | 87th Avenue SW           |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Durango Street SW       | Steilacoom Boulevard SW | B&I Parking Lot          |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Edgewood Avenue SW      | Veterans Drive SW       | North Gate Road SW       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Elwood Drive SW         | Angle Lane SW           | Dresden Lane SW          |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Hillcrest Drive SW      | Glenwood Avenue SW      | Clover Creek Drive SW    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Holden Road SW          | Military Road SW        | Lake Louise Drive SW     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Huggins Meyers Rd SW    | 116th Street SW         | 112th Street SW          |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Idlewild Road SW        | 112th Street SW         | 104th Street SW          |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Interlaaken Drive SW    | Veterans Drive SW       | Lake Steilacoom Drive SW |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| John Dower Road SW      | Steilacoom Boulevard    | Custer Road W            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| John Dower Road W       | Custer Road W           | 75th Street W            |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Lake City Boulevard SW  | Veterans Drive SW       | 116th Street SW          |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Lake Grove Avenue SW    | Waverly Avenue SW       | Dekoven Drive SW         |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Lakewood Mall Boulevard | Lakewood Towne Center   | Bridgeport Way SW        |
| SW                      |                         |                          |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Lake Louise Drive SW    | 100th Avenue SW         | Holden Road SW           |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Lake Louise Drive SW    | Holden Road SW          | 104th Street SW          |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Lake Louise Drive SW    | 104th Street SW         | 100th Ave SW             |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Lake Louise Drive SW    | Lake Louise Drive SW    | 100th Avenue SW          |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| McChord Drive SW        | New York Avenue SW      | Bridgeport Way SW        |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Meadow Road SW          | Brooke Lane SW          | Ardmore Drive SW         |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| New York Avenue SW      | Pacific Highway SW      | McChord Drive SW         |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| North Thorne Lane SW    | Union Avenue SW         | Portland Avenue SW       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Nyanza Park Drive SW    | Nyanza Road SW          | Glenwood Avenue SW       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Onyx Drive SW           | Zircon Drive SW         | 87th Avenue SW           |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Onyx Drive SW           | 87th Avenue SW          | Phillips Road SW         |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Onyx Drive SW           | Phillips Road           | Turquoise Drive SW       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Phillips Road SW        | Onyx Drive SW           | Turquoise Drive SW       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Portland Avenue SW      | Boundary Street SW      | North Thorne Lane SW     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| San Francisco Avenue SW | Interstate 5            | Addison Street SW        |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Sapphire Avenue SW      | Amber Drive SW          | Coral Lane               |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Waverly Drive SW        | Crescent Lane SW        | Mount Tacoma Drive SW    |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| West Thorne Lane SW     | Union Avenue SW         | Portland Avenue SW       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Whitman Avenue SW       | Ardmore Drive SW        | Steilacoom Boulevard SW  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Zircon Drive SW         | Onyx Drive SW           | Turquoise Drive SW       |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| 59th Avenue SW          | Main Street SW          | Gravelly Lake Drive SW   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| 75th Street SW          | 75th Street W           | Bridgeport Way W         |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| 78th Street SW          | Onyx Drive SW           | 91st Avenue SW           |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| 83rd Avenue SW          | Washington Boulevard SW | 112th Street SW          |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| 87th Avenue SW          | Dresden Street SW       | Steilacoom Boulevard SW  |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| 91st Avenue SW          | 78th Street SW          | Zircon Drive SW          |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| 100th Street SW         | Dekoven Drive SW        | Gravelly Lake Drive SW   |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| 101st Street SW         | Farwest Drive SW        | 100th Avenue SW          |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| 104th Street SW         | Lake Louise Drive SW    | Butte Drive SW           |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| 104th Street SW         | Hipkins Road SW         | Interlaaken Drive SW     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| 112th Street SW         | Farwest Drive SW        | Butte Drive SW           |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| 112th Street SW         | Huggins Meyers Road SW  | Interlaaken Drive SW     |
+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
[Ord. 635 § 3, 2016; Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.09.025 Local access street system.
The local access street system provides circulation and access for residential neighborhoods away from the arterial system.
Traffic generators, such as schools or churches, within residential areas should be considered within the local circulation pattern, not only from within the subdivision, but from adjacent neighborhoods as well. There should be a limited number of access points with the arterial streets that border a subdivision.
Local access streets should be designed for relatively uniform low volume of traffic upon full development. The system should be designed to discourage excessive speeds and should minimize the necessity for traffic control devices. Internal streets with direct lot access should be discontinuous so as to discourage through traffic.
Local access streets provide direct access from abutting land to the arterial street system. There are usually no bus routes on local access streets. Through traffic is deliberately discouraged. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.09.026 Minimum street standards.
See the Engineering Standards Manual, current edition, for street details.
Pavement for all city streets shall meet the requirements outlined in the Engineering Standards Manual and shall be designed by a professional engineer registered in the state of Washington. In some cases the City Engineer may elect to waive the requirements for a design report provided the roadway is designed to a minimum pavement section as outlined in the ESM. [Ord. 583 § 5, 2014; Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.09.027 Roadway level of service.
The intent of this section is to ensure that public streets maintain an adequate level of service (LOS) as new development occurs. The LOS standard is adopted in the transportation element of the comprehensive plan. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.09.028 Traffic studies.
The City may request that a trip generation analysis be prepared and submitted for any proposed development. The analysis shall clearly identify traffic generated and trip distribution.
All new proposals for development that would meet any of the following trip generation levels shall submit a traffic impact analysis at the time of application:
A. Twenty new trips during the peak hour at any signalized intersection;
B. Fifty new trips during the peak hour; or
C. Two hundred average daily trips.
Where a safety concern exists, the City may require an analysis to be prepared to address the safety concern and any other concern identified by the applicant’s engineer upon review.
All traffic studies shall be consistent with the most recent edition of the Trip Generation Manual, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. Traffic impact analyses shall identify a traffic impact area and include an analysis of origin/destination trip distribution and an analysis of impacts to LOS within the traffic impact area, an evaluation of safety concerns, recommendations for mitigating traffic impacts, or additional information as deemed necessary by the City Engineer. Traffic impact analyses shall be prepared by a professional traffic engineer. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

Article II. Road Improvements

12.09.031 Street frontage improvements.
A. When Required. Street frontage improvements are required for the following development projects:
    1. New Construction. The installation of street frontage improvements is required prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for all new construction projects except two or fewer single-family houses (when constructed concurrently on adjacent existing lots) or one duplex, unless otherwise required by the City Engineer.
    2. New Subdivisions and Short Plats. The installation of street frontage improvements is required prior to final plat approval for subdivisions and short plats which create two or more additional/new lots, unless otherwise required by the City Engineer.
    3. Additions, Alterations, or Tenant Improvements – Special Provisions Apply. Street frontage improvements shall be constructed as part of all additions, alterations or tenant improvements if one of the following conditions is met:
        a. The proposed addition, alteration or tenant improvement will generate an increase in traffic exceeding 12 additional/new vehicular trips per day as determined by the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) manual.
        b. The proposed addition, alteration or tenant improvement is considered a change of use which intensifies the use of the site or significantly alters the traffic circulation within the site.
        c. The proposed addition, alteration or tenant improvement will create a traffic safety concern or exacerbate a known traffic safety concern in surrounding project vicinity.
        d. The proposed addition, alteration or tenant improvement will redevelop the property (remove/demolish existing buildings, parking areas and improvements on site and construct new buildings, parking areas and improvements within the property).
B. Scope of Improvements. Street frontage improvements shall be installed along the entire frontage of the property, to the centerline of the street, or if a multi-lane street, the affected lane, at the sole cost of the applicant as directed by the City Engineer. The City Engineer may permit modification of street improvement standards where the required street improvements are not, in the opinion of the City Engineer, roughly proportionate to the impact, type, scale and cost of the proposed development action.
    1. Street frontage improvements may include the following: curb, gutter, sidewalk, storm drainage, street lighting, traffic signal equipment, utility installation or relocation, landscaping strip, street trees and landscaping, irrigation, street widening, pavement overlay or reconstruction, and channelization.
    2. In addition to required frontage improvements, the applicant shall provide ramps from the new sidewalk or walkway to the existing shoulder, across streets and pavement and channelization tapering back to the existing pavement and channelization as required to address safety concerns.
    3. Frontage Improvement Pavement Requirements. 
        a. Half-street pavement reconstruction shall be required when: the existing pavement rating is at or below 40, based on the City of Lakewood Pavement Management System; crown slope is greater than three percent; is light bituminous pavement; and/or was built with no base structure. Pavement coring and/or subsurface investigation shall be required to determine base condition.
        b. Half-street asphalt overlay (two-inch minimum) shall be required when the existing pavement rating is at or below 60 based on the City of Lakewood Pavement Management System. Pre-leveling and/or grinding may be required to create a uniform two percent crown slope.
        c. Minimum frontage improvement pavement requirements shall be a patch per City standard plans and one lane grind/inlay (two-inch minimum).
        d. See the Engineering Standards Manual for additional requirements.
C. Deferral of Improvements. When the City has plans for an improvement project, or an area is deemed not essential to the City sidewalk system, or for other similar reasons, the City Engineer may determine that street frontage improvements cannot or should not be constructed at the time of building construction or subdivision, and may allow improvements to be deferred. In these instances, the property owner shall, prior to issuance of the building permit or site development permit, at the direction of the City Engineer:
    1. Pay to the City an amount equal to the property owner’s cost of installing the required improvements prior to issuance of a building permit. The property owner shall provide documentation satisfactory to the City Engineer that establishes the cost of the materials, labor, quantities; or
    2. Record an agreement which provides for these improvements to be installed by the property owner by a date acceptable to the City Engineer; or
    3. Record an agreement to not protest a local improvement district to improve the street frontage.
    Note: In the case of subsection (C)(1) of this section, the City shall be required to use the money collected in accordance with RCW 82.02.020 and identify to the owner which streets the money collected will be used to improve.
D. Corner Lots. In the case of corner lots or other development sites fronting more than one right-of-way, should the impact of the development be such that street system improvements would not be required on all rights-of-way fronting the development site, street system improvements shall be constructed on the right-of-way or rights-of-way selected by the City Engineer.
E. The City Engineer may require the applicant to deed to the City, in accordance with LMC 12.05.060, additional right-of-way as necessary from the property under consideration to create a right-of-way width which complies with state statutes, City ordinances, and/or any other statutes, ordinances, or regulations as a means of mitigating any impact the project may have on the City street system. [Ord. 583 § 6, 2014; Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.09.032 Other road improvement requirements.
If a proposed project is determined to impact an existing City-maintained street, one or more of the following mitigation measures may be required:
A. Implement site-specific traffic mitigating measures immediately adjacent to the project such as right- or left-turn lanes, channelization, signalization, signal coordination, signal timing, additional road and/or shoulder widening, and correction of geometric deficiencies which are determined to be necessary based upon information from a traffic or engineering study or other sources. These improvements shall be implemented only to mitigate impacts resulting directly from a proposed project’s traffic on the City street at the entrance/exit to the project or in the affected project area; and/or
B. Projects that cause a City street to be reclassified to an arterial classification or higher classification of arterial shall be subject to the right-of-way requirements of the higher classified road; and/or
C. If the City streets serving as access to the development do not meet City standards, the City shall require the applicant to construct the existing City streets for a length and in such areas as the City determines is necessary. Design and construction shall be in conformance with the Engineering Standards Manual.
D. If a proposed project will create a safety concern or exacerbate a known safety concern in the surrounding project vicinity, the applicant and/or property owner shall be required to:
    1. Participate in road improvements to correct or improve safety concern(s) as directed by the City Engineer; or
    2. At the discretion of the City Engineer, the applicant shall comply with all of the items listed below:
        a. Hire a professional traffic engineer to evaluate the safety concern and determine appropriate solutions to the problem;
        b. Provide construction plans designed by a professional civil engineer to remedy the safety concern. The City shall review and approve the proposed construction plans. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

Article III. Private Streets

12.09.061 Certification.
All private streets shall be constructed by the applicant and inspected by the project engineer who shall issue a letter of compliance to the applicant with a copy to the City certifying the following:
A. The private street has been constructed in accordance with the Engineering Standards Manual.
B. The street signs are in place.
C. The storm drainage, if applicable, has been constructed in accordance with the project engineer’s design.
D. The gate (if applicable) has been installed in conformance with all applicable codes.
E. Existing and new bridge structures, if any, comply with all applicable codes.
F. The compliance letter shall be stamped, signed, and dated by the project engineer and shall be worded as follows:I have inspected the project and find that the private street and storm drainage as constructed for this project conform to the terms and conditions of the submitted design and requirements of the City’s development standards and regulations, and that the appropriate street signs are in place.
A revised set of plans showing alterations to the previous accepted plans shall be submitted with the letter of compliance. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.09.062 Completion.
All site improvements shall be completed and the letter of compliance submitted to the City or a financial guarantee shall be submitted to the City in the amount of 150 percent of the construction cost prior to plat approval.
The street(s) within a short plat, large lot, or formal plat shall be constructed prior to approval of occupancy of any structures constructed within the plat, except for model home permits as authorized by the City.
A note shall be placed on the face of the plat which states:No building permits will be issued on any lots in this plat (except for model home permits as authorized by the City Subdivision Code) until the private street(s) have been constructed and a letter certifying their compliance to the City’s development standards and regulations is on file with the City.
[Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.09.063 Maintenance.
All private streets and sidewalks subject to the terms of these regulations shall have a maintenance covenant approved by the City Engineer and recorded with the Pierce County Auditor’s Office prior to or concurrent with the recording of the subdivision or plat. An active association shall be established to carry out the terms of the covenant. Private streets or easements existing prior to the effective date of this chapter will be exempted from the street maintenance covenant. Any new private street shall conform to these standards.
Maintenance of the street shall include but not be limited to street surfacing, shoulders, gates, signs, storm water facilities, landscape maintenance, and vegetation control. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.09.064 Conditions of recording.
Prior to recording a plat, the applicant shall dedicate private street easements to the City in the event of formation of a local improvement district (LID). If private street easement widths are insufficient to allow dedication to the City, then a note will be placed on the face of the plat stating that “Future dedication of the private street to the City may require the dedication of additional right-of-way.” [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

Article IV. Other Provisions

12.09.070 Traffic control.
A traffic control plan meeting the approval of the City Engineer, based on engineering principles, shall be prepared for any activities within the right-of-way that disrupt pedestrian or vehicular traffic patterns in accordance with the most current version of the MUTCD. This plan shall be developed and submitted with the permit application.
A. Temporary traffic control to ensure traffic safety during construction activities must be provided. A City-approved plan is required prior to starting construction activities.
B. The applicant is responsible for supplying and installing all necessary permanent traffic control devices such as street name signs, stop signs, speed limit signs, and channelization.
C. The traffic control plan shall minimize disruption to pedestrians during construction. In the event of pedestrian disruption, the plan shall contain adequate pedestrian connections and clear signage.
City approval of traffic control plans does not relieve the contractor of responsibility for maintaining proper traffic control for the project’s duration. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.09.080 Street trees.
The purpose of this section is to protect existing street trees by regulating their maintenance and removal, and to provide for new street trees on existing and new streets.
A. No person shall plant, remove, or otherwise change a tree on a right-of-way, without an approved right-of-way permit, or if appropriate, site development permit. The general maintenance of street trees by property owners or their contractors is exempt from this requirement. The general maintenance of City-owned street trees by City employees, their contractors, or assigns is also exempt from this requirement.
B. All new development applications are required to plant and maintain street trees consistent with the requirements LMC 18A.50.135 and 18A.50.460, as determined by the City Engineer. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009. Formerly 12.09.040.]

12.09.090 Sidewalks, walkways, paths, and trails.
Sidewalks shall be provided on public and private streets. Walkways, paths, and trails may be required for pedestrian connectivity. Installation of improvements shall be required as a condition of development approval.
A. Sidewalks fronting public right-of-way shall be located in public right-of-way. The preferred location for other sidewalks, walkways, and trails is within existing public rights-of-way. If it is not feasible to locate these facilities within the right-of-way, then recorded easements across private property that guarantee public access may be used.
B. Easements and tracts may be used to accommodate trails. Easements and tracts shall be wide enough to include the trail width and a minimum clear distance of two feet on each side of the trail. The width may vary according to site-specific design issues such as topography, buffering, landscaping, and utilities.
C. The location of nonmotorized facilities shall consider the following factors.
    1. Compliance with adopted City plans and policies, including but not limited to the comprehensive plan, the six-year transportation improvement plan, the nonmotorized transportation plan, the parks master plan;
    2. Need to improve access to public facilities;
    3. Need to connect a development with trails;
    4. Need for sidewalks on one or both sides of a street. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009. Formerly 12.09.050.]

Chapter 12.10 SITE DEVELOPMENT PROVISIONS

Sections:
12.10.010    Storm drainage.
12.10.020    Wastewater disposal.
12.10.031    Earthwork – Excavation standards.
12.10.032    Earthwork – Fill standards.
12.10.033    Soil – Engineering geology report.
12.10.040    Erosion control.
12.10.050    Floodplain.
12.10.051    Elevating by fill, pilings and diking.
12.10.052    Access requirements.
12.10.053    Floodways.
12.10.060    Ingress/egress, driveways and access.
12.10.061    Residential driveways.
12.10.062    Commercial and multifamily driveways.
12.10.063    Emergency vehicle (EV) access standards.
12.10.070    Gates.
12.10.080    Exemptions from site development permits.
The provisions of this chapter shall be in addition to any other applicable adopted regulations.

12.10.010 Storm drainage.
Storm drainage review and inspection shall be required in accordance with Chapter 12.11 LMC. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.10.020 Wastewater disposal.
All development proposals shall be served by a wastewater disposal system, including both collection and treatment facilities as follows:
A. For the issuance of a building permit, preliminary plat approval, or other land use approval for an existing lot of record, documentation shall be provided indicating that the disposal system for the project site is consistent with adopted rules and regulations of Pierce County Sewer Utility and/or the Tacoma Pierce County Health Department;
B. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a building or change of use permit, the applicant shall provide documentation to the City that an approved wastewater disposal system has been properly installed to serve each building, unit, tenant space, or lot; and
C. All new subdivisions, including short plats, preliminary and final plats, binding site plans and condominium conversions shall require connection to the public sewer system prior to recordation of the subdivision instrument. An appropriate financial guarantee may be posted with the sewer utility, health department, or the City of Lakewood prior to physical connection at the discretion of the City Engineer and Community Development Director. [Ord. 591 § 76, 2015; Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.10.031 Earthwork – Excavation standards.
Cut slopes shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use and shall not be steeper than two horizontal to one vertical, or as recommended by a soils engineer. The cut depth shall be set back from property lines as follows:
+--------------+----------------------+
|  Cut Depth   |  Set Back Distance   |
+--------------+----------------------+
| Under 5 Feet | 2 Feet               |
+--------------+----------------------+
| 5 – 20       | Feet Height of Cut/2 |
+--------------+----------------------+
| Over 20 Feet | 10 Feet              |
+--------------+----------------------+
[Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.10.032 Earthwork – Fill standards.
Fills which are intended for building sites shall be constructed in conformance with the requirements of the latest edition of the International Building Code (IBC), as adopted by the City of Lakewood, and an assignment of allowable soil-bearing pressures will be determined under the jurisdiction of the City Building Official in accordance with the latest edition of the IBC.
Fill slopes shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use and shall not be steeper than two horizontal to one vertical, or as recommended by a soils engineer. Fill sites shall be approved by the engineer as suitable locations for the proposed fill.
The ground surface for fills over five feet in height shall be prepared by removing vegetation, noncomplying fill, topsoil, and other unsuitable materials; scarifying to provide a bond with the new fill; and, where existing slopes are steeper than five horizontal to one vertical, by benching into competent material as determined by the engineer. The bench under the toe of a fill on a slope steeper than five horizontal to one vertical shall be at least 10 feet wide, or as recommended by a soils engineer.
Except as permitted by the City, no material other than earth material shall be buried or placed in fills. Placement of other than earth material is regulated by state statutes or federal laws and additional permits may be required. Fills shall be constructed using earth materials, compaction methods, and construction techniques so that stable fills are created.
The toe or catch point of fill slopes shall be set back from the site boundary line in accordance with the following table unless a retaining wall is designed by the engineer and constructed for the project:
+--------------+-------------------+
|  Fill Depth  | Set Back Distance |
+--------------+-------------------+
| Under 5 Feet | 2 Feet            |
+--------------+-------------------+
| 5 – 40 Feet  | Height of Fill/2  |
+--------------+-------------------+
| Over 40 Feet | 20 Feet           |
+--------------+-------------------+
[Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.10.033 Soil – Engineering geology report.
When site conditions or the proposed work involve slide-prone or unstable soils, in accordance with Chapter 14.146 LMC or as determined by the City Engineer, the applicant shall be required to retain a soils engineer to prepare a report that includes data regarding the nature, slide potential, soil bearing capacity, and slope stability of existing soils; conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures and design criteria for corrective measures when necessary; and opinions and recommendations covering adequacy of sites to be developed. The report shall be stamped and signed by the engineer. Recommendations in the report shall be incorporated in the proposed plans or specifications. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.10.040 Erosion control.
All proposed projects that will clear, grade, or otherwise disturb a site shall provide erosion and sediment controls to prevent, to the maximum extent possible, the transport of sediment from the project site to downstream drainage facilities, water resources, and adjacent properties. Both temporary and permanent erosion and sediment controls shall be designed, implemented, and maintained as described in Chapters 12.05 and 12.11 LMC and the Engineering Standards Manual. [Ord. 648 § 2, 2016; Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.10.050 Floodplain.
Flood hazard areas are designated in LMC 14.158.020. Development in the flood hazard overlay is regulated by LMC 18A.40.100 through 18A.40.170. The following provisions apply to project proposals located in flood hazard areas and requiring site development permits. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.10.051 Elevating by fill, pilings and diking.
No filling or grading shall be permitted which increases flood hazards, water velocities, or flood elevations. Compensatory storage volumes may be required. Armoring protection such as rock riprap or bulkheads shall be constructed to protect filled areas when water velocities exceed two feet per second. All armoring protection shall be elevated at least three feet above the base flood elevation. All construction elevated by piling shall be designed by a professional structural engineer and approved by the City prior to construction. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.10.052 Access requirements.
Private roads and access easements and all public or future public roads shall be armored and elevated one foot above the base flood elevation. Parking lots are not considered as private roads or access easements. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.10.053 Floodways.
A floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the height and/or velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential. Encroachments, filling, new construction, and substantial improvements shall be prohibited except as follows:
A. Work done by or for a public agency or utility; such as bridges, flood control works, revetments, retaining walls, drainage structures, or other structures necessary to promote the public health, safety, and welfare when the improvements do not obstruct the floodway, increase the water surface elevation more than one foot, or cause an adverse impact to adjacent, cross-channel or downstream properties, and the improvements use appropriate flood hazard protection standards.
Certification by a registered professional engineer is required to verify that the proposed work shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. Agricultural uses or recreational facilities that do not require the installation of utilities or structures.
C. Repairs and/or interior remodels (which are not substantial improvements) to a structure that do not increase the ground floor area or overall square footage of the structure. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.10.060 Ingress/egress, driveways and access.
Driveways and driveway approaches shall be constructed in accordance with the Engineering Standards Manual.
All development proposals shall provide adequate access to a street system or fire lane system that provides life safety/rescue access, and other adopted fire protection requirements for buildings.
Except for a single-family dwelling (not located on an arterial street), all development access shall be provided with adequate aisles/driveways and/or turnaround areas so that all vehicles may enter the street in a forward manner. The access shall be designed and constructed to facilitate the flow of traffic on and off the site, with due regard to pedestrian and vehicle safety, and which shall be clearly and permanently marked and defined.
Wherever a potential access exists to any property from both a local access road and a road of a higher classification, the City shall refuse access to the higher classified road for residential uses.
Lots of record in existing formal plat subdivisions, short plats and large lots not served by a minor or major driveway shall be permitted a minimum of one residential driveway.
All driveway locations shall be shown on the plat maps and/or on the site development plans. Residential driveway locations for lots in formal plats are not restricted to any location unless so noted on the plat maps. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.10.061 Residential driveways.
Driveway locations shall be unified whenever possible to create the fewest number of accesses onto a street. Driveways that serve only one lot shall be located a minimum of five feet from an adjacent property line where the driveway enters the right-of-way. The City Engineer or designee may approve driveways for flag lots on easements to land-locked properties to be located two and one-half feet from an adjacent property line.
Residential driveways shall be constructed the maximum practical distance but in no event less than 35 feet or the posted speed limit in feet, whichever is greater, from a side street or intersection. The distance is measured from the road right-of-way line to the nearest edge of the driveway. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.10.062 Commercial and multifamily driveways.
Commercial and multifamily driveways shall be located a minimum of 125 feet from a side street or intersection except where physical site conditions and spacing of existing driveways may cause the City to require another location. The 125 feet is measured along the property line from the right-of-way of the perpendicular street to the edge of the driveway. New driveways that would create a four-legged intersection are undesirable unless the existing City street has an arterial classification, or if a stop condition to the City street exists. Access to a corner lot with a frontage less than 155 feet in width will be established on a case-by-case basis by the City and the driveway(s) shall be placed at such a location to maximize safety.
New driveway locations created by the platting of property shall be unified whenever possible to create the fewest number of accesses onto a City street.
The number, location, and size of commercial and multifamily driveways shall be determined by the volume and type of traffic generated by the development, other driveways in the vicinity of the proposed approach, the amount of lot frontage along the City street, and channelization/traffic control on the City street along the lot frontage.
When multiple driveways to one parcel or development are permitted, they shall not be less than 125 feet apart, measured from centerline to centerline.
A minimum of two major driveways shall be required for developments that will generate 500 ADT or more unless other mitigating measures are approved by the City.
Notwithstanding the requirements of these regulations, the number and location of major driveways may be more restrictive than described herein if deemed necessary by the City. The City shall base its determination on existing and projected traffic volumes and channelization and signalization on the existing City street, traffic, and turning movements generated by the existing and/or proposed project and other applicable traffic design criteria.
When a three-lane driveway is requested, a traffic engineering study along with a signing, striping, and traffic channelization plan shall be done by the applicant’s engineer for submittal to the City for review and approval. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.10.063 Emergency vehicle (EV) access standards.
The following provisions are required for property access roads and shall be approved by the City Engineer and Fire Marshal:
A. Length. Approved emergency vehicle (EV) access road shall extend to within 150 feet of all portions of the facility and all portions of the exterior walls of the first story of the building as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the facility.
B. Width. EV access servicing not more than two dwelling units shall not be less than 15 feet wide. EV access for all other projects shall not be less than 24 feet with no parking, 28 feet with parking on one side and 32 feet with parking on both sides.
C. Vertical Clearance. EV access shall have an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet, six inches. The City, after conferring with the Fire Marshal, may allow a reduction in the vertical clearance, provided such reduction does not impair access by emergency vehicles, and approved signs are installed and maintained indicating the established vertical clearance.
D. Surface Requirements. EV access shall be designed and maintained to support the imposed loads of fire apparatus and shall be paved with asphalt or concrete so as to provide all-weather driving capabilities. Exception: access designated “Emergency Vehicles Only” may be designed by a professional engineer and can be alternative surfacing, as approved by the City Engineer or designee.
E. Turning Radii. A minimum outside turning radius of 45 feet shall be provided for all EV access.
F. Number of Accesses. More than one EV access may be required for commercial developments when it is determined by the Pierce County Fire District No. 2 that access by a single street may be impaired by vehicle congestion, condition of terrain, climatic conditions, or other factors that could limit access unless mitigation acceptable to the City and the Fire District is provided.
G. Grade. The maximum grade (vertical profile grade) of an EV access shall be 15 percent. All sections of EV accesses with grades over 12 percent shall be paved with 0.17 feet compacted asphalt concrete or its cement concrete equivalent.
H. Dead End Road Access. Dead end emergency access roads or drive aisles in excess of 150 feet in length shall be provided with an approved area for turning around fire apparatus. The turnaround shall be as follows:
    1. New additions, alterations or tenant improvements, on a dead end street or interior drive access aisle, that increase the number of uses to the site shall construct an EV turnaround.
    2. A hammerhead turnaround or a cul-de-sac shall be provided within all new commercial/industrial projects whose EV access meets the “Dead End Access Road” criteria.
    3. Hammerhead turnarounds and cul-de-sac design shall comply with the latest edition of the Engineering Standards Manual.
I. Modifications to the Standards. The Fire Marshal may modify the emergency vehicle access requirements of this section in accordance with the latest edition of the International Fire Code (IFC) or as amended by City ordinance. [Ord. 648 § 3, 2016; Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.10.070 Gates.
A building permit issued by the City is required when gates are installed over private streets and driveways. The following requirements shall be met:
A. Gates which serve 10 or more dwelling units shall have an Opticom activation system or an equivalent and compatible system that is approved by the Fire Marshal.
B. Gates shall have rapid-entry key capabilities compatible with the Fire District per IFC Section 506.
C. All electrically-activated gates shall have default capabilities to the unlocked position.
D. The minimum clear width of a gate shall be compatible with the street or driveway required width.
E. Gates that might be obstructed by the accumulation of snow shall not be installed.
F. A vehicular turn around shall be provided in front of the gate.
Gates on residential driveways shall be set back from the right-of-way line a minimum of 20 feet. Gates on private streets and commercial and multifamily driveways shall be set back from the right-of-way line a minimum of 60 feet. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.10.080 Exemptions from site development permits.
Subject to the requirements of International Building Code Appendix J, the following work is exempt from the requirements of these regulations:
A. Construction or maintenance of public roads or flood control projects when done by a public agency sponsoring the project has completed a SEPA checklist, if required, has been approved by the City, and the work is in existing public right-of-way or easement dedicated to or owned by the City of Lakewood.
B. The import or disturbance of not more than a total of 25 cubic yards of material, throughout the life of a development from its existing condition, except in sensitive areas; import or disturbance placed within 25 feet of a drainage course, pothole, or floodplain; and for road construction.
C. Cutting and clearing and/or grubbing of a parcel of land or portion thereof less than 5,000 square feet except in sensitive areas.
D. The stockpiling or broadcasting of less than 500 cubic yards of topsoil, peat, sawdust, mulch, bark, chips or solid nutrients on a lot, tract, or parcel of land, per year except in floodplains and except in sensitive areas.
E. The installation of utilities in accordance with a valid City permit, well drilling activities, installation of sanitary drain fields, or excavation for soil logs.
F. Emergency sandbagging, diking, ditching, filling or similar work during or after periods of extreme weather conditions when done to protect life or property.
G. The excavation or filling required to accommodate only the footprint of a proposed single-family residential structure in preparation for the proposed structure. [Ord. 583 § 7, 2014; Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

Chapter 12.11 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT

Sections:
12.11.010    Purpose.
12.11.020    General provisions.
12.11.030    Development proposal requirements.
12.11.040    Minimum surface water and storm water requirements.
12.11.050    Construction timing and final approval.
12.11.060    Illicit discharge.

12.11.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to describe requirements for new development and redevelopment to:
A. Reduce flooding, erosion, and sedimentation;
B. Prevent and mitigate habitat loss;
C. Enhance ground water recharge; and
D. Prevent surface and subsurface water pollution through the implementation of comprehensive and thorough permit review and construction inspection. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.11.020 General provisions.
All new development and redevelopment shall be served by an adequate storm water management system as follows:
A. The proposed system is adequate if the development proposal site is served by a storm water management system approved by the City Engineer as being consistent with the design, operating and procedural requirements adopted by the City. The project engineer shall submit a letter to the City certifying completeness of the storm water management system in accordance with LMC 12.06.020;
B. For a formal subdivision, special use permit or zone reclassification, the phased installation of required storm water management improvements shall be stated in the approving documents. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.11.030 Development proposal requirements.
A drainage review and approval is required when any development proposal is subject to a City permit. All proposals for development or redevelopment, whether public or private, which are submitted to the City for review and approval shall conform to these requirements which are to be used as the basis for review and approval of design and construction.
Development projects that capture and infiltrate all storm water on site are also subject to these regulations, since these projects contribute to ground water and have a probability of contributing storm water to the City storm water system in the event the design capacity is exceeded; or the system is compromised or fails.
Not all of the minimum requirements apply to every development or redevelopment project. The applicability varies depending on the type and size of the project. The flow charts in Figures 11.1 and 11.2 shall be used to determine which of the minimum requirements apply.
[IMAGE: <12A.11.030_001.png>]Figure 11.1: Flow Chart for Determining Requirements for New Development
[IMAGE: <12A.11.030_002.png>]Figure 11.2: Flow Chart for Determining Requirements for Redevelopment
[Ord. 648 § 4, 2016; Ord. 583 § 8, 2014; Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.11.040 Minimum surface water and storm water requirements.
When drainage review and approval is required the City requires, at a minimum, full compliance with this section.
A. Minimum Requirement No. 1: Preparation of Storm Water Site Plans. All projects meeting the thresholds in LMC 12.11.030, Figure 11.1 or 11.2, shall prepare a storm water site plan for City review. Storm water site plans shall be prepared in accordance with the DOE Stormwater Manual as amended by the Engineering Standards Manual.
B. Minimum Requirement No. 2: Construction Storm Water Pollution Prevention. All new development and redevelopment projects are responsible for preventing erosion and discharge of sediment and other pollutants leaving the site. Projects meeting the thresholds described in LMC 12.11.030, Figure 11.1 or 11.2, shall prepare a construction storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as part of the storm water site plan (see Minimum Requirement No. 1). In addition, projects greater than one acre that have the potential to discharge to waters of the state, as determined by the City Engineer, shall apply for a construction storm water general permit through the DOE. The permit, as well as guidance for preparing a SWPPP, is available through the DOE.
The SWPPP shall be implemented beginning with initial soil disturbance and until final stabilization. The SWPPP shall meet the following objectives:
    1. To implement best management practices (BMPs) to prevent erosion and sedimentation, and to identify, reduce, eliminate or prevent storm water contamination and water pollution from construction activity;
    2. To prevent violations of surface water quality, ground water quality or sediment management standards; and
    3. To control peak volumetric flow rates and velocities of storm water discharges.
C. Minimum Requirement No. 3: Source Control of Pollution. All known, available and reasonable source control BMPs shall be applied to all projects. Source control BMPs shall be selected, designed, and maintained in accordance with the DOE Stormwater Manual and as amended by the Engineering Standards Manual.
D. Minimum Requirement No. 4: Preservation of Natural Drainage Systems and Outfalls. Natural drainage patterns shall be maintained, and discharges from the project site shall occur at the natural location, to the maximum extent practicable. The manner by which runoff is discharged from the project site shall not cause a significant adverse impact to downstream receiving waters and down gradient properties. All outfalls require energy dissipation.
E. Minimum Requirement No. 5: On-Site Storm Water Management. Projects shall employ on-site storm water management BMPs in accordance with the project thresholds, standards, and lists found in Section 4.5 of Appendix 1 of the Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit (Municipal NPDES Permit) to infiltrate, disperse, and retain storm water runoff on site to the maximum extent feasible without causing flooding or erosion impacts.
F. Minimum Requirement No. 6: Runoff Treatment Project Thresholds. The following require construction of storm water treatment facilities:
    1. Projects in which the total of pollution-generating hard surface (PGHS) is 5,000 square feet or more in a threshold discharge area of the project; or
    2. Projects in which the total of pollution-generating pervious surfaces (PGPS), not including permeable pavements, is three-quarters of an acre or more in a threshold discharge area, and from which there will be a surface discharge in a natural or manmade conveyance system from the site.
Treatment-type thresholds, facility sizing and facility selection, design and maintenance are as described in Section 4.6 of Appendix 1 of the Municipal NPDES Permit.
G. Minimum Requirement No. 7: Flow Control. 
    1. Projects shall provide flow control to reduce the impacts of storm water runoff from hard surfaces and land cover conversions. This requirement shall be interpreted as follows within the City of Lakewood:
        a. This minimum requirement applies to projects that discharge storm water directly or indirectly through a conveyance or overflow system, into a fresh water body.
        b. This minimum requirement applies to projects that discharge storm water to a City-owned conveyance system which subsequently infiltrates storm water. However, for this scenario, the level of control required for such discharges will be approved on a site-by-site basis by the City Engineer. The intent is to ensure that drainage from the project site will not exceed the capacity of the downstream conveyance and/or the downstream infiltration system.
        c. This minimum requirement is waived for sites that will infiltrate on site all runoff from hard surfaces and converted vegetation areas.
    2. Thresholds. The following require construction of flow control facilities and/or land use management BMPs that will achieve the standard requirements of the DOE Stormwater Manual:
        a. Projects in which the total of effective impervious surfaces is 10,000 square feet or more in a threshold discharge area; or
        b. Projects that convert three-quarters of an acre or more of native vegetation to lawn or landscape, or convert two and one-half acres or more of native vegetation to pasture in a threshold discharge area, and from which there is a surface discharge in a natural or manmade conveyance system from the site; or
        c. Projects that through a combination of hard surfaces and converted vegetation areas cause a 0.10 cubic feet per second or greater increase in the 100-year flow frequency from a threshold discharge area as estimated using the Western Washington Hydrology Model or other approved model and one-hour time steps (or a 0.15 cfs increase or greater using 15-minute time steps).
    3. Standard Flow Control Requirement. Storm water discharges shall match developed discharge durations to predeveloped durations for the range of predeveloped discharge rates from 50 percent of the two-year peak flow up to the full 50-year peak flow. The predeveloped condition to be matched shall be a forested land cover unless:
        a. Reasonable, historic information is provided that indicates the site was prairie prior to settlement (modeled as “pasture” in the Western Washington Hydrology Model); or
        b. The drainage area of the immediate stream and all subsequent downstream basins have had at least 40 percent total impervious area since 1985. In this case, the predeveloped condition to be matched shall be the existing land cover condition. The map in Appendix I-G of the DOE Stormwater Manual depicts those areas which meet this criterion. Where basin-specific studies determine a stream channel to be unstable, even though the above criteria is met, the predeveloped condition assumption shall be the “historic” land cover condition or a land cover condition commensurate with achieving a target flow regime identified by an approved basin study.
    This standard requirement is waived for sites that will reliably infiltrate on site all the runoff from hard surfaces and converted vegetation areas.
    4. Alternative Requirement. An alternative requirement may be established through application of watershed-scale hydrological modeling and supporting field observations. Possible reasons for an alternative flow control requirement include the following:
        a. Establishment of a stream-specific threshold of significant bed load movement other than the assumed 50 percent of the two-year peak flow;
        b. Zoning and land clearing ordinance restrictions that, in combination with an alternative flow control standard, maintain or reduce the naturally occurring erosive forces on the stream channel; or
        c. A duration control standard is not necessary for protection, maintenance, or restoration of designated beneficial uses or Clean Water Act compliance.
    See Section 7, Basin/Watershed Planning, of Appendix 1 of the Municipal NPDES Permit for details on how alternative control requirements may be established.
    5. Additional Requirement. Flow control BMPs shall be selected, designed, and maintained in accordance with Volume III of the DOE Stormwater Manual or an approved equivalent.
H. Minimum Requirement No. 8: Wetlands Protection. 
    1. Applicability. The requirements below apply only to projects whose storm water discharges into a wetland, either directly or indirectly through a conveyance system. These requirements shall be met in addition to meeting Minimum Requirement No. 6, Runoff Treatment Project Thresholds; and Minimum Requirement No. 7, Flow Control; and comply with the provisions of Chapter 14.162 LMC, Wetlands Areas.
    2. Standard Requirement. Projects shall comply with Guide Sheets No. 1 and No. 3 in Appendix I-D of the DOE Stormwater Manual. The hydrologic analysis shall use the existing land cover condition to determine the existing hydrologic conditions unless directed otherwise by a regulatory agency with jurisdiction.
    3. Additional Requirements. The standard requirement does not excuse any discharge from the obligation to apply whatever technology is necessary to comply with state water quality standards, Chapter 173-201A WAC, or state ground water standards, Chapter 173-200 WAC. Additional treatment requirements to meet those standards may be required by federal, state, or local governments.
    Storm water treatment and flow control facilities shall not be built within a natural vegetated buffer, except for necessary conveyance systems as approved by the City Engineer or as allowed in wetlands approved for hydrologic modification and/or treatment in accordance with the Guide Sheet No. 2 in Appendix I-D of the DOE Stormwater Manual.
    An adopted and implemented basin plan prepared in accordance with provisions of Section 7 of Appendix 1 of the Municipal NPDES Permit may be used to develop requirements for wetlands that are tailored to a specific basin.
I. Minimum Requirement No. 9: Operation and Maintenance. An operation and maintenance manual consistent with the provisions in Volume V of the DOE Stormwater Manual shall be provided for all proposed storm water facilities and BMPs. The party (or parties) responsible for maintenance and operation shall be identified in the operation and maintenance manual. At private facilities, a copy of the manual shall be retained on site or within reasonable access to the site, and shall be transferred with the property to the new owner. For short plats and subdivisions, a plat agreement to follow the long-term operation and maintenance plan shall be signed. For public facilities, a copy of the manual shall be retained in the appropriate department. A log of maintenance activity that indicates what actions were taken shall be kept and be available for inspection by the City. [Ord. 648 § 5, 2016; Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.11.050 Construction timing and final approval.
Erosion and sediment control measures associated with both the interim and permanent drainage systems shall be:
A. Constructed in accordance with the approved plan prior to any grading or land clearing other than that associated with an approved erosion and sediment control plan; and
B. Satisfactorily sequenced and maintained until all improvements, restoration, and landscaping associated with the permit and/or for the project are completed, and the potential for on-site erosion has passed.
Prior to the construction of any improvements and/or buildings on the site, those portions of the drainage facilities necessary to accommodate the control of surface water and storm water runoff discharging from the site shall be constructed and in operation. Recording of short plats and subdivisions may occur prior to the construction of drainage facilities when approved in writing by the City Engineer only to minimize impacts that may result from construction during inappropriate times of the year. If recording of formal or administrative subdivisions occurs prior to the construction of the drainage facilities then a financial guarantee will be posted to cover the cost of the unbuilt drainage facilities and a deadline for completion of the drainage facilities will be imposed. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.11.060 Illicit discharge.
A. Prohibited Discharges. It is unlawful for any individual, person, firm or corporation to discharge into the public storm drainage system directly or indirectly any liquid or solid foreign substances of biodegradable or other nature which may cause or tend to cause water pollution, including but not limited to the following items:
    1. Petroleum and automotive products including but not limited to oil, gasoline, diesel fuel, grease, fuel oil and heating oil, antifreeze or other automotive products;
    2. Trash, waste and debris including but not limited to food waste, garbage, pet wastes, sanitary sewage, bark and other fibrous material, lawn clippings, leaves or branches, animal carcasses, silt, sand, dirt or rock;
    3. Chemicals, paints, paint chips, steam cleaning wastes, laundry wastes, soaps, pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers, degreasers and/or solvents, acids or alkalis, or dyes;
    4. Heated water, chlorinated water or chlorine;
    5. Construction materials including waste from washing of fresh concrete for cleaning and/or finishing purposes or to expose aggregates, mortar, gypsum, paint, or any other building materials.
B. Discharging of the following non-storm-water into the public storm drainage system directly or indirectly is illegal unless the stated conditions are met:
    1. Discharges from potable water sources that have not been dechlorinated, including water line flushing, hyperchlorinated water line flushing, fire hydrant system flushing, and pipeline hydrostatic test water. Planned discharges shall be dechlorinated to a concentration of 0.1 ppm or less, pH-adjusted, if necessary, and volumetrically and velocity controlled to prevent resuspension of sediments in the City drainage system;
    2. Dechlorinated Swimming Pool Discharges. The discharges shall be dechlorinated to a concentration of 0.1 ppm or less, pH-adjusted and reoxygenized if necessary, volumetrically and velocity controlled to prevent resuspension of sediments in the City drainage system. Swimming pool cleaning wastewater and filter backwash shall not be discharged to the City drainage system;
    3. Street and sidewalk wash water, water used to control dust, and routine external building wash down water at active construction sites. Street sweeping must be performed prior to washing the street;
    4. Discharges shall be in compliance with the requirements of the storm water pollution prevention plan reviewed by the City, which addresses control of construction site dewatering discharges.
C. Permissible Discharges. Discharges from the sources listed below shall only be considered illicit discharges if the City Engineer, or designee thereof, determines that the type of discharge, whether singly or in combination with others, is a significant source of water pollution:
Natural uncontaminated ground water; uncontaminated air conditioning condensation; natural springs; uncontaminated water from crawl space pumps; irrigation runoff from agricultural sources that is commingled with urban storm water; discharges in compliance with an NPDES permit; discharges from approved footing drains and foundation drains; diverted stream flows; flows from riparian habitat and wetlands; uncontaminated pumped ground water; and rising ground water.
D. Exemption. Discharges resulting directly from public firefighting activities, but not from such as the maintenance or cleaning of firefighting equipment, are exempt from regulation under this section.
E. Enforcement. The City Engineer, or the designee thereof or enforcement inspector or official, is authorized to enforce the regulations of this section through the following process or procedure:
    1. Notice to Correct Violation. Whenever the code enforcement official or other authorized enforcement official, or his/her designee, determines that a violation of this section is occurring or has occurred, a written notice may be issued to correct the violation, with such notice being posted upon the property or delivered to the property owner(s) and/or tenant(s) and/or to any person(s) causing or allowing or participating in the violation.
    2. Service of Notice. Such notice shall be served by posting the property, personally serving a copy of the notice upon a party responsible for the property, or by certified mail to the property owner or taxpayer of record for the property.
    3. Notices pursuant to this section shall be in writing, shall state the specific violation to be remedied, the location of the violation, and the property owner and/or persons responsible for the property.
    4. The code enforcement officer or inspecting official shall require the violation to be corrected within one to 15 working days from the issuance of the notice to correct. The length of time to correct shall be determined, in the sole discretion of the code enforcement official or other authorized enforcement official, or his/her designee, by the scope of violation, the history of prior violations by the same persons and/or at the same location and method needed to correct violation. All violations, in any event, shall be corrected expediently.
    5. Failure to remedy a violation of this section after proper service of a notice to correct is a misdemeanor crime, punishable by up to 90 days in jail, a $1,000 fine or any combination thereof.
    6. Public Nuisance. Violations of this section are public nuisances and may be abated by the City. See LMC 12.02.050, Public nuisance. [Ord. 648 § 6, 2016; Ord. 583 § 9, 2014; Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

Chapter 12.12 STREET AND ALLEY VACATION PROCEDURES*

Sections:
12.12.010    Definitions.
12.12.020    Statement of purpose.
12.12.030    Initiation of vacation.
12.12.040    Petition for vacation.
12.12.050    Petition fees.
12.12.060    Survey, vicinity map, plat map and legal description.
12.12.070    Setting of hearing.
12.12.080    Staff report.
12.12.090    Notice of hearing.
12.12.100    Protest.
12.12.110    Hearing and committee report.
12.12.120    City Council decision.
12.12.130    Limitation on vacations of streets abutting bodies of water.
12.12.140    Requirements prior to resolution regarding vacation of streets abutting bodies of water.
12.12.150    Vacation by ordinance.
12.12.160    Compensation for vacation.
12.12.170    Appraisals.
12.12.180    Payment of compensation of conveyance.
12.12.190    Recording with County Auditor.
* Prior legislation note: Ord. 501 repealed provisions concerning street vacation procedures that were formerly in Chapter 12.20, based on the provisions of Ords. 48 and 377.

12.12.010 Definitions.
A street or alley “vacation” means that the public is letting go of, or “vacating,” the public interest in a property. After a street or an alley is vacated, the public no longer has a right to use the property for access. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.12.020 Statement of purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures, notice requirements and fees for the vacation of streets and alleys within the City. This chapter is intended to implement the authority granted to the City by Chapter 35.79 RCW and RCW 35A.47.020 and to conform to their provisions. In case of conflict between this chapter and those statutes, the statutory provisions shall be controlling. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.12.030 Initiation of vacation.
The owners of an interest in any real property abutting upon any street or alley who may desire to vacate the street or alley, or any part thereof, may petition the City Council. In the alternative, the City Council may itself initiate a vacation by resolution. The petition or resolution shall be filed with the City Clerk. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.12.040 Petition for vacation.
The petition shall be in a form prescribed by the City Manager or designee and shall contain a name, address and telephone number of a representative for the petitioners. The petition shall also discuss the criteria set forth in LMC 12.12.120. The sufficiency of the petition shall be governed by RCW 35A.01.040. [Ord. 583 § 10, 2014; Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.12.050 Petition fees.
Every petition for the vacation of any street or alley, or any part thereof, shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount established by resolution of the City to defray the administrative costs incurred in processing the petition and publishing, posting and mailing notices, plus any consulting costs incurred by the City during the review process. The fee shall not be refunded under any circumstances. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.12.060 Survey, vicinity map, plat map and legal description.
A. Every petition shall be accompanied by: (1) a survey, (2) a vicinity map showing the general area of the proposed vacation, (3) a plat map prepared and sealed by a professional land surveyor, registered in the state of Washington, indicating the specific parcels abutting the proposed street or alley to be vacated, and (4) an exact legal description of the portion of road to be vacated prepared and sealed by a professional land surveyor, registered in the state of Washington.
B. Flagging which indicates the boundaries of the street or alley shall be installed when the survey is conducted. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.12.070 Setting of hearing.
Upon receipt of the petition, the fee and all required documents the City Clerk shall forward the petition and required documents to the City Manager or designee who shall determine whether the petition has been signed by the owners of more than two-thirds of the property abutting the part of the street or alley to be vacated. If the petition has been signed by the required percentage of such owners, the City Manager or designee shall bring the petition before the City Council within 30 days of receipt of the petition, and the City Council shall, by resolution, fix a time when the petition will be heard and determined by the City Council, or committee of the City Council, which time shall be not more than 60 days nor less than 20 days after the date of adoption of the resolution. Where the City Council initiates the vacation by resolution, that resolution shall fix a time when the proposed vacation will be heard by the City Council or a committee of the City Council. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.12.080 Staff report.
The City Manager or designee shall prepare a report concerning the proposed vacation, which report shall address the criteria (see LMC 12.12.120) to be considered by the City Council in determining whether to vacate the street or alley, and such other information as deemed appropriate by the City Manager or designee. In preparing the report, the City Manager or designee shall solicit comments from Law Enforcement, Public Works and other departments of the City, and may solicit comments from other governmental agencies and utility service providers operating within the boundaries of the City, including fire districts. The report shall be submitted to the City Council, or the City Council committee hearing the matter, and to the representative of the petitioners, not less than five days before the hearing. [Ord. 583 § 11, 2014; Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.12.090 Notice of hearing.
Upon the passage of the resolution fixing the time for hearing the petition or proposal for vacation, the City Clerk shall give not less than 20 days’ notice to the time, place and purpose of the hearing by (A) publishing written notice once in the City’s official newspaper, (B) posting a placard in a conspicuous place at each end of the street or alley sought to be vacated, and (C) mailing written notice to all petitioners at the address on the petition and all owners of property abutting the street or alley proposed to be vacated, as shown on the records of the Pierce County Assessor. In addition, notice shall be given to the owners of property which lie within 300 feet beyond the street or alley to be vacated, measuring in both directions from the area to be vacated. The City Manager or designee shall send the same written notice to the representative of the petitioners at the address on the petition. The placards shall be highly visible and at least 11 by 14 inches in size, and shall include a map showing the location of the street or alley proposed to be vacated. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.12.100 Protest.
If 50 percent or more of the owners of the abutting property file written objections to a City Council-initiated vacation with the City Clerk, prior to the time of the hearing, the City shall be prohibited from proceeding with the vacation. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.12.110 Hearing and committee report.
The hearing on the petition proposal shall be held before the City Council, or a committee of the City Council, upon the day fixed by resolution or at the time to which a hearing may be adjourned. Following the hearing, the committee shall report its recommendation on the petition or proposal to the City Council, which may adopt or reject the recommendation. If a hearing is held before a committee, it shall not be necessary to hold a hearing before the City Council. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.12.120 City Council decision.
Following the hearing and receipt of committee report, if applicable, the City Council shall determine whether to vacate the street or alley. The determination shall include, but not be limited to, consideration of the following criteria:
A. Whether a change of use or vacation of the street or alley will better serve the public good;
B. Whether the street or alley is no longer required for public use or public access;
C. Whether the substitution of a new and different public way would be more useful to the public;
D. Whether conditions may so change in the future as to provide a greater use or need than presently exists; and,
E. Whether objections to the proposed vacation are made by owners of private property (exclusive of petitioners) abutting the street or alley or other governmental agencies or members of the general public. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.12.130 Limitation on vacations of streets abutting bodies of water.
If the street or alley to be vacated, or any portion of the street or alley to be vacated, abuts a body of fresh or salt water, the City shall not vacate such street or alley unless the following additional criteria and the requirements are met:
A. The vacation is sought to enable the City to acquire the property for port purposes, beach or water access purposes, boat moorage or launching sites, park, public view, recreation, or educational purposes, or other public uses;
B. The City, by resolution, declares that the street or alley is not presently being used as a street or alley and that the street or alley is not suitable for any of the following purposes: port, beach or water access, boat moorage, launching sites, park, public view, recreation, or education; or
C. The vacation is sought to enable the City to implement a plan, adopted by resolution or ordinance, that provides comparable or improved public access to the same shoreline area to which the streets or alleys sought to be vacated abut, had the properties included in the plan not been vacated. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.12.140 Requirements prior to resolution regarding vacation of streets abutting bodies of water.
Before adopting a resolution vacating a street or alley under LMC 12.12.130(B), the City shall complete the following:
A. Compile an inventory of all rights-of-way within the City that abut the same body of water that is abutted by the street or alley sought to be vacated;
B. Conduct a study to determine if the street or alley to be vacated is suitable for use by the City for any of the following purposes: port, boat moorage, launching sites, beach or water access, park, public view, recreation, or education;
C. Hold a public hearing on the proposed vacation in the manner required by this chapter, where in addition to the normal requirements for publishing notice, notice of the public hearing is posted conspicuously on the street or alley sought to be vacated, which posted notice indicates that the area is public access, is proposed to be vacated, and that anyone objecting to the proposed vacation should attend the public hearing or send a letter to a particular designated official indicating his or her objection; and
D. Make a finding that the street or alley sought to be vacated is not suitable for any of the purposes listed under subsection B of this section, and that the vacation is in the public interest.
E. No vacation shall be effective until the fair market value has been paid for the street or alley that is vacated. Moneys received from the vacation may be used by the City only for acquiring additional beach or water access, acquiring additional public view sites to a body of water, or acquiring additional moorage or launching sites. [Ord. 583 § 12, 2014; Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.12.150 Vacation by ordinance.
If the City Council determines to grant the vacation, the action shall be made by ordinance in conformance with LMC 12.12.120 and with such conditions or limitations as the City Council deems necessary and proper to preserve any desired public use or benefit. The ordinance may contain a provision retaining or requiring conveyance of easements for construction, repair and maintenance of existing and future utilities and services. [Ord. 581 § 13, 2014; Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.12.160 Compensation for vacation.
A. Where a vacation has been initiated by petition, the owners of the property abutting the area vacated shall pay to the City, prior to the effective date of the ordinance vacating the area, a sum equal to one-half of the appraised value of the area vacated plus the full cost of physical closure and road repairs as required by the City Manager or designee. If the property sought to be vacated, however, has been part of a dedicated public right-of-way, whether open or unopened for 25 years or more, or if the property or portions thereof were acquired at public expense, the City may require the petitioner(s) to pay compensation in an amount that does not exceed the full appraised value of the area vacated. Where the vacation was initiated by the City or was required by the City as a condition of a permit or approval, the owners of the property abutting the area vacated shall not be required to compensate the City.
B. Conveyance of other property acceptable to the City may be made in lieu of the required payment, whether required to mitigate adverse impacts of the vacation or otherwise. When the conveyance is made for street purposes, one-half of the fair market value of the land conveyed shall be credited to the required payment. When the conveyance is made in fee for purposes other than street purposes, the full appraised value of the land conveyed shall be credited to the required payment.
C. When the value of the in-lieu parcel is less than the required payment, the petitioners shall pay the difference to the City. When the value of the in-lieu parcel exceeds the required payment, the City shall pay the difference to the petitioners.
D. One-half of the revenue received by the City as compensation for vacated public property shall be dedicated to the acquisition, improvement, development, and related maintenance of public open space or transportation projects within the City. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.12.170 Appraisals.
A. The City Manager or designee shall determine the appraised value of the area vacated based on an appraisal from a state-certified real estate appraiser who has an MAI or SRA designation from the Appraisal Institute. To obtain such appraisal, the City Manager or designee shall present to the representatives of the petitioners a list of three such certified and designated appraisers from which the representatives of the petitioners shall select one appraiser. The petitioner shall pay for the appraisal. If the City Manager or designee is not satisfied with the appraisal, the City Manager or designee may order a second appraisal from a state-certified real estate appraiser who has an MAI or SRA designation from the Appraisal Institute. The City shall pay for the second appraisal.
B. The City Manager or designee shall use the appraisal having the highest value for the area vacated. The City Manager or designee shall determine the fair market value or full appraisal value of the real property proposed to be granted or dedicated to the City in lieu of cash payment under LMC 12.12.120 in accordance with the appraisal procedure of subsection A of this section. [Ord. 583 § 14, 2014; Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.12.180 Payment of compensation of conveyance.
After determining the appraisal of the value of the street or alley to be vacated, pursuant to LMC 12.12.170, the City Manager or designee shall notify the representatives of the petitioners of the amount of compensation. The payment shall be delivered to the City Manager or designee who, upon receipt of the payment, shall transmit it to the City Finance Department for deposit in the street fund and shall make a written report of the payment to the City Council. If the petitioner has been authorized to deliver an instrument granting or dedicating to the City a parcel or parcels of land in lieu of cash payment, as contemplated in LMC 12.12.160, the City Manager or designee, at the petitioner’s expense, may obtain either a policy of title insurance insuring title of the property in the City, or a certificate of title as to the title insurance insuring title of the property in the City, or a certificate of title as to the title thereof, and upon receipt of such policy or certificate, shall transmit it to the City Council. [Ord. 583 § 15, 2014; Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.12.190 Recording with County Auditor.
A certified copy of any such ordinance vacating a street or alley, or part thereof, shall be recorded by the City Clerk in the office of the Pierce County Auditor. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

Chapter 12.13 COMMUTE TRIP REDUCTION*

Sections:
12.13.010    Definitions.
12.13.020    Commute trip reduction goals.
12.13.030    Designation of CTR zone and base year values.
12.13.040    City employee CTR plan.
12.13.050    Implementation responsibility.
12.13.060    Responsible City department.
12.13.070    Applicability.
12.13.080    Notification of applicability.
12.13.090    New affected employers.
12.13.100    Change in status as an affected employer.
12.13.110    Requirements for employers.
12.13.120    Record-keeping.
12.13.130    Schedule and process for CTR reports, program review and implementation.
12.13.140    Exemptions and goal modifications.
12.13.150    Credit for transportation demand management (TDM) efforts.
12.13.160    Appeals of final decisions.
12.13.170    Enforcement.
* Prior legislation note: Ord. 501 repealed provisions concerning commute trip reduction that were formerly in Chapter 12.24, based on the provisions of Ords. 99 and 197.

12.13.010 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
“Affected employee” means a full-time employee who is scheduled to begin his or her regular work day at a single work site between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. (inclusive) on two or more weekdays per week for at least 12 continuous months. Seasonal agricultural employees, including seasonal employees of processors of agricultural products, are excluded from the count of affected employees. For the purposes of this chapter, principals and associates in a corporation, partners (general or limited) in a partnership and participants in a joint venture are to be considered employees.
“Affected employer” means an employer that employs 100 or more full-time employees at a single work site who are scheduled to begin their regular work day between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. (inclusive) on two or more weekdays for at least 12 continuous months. Construction work sites, when the expected duration of the construction is less than two years, are excluded from this definition. (See also definition of “employer.”)
“Alternative mode” means any means of commute transportation other than that in which the single-occupant motor vehicle is the dominant mode, including teleworking and compressed work weeks if they result in reduced commute trips.
“Alternative work schedules” means programs such as compressed work weeks that eliminate work trips for affected employees.
“Base year” means the period on which goals for vehicle miles traveled (VMT) per employee and the proportion of single-occupant vehicle (SOV) trips shall be based.
“Carpool” means a motor vehicle occupied by two to six people 16-plus years of age traveling together for their commute trip that results in a reduction of a minimum of one motor vehicle commute trip.
“City” means the City of Lakewood, including any persons, agencies, or entities providing services for and on behalf of the City in connection herewith.
“Commute trips” means trips made from a worker’s home to a work site with a regularly scheduled arrival time of 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. (inclusive) on weekdays.
“Commuter matching service” means a system that assists in matching commuters for the purpose of commuting together.
“Compressed work week” means an alternative work schedule, in accordance with employer policy, that regularly allows a full-time employee to eliminate at least one work day every two weeks by working longer hours during the remaining days, resulting in fewer commute trips by the employee. This definition is primarily intended to include weekly and bi-weekly arrangements, the most typical being four 10-hour days or 80 hours in nine days, but may also include other arrangements.
“CTR (commute trip reduction) plan” means the City of Lakewood’s plan and ordinance to regulate and administer the CTR programs of affected employers within its jurisdiction.
“CTR (commute trip reduction) program” means an employer’s strategies to reduce affected employees’ SOV use and VMT per employee.
“CTR (Commute Trip Reduction) Task Force Guidelines” means the model standards for local jurisdictions to use in the creation and administration of CTR plans and programs. The standards are guidelines to create consistency among local jurisdictions.
“CTR (commute trip reduction) zone” means an area, such as a census tract or combination of census tracts within Pierce County and/or the City of Lakewood, characterized by similar employment density, population density, level of transit service, parking availability, access to high-occupancy vehicle facilities, and other factors that are determined to affect the level of SOV commuting.
“Custom bus/buspool” means a commuter bus service arranged specifically to transport employees to work.
“Dominant mode” means the mode of travel used for the greatest distance of a commute trip.
“Employee” means anyone who receives financial or other remuneration in exchange for work provided to an employer, including owners or partners of the employer.
“Employer” means a sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, unincorporated association, cooperative, joint venture, agency, department, district or other individual or entity, whether public, nonprofit, or private, that employs workers.
“Exemption” means a waiver from any or all CTR program requirements granted to an employer by the City based on unique conditions that apply to the employer or employment site.
“Flex-time” means an employer policy or a mutual agreement between employee and employer allowing individual employees some flexibility in choosing the time, but not the number, of their working hours in order to facilitate the use of alternative modes.
“Full-time employee” means a person other than an independent contractor, scheduled to be employed on a continuous basis for 52 weeks per year for an average of at least 35 hours per week.
“Good faith effort” means that an employer is meeting the minimum requirements identified in RCW 70.94.531 and this chapter and is working collaboratively with the City to continue its existing CTR program or is developing and implementing program modifications likely to result in improvements to its CTR program over an agreed-upon length of time.
“Implementation” means active pursuit by an employer of the CTR goals of RCW 70.94.521 through 70.94.551 and this chapter as evidenced by appointment of a transportation coordinator, distribution of information to employees regarding alternatives to SOV commuting, and commencement of other measures according to their CTR program and schedule.
“Mode” means the means of transportation used by employees, such as SOVs, rideshare vehicle (carpool, vanpool), transit, ferry, bicycle, walking, compressed work schedules, and teleworking.
“Notice” means written communication delivered via the United States Postal Service with receipt deemed accepted three days following the day on which the notice was deposited with the Postal Service, unless the third day falls on a weekend or legal holiday, in which case the notice is deemed accepted the day after the weekend or legal holiday.
“Peak period” means the hours from 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. (inclusive), Monday through Friday, except legal holidays.
“Peak period trip” means any employee trip that delivers the employee to begin his or her regular workday between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. (inclusive), Monday through Friday, except legal holidays.
“Proportion of SOV (single-occupant vehicle) commute trips or SOV rate” means the number of commute trips over a set period made by affected employees in SOVs divided by the number of potential trips taken by affected employees working during that period.
“Single-occupant vehicle (SOV)” means a motor vehicle occupied by one employee for commute purposes, including a motorcycle.
“Single-occupant vehicle (SOV) trips” means trips made by affected employees in SOVs.
“Single work site” means a building or group of buildings on physically contiguous parcels of land or on parcels separated solely by private or public roadways or rights-of-way occupied by one or more affected employers.
“State” means the Commute Trip Reduction Program of the Washington State Department of Transportation, its successor(s) and/or assign(s).
“Teleworking” means the use of telephones, computers, or other similar technology to permit an employee to work from home, eliminating a commute trip, or to work from a work place closer to home, reducing the distance traveled in a commute trip by at least half.
“Transit” means a multiple-occupant vehicle operated on a for-hire, shared-ride basis, including bus, ferry, rail, shared-ride taxi, shuttle bus, or vanpool. A transit trip counts as zero vehicle trips.
“Transportation demand management (TDM)” means a broad range of strategies that are primarily intended to reduce and reshape demand on the transportation system.
“Transportation management organization (TMO)” means a group of employers or an association representing a group of employers in a defined geographic area. A TMO may represent employers within specific city limits or may have a sphere of influence that extends beyond city limits.
“Vanpool” means a vehicle occupied by from seven to 15 people 16-plus years of age traveling together for their commute trip that results in the reduction of a minimum of one motor vehicle trip. A vanpool trip counts as zero vehicle trips.
“Vehicle miles traveled (VMT) per employee” means the sum of the individual vehicle commute trip lengths in miles made by affected employees over a set period divided by the number of affected employees during that period.
“Week” means a seven-day calendar period, starting on Monday and continuing through Sunday.
“Weekday” means any day of the week except Saturday or Sunday.
Writing, Written, or In Writing. Original signed and dated documents facsimile (fax) transmissions are a temporary notice of action that must be followed by the original signed and dated document via mail or delivery. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.13.020 Commute trip reduction goals.
The CTR goals for employers affected by this chapter are to achieve the following reductions in vehicle miles traveled (VMT) per employee or in the proportion of single-occupant vehicle (SOV) commute trips from the base year value of Lakewood’s CTR zone or the work site’s measured base year value:
A. Fifteen percent by January 1, 1995;
B. Twenty percent by January 1, 1997;
C. Twenty-five percent by January 1, 1999; and
D. Thirty-five percent by January 1, 2005.
New employers that become subject to this chapter after 1997 shall have two years from the date on which they become subject to this chapter to achieve the 15 percent reduction goals, four years to achieve the 20 percent reduction goals, six years to achieve the 25 percent reduction goals, and 12 years to achieve the 35 percent reduction goals. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.13.030 Designation of CTR zone and base year values.
Employers in Lakewood shall be placed into a given CTR zone that shares generally common values for employees’ VMT and proportion of SOV trips. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.13.040 City employee CTR plan.
The City of Lakewood’s CTR plan for City employees, developed in accordance with the provisions of RCW 70.94.521 through 70.94.551 and the provisions of this chapter, shall be on file in the Office of the City Clerk; provided, that the plan may be amended from time to time. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.13.050 Implementation responsibility.
The City of Lakewood has a variety of responsibilities pursuant to the requirements of RCW 70.94.521 through 70.94.551 and this chapter, including but not limited to the following:
A. Adoption and implementation of CTR programs and plans for all major employers, consistent with RCW 70.94.527, and in cooperation with other major employers and other public agencies.
B. Provide for civil penalties for affected employers that fail to implement or modify a CTR program as required by this chapter.
C. Coordinate with neighboring jurisdictions to ensure consistency in the development and interpretation of the CTR plan.
D. Implement a CTR program for City of Lakewood employees.
E. Provide technical assistance to affected employers within the City of Lakewood to help them meet the requirements of this chapter.
F. Review the CTR programs of affected employers within the City of Lakewood.
G. Review and revise the City of Lakewood CTR program as necessary.
H. Provide information on the adopted CTR plan, as well as annual reports and other information as required, to the State Commute Trip Reduction Task Force (RCW 70.94.537) via the state. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.13.060 Responsible City department.
The City of Lakewood Engineering Department shall be responsible for implementing this chapter, the CTR plan, and the City’s CTR program for its own employees. The City Engineer or designee shall have the authority to issue such rules and administrative procedures as are necessary to implement this chapter. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.13.070 Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any affected employer at any single work site within the corporate limits of the City of Lakewood. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.13.080 Notification of applicability.
A. In addition to the City’s established public notification for adoption of an ordinance, a notice of availability of a summary of this chapter, a notice of the requirements and criteria for affected employers to comply with this chapter, and subsequent revisions shall be published at least once in the City’s official newspaper not more than 30 days after the passage or revision of this chapter.
B. Affected employers located in the City are to receive formal written notification that they are subject to this chapter. Such notification shall be at least 180 days prior to the due date for submittal of their CTR program.
C. Affected employers that, for whatever reason, do not receive notice within 30 days of passage of the ordinance providing for this chapter and are either notified or identify themselves to the City within 180 days of the passage of the ordinance providing for this chapter will be granted an extension to assure up to 180 days from the passage of the ordinance providing for this chapter within which to develop and submit a CTR program.
D. Affected employers that have not been identified or do not identify themselves within 180 days of the passage of the ordinance providing for this chapter and do not submit a CTR program within 180 days from the passage of the ordinance providing for this chapter are in violation of this chapter. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.13.090 New affected employers.
A. Employers that meet the definition of the “affected employer” in this chapter must identify themselves to the City within 180 days of either moving into the boundaries of the City or growing in employment at a work site to 100 or more affected employees. Such employers shall be given 180 days to develop and submit a CTR program. Employers that do not identify themselves within 180 days are in violation of this chapter.
B. Employers must conduct a baseline survey within one year of becoming an affected employer. Employers must survey all of their affected employees. Employers are required to achieve a 70 percent response rate. An employer’s survey of employees shall utilize the state form or Pierce County approved equivalent data as set forth in the CTR Task Force Guidelines.
C. New affected employers shall have two years to meet the first CTR goal of a 15 percent reduction in proportion of SOV trips or VMT per person; four years to meet the second goal of a 20 percent reduction; six years to meet the third goal of a 25 percent reduction; and 12 years to meet the fourth goal of a 35 percent reduction, from the time they begin their programs. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.13.100 Change in status as an affected employer.
Any of the following changes in an employer’s status will change the employer’s CTR program requirements:
A. If an employer initially designated as affected employer no longer employs 100 or more affected employees and expects not to employ 100 or more affected employees for the next 12 months, that employer is no longer an affected employer. It is the responsibility of the employer to notify the City that it is no longer an affected employer.
B. If the same employer returns to the level of 100 or more affected employees within the same 12 months, that employer will be considered an affected employer for the entire 12 months and will be subject to the same program requirements as other affected employers.
C. If the same employer returns to the level of 100 or more affected employees 12 or more months after its change in status to an “unaffected” employer, that employer shall be treated as a newly affected employer and will be subject to the same program requirements as other newly affected employers. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.13.110 Requirements for employers.
An affected employer is required to make a good faith effort, as defined in RCW 70.94.534(2) and this chapter, to develop and implement a CTR program that will encourage its employees to reduce VMT per employee and SOV commute trips. The employer shall submit a description of its program to the City and provide an annual progress report to the City on employee commuting and progress toward meeting the SOV goals. The CTR program must include the mandatory elements described below.
A. CTR Program Description Requirements. The CTR program description presents the strategies to be undertaken by an employer to achieve the CTR goals for each goal year. Employers are encouraged to consider innovative strategies and combine program elements in a manner that will best suit their location, site characteristics, business type, and employees’ commuting needs. Employers are further encouraged to cooperate with each other and to form or use transportation management organizations in developing and implementing their CTR programs.
At a minimum, the employer’s description must include the following:
    1. General description of the employment site location, transportation characteristics, and surrounding services, including unique conditions experienced by the employer or its employees;
    2. Number of employees affected by the CTR program;
    3. Documentation of compliance with the mandatory CTR program elements (as described in subsection B of this section);
    4. Description of the additional elements included in the CTR program (as described in subsection B of this section); and
    5. Schedule of implementation, assignment of responsibilities, and commitment to provide appropriate resources.
B. Mandatory Program Elements. Each employer’s CTR program shall include the following mandatory elements:
    1. Transportation Coordinator. The employer shall designate a transportation coordinator to administer the CTR program. The coordinator’s and/or designee’s name, location, and telephone number must be displayed prominently at each affected work site. The coordinator shall oversee all elements of the employer’s CTR program and act as liaison between the employer and the City of Lakewood. The objective is to have an effective transportation coordinator presence at each work site; an affected employer with multiple sites may have one transportation coordinator for all sites.
    2. Information Distribution. Information about alternatives to SOV commuting shall be provided to employees at least once a year. Each employer’s program description and annual report must report the information to be distributed and the method of distribution.
    3. Annual Progress Report. The CTR program must include an annual review of employee commuting and progress and good faith efforts toward meeting the SOV reduction goals. Affected employers shall file an annual progress report with the City in accordance with the format established by this chapter and consistent with the CTR Task Force Guidelines. The report shall describe each of the CTR measures that were in effect for the previous year, the results of any commuter surveys undertaken during the year, and the number of employees participating in CTR programs. Within the report, the employer should evaluate the effectiveness of the CTR program and, if necessary, propose modifications to achieve the CTR goals. Survey information or approved alternative information must be provided in the reports submitted in the second, fourth, sixth, eighth, tenth, and twelfth years after implementation begins. The employer should contact the City for the format of the report.
    4. Additional Program Elements. In addition to the specific program elements noted above, the employer’s CTR program shall include additional elements as needed to meet CTR goals. Elements may include, but are not limited to, one or more of the following:
        a. Provision of preferential parking or reduced parking charges, or both, for high-occupancy vehicles;
        b. Instituting or increasing parking charges for SOVs;
        c. Provision of commuter ride matching services to facilitate employee ridesharing for commute trips;
        d. Provision of subsidies for transit fares;
        e. Provision of vans for vanpools;
        f. Provision of subsidies for carpools or vanpools;
        g. Permitting the use of the employer’s vehicles for carpooling or vanpooling;
        h. Permitting flexible schedules to facilitate employees’ use of transit, carpools or vanpools;
        i. Cooperation with transportation providers to provide additional regular or express service to the work site;
        j. Construction of special loading and unloading facilities for transit, carpool, and vanpool users;
        k. Provision of bicycle parking facilities, lockers, changing areas, and showers for employees who bicycle or walk to work;
        l. Provision of a program of parking incentives such as rebates for employees who do not use the parking facilities;
        m. Establishment of a program to permit employees to work part- or full-time at home or at an alternative work site closer to their homes;
        n. Establishment of a program of alternative work schedules, such as a compressed work week which reduces commuting; and
        o. Implementation of other measures designed to facilitate the use of high-occupancy vehicles, such as on-site day care facilities and emergency taxi service. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.13.120 Record-keeping.
Affected employers shall include a list of the records they will keep as part of the CTR program they submit to the City for approval. Employers will maintain all records listed in their CTR program for a minimum of 24 months. The City and the employer shall agree on the record-keeping requirements as part of the accepted CTR program. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.13.130 Schedule and process for CTR reports, program review and implementation.
A. CTR Program. Not more than 180 days after the adoption of the ordinance providing for this chapter, or within six months after an employer qualifies under the provisions of this chapter, the employer shall develop a CTR program and shall submit to the City a description of that program for review.
B. Document Review. The City shall provide the employer with written notification if a CTR program is deemed unacceptable. The notification must give cause for any rejection. If the employer receives no written notification of extension of the review period of its CTR program or comment on the CTR program or annual report within 90 days of submission, the employer’s program or annual report is deemed accepted. The City may extend the review period up to 90 days. The implementation date for the employer’s CTR program will be extended an equivalent number of days.
C. CTR Annual Progress Reports. Upon review of an employer’s initial CTR program, the City shall establish the employer’s annual reporting date, which shall not be less than 12 months from the day the program is submitted. Each year on the employer’s reporting date, the employer shall submit to the City its annual CTR report.
D. Surveying. Employers are required to survey their affected employees to measure progress toward CTR performance targets. Remaining survey years are 1999 and 2005. New affected employers shall survey on an alternative schedule consistent with LMC 12.13.020. An employer’s survey of employees shall use the state form or Pierce County approved equivalent data as set forth in the CTR Task Force Guidelines.
E. Modification of CTR Program Elements. Any affected employer may submit a request to the City for modification of CTR program elements, other than the mandatory elements specified in this chapter, including record-keeping requirements. Such request may be granted if one of the following conditions exists:
    1. The employer can demonstrate it would be unable to comply with the CTR program elements for reasons beyond the control of the employer; or
    2. The employer can demonstrate that compliance with the program elements would constitute an undue hardship. This may include evidence from employee surveys administered at the work site; first, in the base year, showing that the employer’s own base year values of VMT per employee and SOV rates were higher than the CTR zone average; and/or secondly, in the goal measurement year(s), showing that the employer has achieved reductions from its own base values that are comparable to the reduction goals established for the employer’s CTR zone.
F. Extensions. An employer may request additional time to submit a CTR program or CTR annual progress report, or to implement or modify a program. Such requests shall be via written notice at least 30 days before the due date for which the extension is being requested. Extensions not to exceed 90 days shall be considered for reasonable causes. The City shall grant or deny the employer’s extension request by written notice within 10 working days of its receipt of the extension request. If there is no response issued to the employer, an extension is automatically granted for 30 days. Extensions shall not exempt an employer from any responsibility in meeting program goals. Extensions granted due to delays or difficulties with any program element(s) shall not be cause for discontinuing or failing to implement other program elements. An employer’s annual reporting date shall not be adjusted permanently as a result of these extensions. An employer’s annual reporting date may be extended at the direction of the City Engineer or designee.
G. Implementation of Employer’s CTR Program. Unless extensions are granted, the employer shall implement its approved CTR program not more than 180 days after the program was first submitted to the City. Implementation of the approved program modifications shall begin within 30 days of the final decision or 180 days from submission of the CTR program or CTR annual report, whichever is greater. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.13.140 Exemptions and goal modifications.
A. Work Site Exemptions. An affected employer may request that the City grant an exemption from all CTR program requirements or penalties for a particular work site. The employer must demonstrate that it would experience undue hardship in complying with the requirements of this chapter as a result of the characteristics of its business, its workforce, or its location(s). An exemption may be granted if and only if the affected employer demonstrates that it faces extraordinary circumstances, such as bankruptcy, and is unable to implement measures that could reduce the proportion of SOV trips or VMT per employee. Exemptions may be granted by the City at any time based on written notice provided by the affected employer. The notice shall clearly explain the conditions for which the affected employer is seeking an exemption from the requirements of the CTR program. The City shall review annually all employers receiving exemptions and shall determine whether the exemption will continue to be in effect during the following program year.
B. Employee Exemptions. Specific employees or groups of employees who are required to drive alone to work as a condition of employment may be exempted from a work site’s CTR program. Exemptions may also be granted for employees who work variable shifts throughout the year and who do not rotate as a group to identical shifts. The City will use the criteria identified in the CTR Task Force Guidelines to assess the validity of employee exemption requests. The City shall review annually all employee exemption requests and shall determine whether the exemption will be in effect during the following program year.
C. Modification of CTR Program Goals. 
    1. An affected employer may request that the City modify its program goals. Such requests shall be filed in writing at least 60 days prior to the date the work site is required to submit its program description or annual report. The goal modification request must clearly explain why the work site is unable to achieve the applicable goal. The work site must also demonstrate that it has implemented all of the elements contained in its approved CTR program.
    2. The City will review and grant or deny requests for goal modifications in accordance with procedures and criteria identified in the CTR Task Force Guidelines.
    3. An employer may not request a modification of the applicable goals until one year after City approval of its initial program description or annual report. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.13.150 Credit for transportation demand management (TDM) efforts.
A. Leadership Certificate. As public recognition for their efforts, employers with VMT per employee and proportion of SOV trips lower than the zone average will receive a Commute Trip Reduction Certificate of Leadership from the City.
B. Credit for Programs Implemented Prior to the Base Year. Employers with successful TDM programs implemented prior to the base year may be eligible to apply for program exemption credit, which exempts them from most program requirements.
    1. Affected employers wishing to receive credit for the results of existing TDM efforts may do so by applying to the City within 90 days of the adoption of the ordinance providing for this chapter. Applications shall include data from a survey of employees or equivalent to establish the applicant’s VMT per employee and proportion of SOV trips. The survey or equivalent data shall conform to all applicable standards established in the CTR Task Force Guidelines.
    2. The employer shall be considered to have met the first measurement goals if their VMT per employee and proportion of SOV trips are equivalent to a 12 percent or greater reduction from the final base year CTR zone values. This three-percentage-point credit applies only to the first measurement goals.
C. Program Exemption Credit. Affected employers may apply for program exemption credit for the results of past or current TDM efforts by applying to the City within 90 days of adoption of the applicable CTR ordinance, or as part of any annual report. Application shall include results from a survey of employees or equivalent information that establishes the applicant’s VMT per employee and proportion of SOV trips. The survey or equivalent information shall conform to all applicable standards established in the CTR Task Force Guidelines.
Employers that apply for credit whose VMT per employee and proportion of SOV trips are equal to or less than goals for one or more future goal years and who commit in writing to continue their current level of effort shall be exempt from the requirements of the ordinance providing for this chapter, except for the requirements to report performance in the measurement years (LMC 12.13.090(B)). If any of these reports indicate the employer does not satisfy the next applicable goal(s), the employer shall immediately become subject to all requirements of this chapter. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.13.160 Appeals of final decisions.
Employers may file a written appeal of the City’s final decisions regarding the following actions:
A. Rejection of an employer’s proposed program.
B. Denial of an employer’s request for a waiver or modification of any of the requirements under this chapter or a modification of the employer’s program.
C. Denial of credits requested under LMC 12.13.150.
D. Mandated program element changes.
Such appeals must be filed with the City within 20 days after the employer receives notice of a final decision. Timely appeals shall be heard by the City’s Hearing Examiner. Determinations on appeals shall be based on whether the decision being appealed is consistent with the state law. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

12.13.170 Enforcement.
A. Compliance. For purposes of this section, compliance shall mean fully implementing, in good faith, all provisions in an approved CTR program. It is provided, however, that affected employers shall be considered as being in compliance with the terms of this chapter if, on the effective date of the ordinance adopting this chapter, such employers are in compliance with the provisions of the Pierce County CTR ordinance (Pierce County Ordinance No. 93-30S and any subsequent amendments). In order to remain in compliance herewith following the effective date of the ordinance adopting this chapter, such affected employers shall continue on the time table originally established by Pierce County Ordinance No. 93-30S, or any subsequent amendments to said timetable, to meet the CTR goals. New employers shall be required to meet the CTR goals in accordance with the schedule set forth in LMC 12.13.020.
B. Program Modification Criteria. The following criteria for achieving goals for VMT per employee and proportion of SOV trips shall be applied in determining requirements for employer CTR program modifications:
    1. If an employer is making good faith effort, as defined in RCW 70.94.534(2) and this chapter, and is meeting either or both goals, the employer is satisfying the objectives of the CTR plan and will not be required to modify its CTR program.
    2. If an employer is making a good faith effort, as defined in RCW 70.94.534(2) and this chapter, but is not meeting or is not likely to meet the applicable SOV or VMT goal, the City shall work collaboratively with the employer to make modifications to its CTR program. After agreeing on modifications, the employer shall submit a revised CTR program description to the City for approval within 30 days of reaching an agreement. If an employer is not making a good faith effort, as defined in RCW 70.94.534(2) and this chapter, and is failing to meet either the applicable SOV or VMT reduction goal, the City shall work collaboratively with the employer to identify modifications to the CTR program and shall direct the employer to revise its program within 30 days to incorporate the modifications. In response to the recommended modifications, the employer shall submit a revised CTR program description, including the requested modifications or equivalent measures, within 30 days of receiving written notice to revise its program. The City shall review the revisions and notify the employer of acceptance or rejection of the revised program. If a revised program is not accepted, the City will send written notice to that effect to the employer within 30 days and, if necessary, require the employer to attend a conference with the program review staff for the purpose of reaching a consensus on the required program. A final decision on the required program will be issued in writing by the City within 10 working days of the conference.
C. Violations. The following constitute violations if the deadlines established in this chapter are not met:
    1. Failure to develop and/or submit on time a complete CTR program, including the following:
        a. Employers notified or that have identified themselves to the City within 180 days of the ordinance providing for this chapter being adopted and that do not submit a CTR program within 180 days from the notification or self-identification; and
        b. Employers not identified or self-identified within 180 days of the ordinance being adopted and that do not submit or implement a CTR program within 180 days from the adoption of the ordinance providing for this chapter.
    2. Failure to implement an approved CTR program, unless the program elements that are carried out can be shown through quantifiable evidence to meet or exceed VMT and SOV goals as specified in this chapter.
    3. Failure of an employer to meet the requirements of RCW 70.94.534(2) and this chapter for good faith effort.
    4. Failure to revise a CTR program as defined in RCW 70.94.534(4) and this chapter.
D. Penalties. 
    1. The City shall notify employers in writing if they are in violation of this chapter. The written notification shall state the effective date upon which penalties will begin to accrue. In the event that an affected employer appeals the imposition of penalties, the penalties will not accrue during the appeals process. Should the outcome of the appeals process favor the employer, all or a portion of monetary penalties will be dismissed.
    2. No affected employer with an approved CTR program which is making a good faith effort may be held liable for failure to reach the applicable SOV or VMT goal.
    3. Each day of failure to implement the program shall constitute a separate violation and is classified as a Class I civil infraction pursuant to the City Code. The penalty for this violation shall be $250.00 per day.
    4. An affected employer shall not be liable for civil penalties if failure to implement an element of a CTR program was the result of an inability to reach agreement with a certified collective bargaining agent under applicable laws where the issue was raised by the employer and pursued in good faith. Unionized employers shall be presumed to act in good faith compliance if they do the following:
        a. Propose to a recognized union any provision of the employer’s CTR program that is subject to bargaining as defined by the National Labor Relations Act; and
        b. Advise the union of the existence of the statute and mandates of the CTR program approved by the City of Lakewood and advise the union that the proposal being made is necessary for compliance with state law (RCW 70.94.531).
E. Appeals of Penalties. Affected employers may appeal penalties pursuant to the provisions of the City Code and RCW 7.80.100. [Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

Chapter 12.14 DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS
Except for chapters with identified definition sections or specific definitions provided, the following definitions apply to this title:
“40 CFR” means Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, which is the codification of general and permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the executive departments and agencies of the federal government.
“ADT” means average daily traffic.
AKART. “All known, available and reasonable methods of prevention, control and treatment” refers to the State Water Pollution Control Act, RCW 90.48.010 and 90.48.520.
“Applicant” means the person, party, firm, corporation, or other legal entity that proposes to develop property in the City of Lakewood by submitting an application for any of the activities covered by these regulations on a form furnished by the City and paying the required fees.
“Arterial” means a road or street primarily for through traffic. The term includes roads or streets considered collectors. It does not include local access roads which are generally limited to providing access to abutting property.
“Average daily traffic” or “ADT” means the total traffic during a given time period (in whole days), greater than one day and less than one year, divided by the number of days in that time period. To determine potential ADT for a local access City street, it will be assumed, for the purposes of this title only, that each dwelling unit or each existing or proposed segregated lot that accesses onto the street will generate 10 traffic trips per day. Traffic generation for other uses will be in accordance with the publication “Trip Generation,” by the Institute of Traffic Engineers, or other approved sources and will include the traffic generated by the proposed development unless otherwise noted. Projects submitted to the City for review and approval will be considered to be proposed projects.
“Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also referred to as the “100-year flood.” Designation on maps will always include the letter “A” or “V.”
“Base flood elevation” means the water surface elevation, in feet, above mean sea level for the base flood and referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (or Pierce County Datum or United States Coast and Geodetic Survey 1929 Datum which are the same).
“Bench” means a relatively level step excavated into natural earth or fill material.
“Best management practices (BMPs)” means the schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and structural and/or managerial practices approved by the Washington State Department of Ecology that, when used singly or in combination, prevent or reduce the release of pollutants and other adverse impacts to waters of Washington State.
“BMP” means best management practices.
“Building” means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
“Certification” means a written engineering opinion, stamped, signed, and dated by an engineer, concerning the progress or completion of work.
“Change of use” means a change of use shall be determined to have occurred when it is found that the general character of the use in question has been modified. This determination shall include review of but not be limited to: hours of operation, materials processed or sold, required parking, traffic generation, impact on public utilities, clientele, general appearance and location or a change in use type.
“City” means the City of Lakewood or an official representative of the City of Lakewood.
“City Engineer” means the individual appointed to be the City Engineer for the City of Lakewood or his/her designee.
“City Environmental Official” means the individual appointed to be the Environmental Official for the City of Lakewood or his/her designee.
Clean Water Act (formerly referred to as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972) Pub. L. 92-500, as amended Pub. L. 95-217, Pub. L. 95-576, Pub. L. 6-483 and Pub. L. 97-117, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq.
“Clearing” means the cutting, moving on site, or removal of standing or fallen timber (including stumps); the removal or moving on site of stumps; or the cutting or removal of brush, grass, ground cover, or other vegetative matter from a site in a way which exposes the earth’s surface of the site. In addition to the above, clearing is an activity which does not require reforestation per an approved forest practices application/notification issued by the Department of Natural Resources.
“Compaction” means the densification of a fill by mechanical means.
“Cul-de-sac” means a circular pavement symmetrical or offset about the centerline of a dead-end street.
“Dedication” means a conveyance of land by the owner of the land to some public use through a clause or conveyance in a deed or some other instrument of conveyance or a duly filed plat.
“Detention” means the short-term storage of storm drainage runoff that has been artificially collected and then released at a predetermined rate.
“Development” means any action taken either in conjunction with a use or to make a use possible. Activities do not in and of themselves result in a specific use. Most activities may take place in conjunction with a variety of uses.
Deviation. A deviation from the engineering standards is a mechanism to allow the City Engineer to grant an adjustment in the application of engineering standards.
“DOE” means Washington State Department of Ecology.
“DOE Stormwater Manual” means the Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington published by the Washington State Department of Ecology, 2005 Edition.
“Drainage” means rainfall runoff from a basin or contributing area which flows on the surface of the ground.
“Driveway” means any area, construction, or facility between a public road and private property which provides access for vehicles from the public roadway to or from private property.
“Dwelling” means a building or portion thereof designed exclusively for human habitation, but not including hotels or motel units.
“Dwelling unit” means any building or portion thereof which contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation for not more than one family.
“Earth/earth material” means naturally occurring rock, soil, stone, dirt, or a combination thereof.
“Earthwork” means any operation involving the excavation, grading, filling, or moving of earth materials.
“Easement” means a grant by the property owner of the use of a strip of land by the public, corporation, or persons for specific purposes.
“Effective impervious surface” means those impervious surfaces that are connected via sheet flow or discrete conveyance to a drainage system. Impervious surfaces are considered ineffective if (1) the runoff is dispersed through at least 100 feet of native vegetation in accordance with BMP T5.30 “Full Dispersion,” as described in Chapter 5 of Volume V of the Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington (SMMWW); (2) residential roof runoff is infiltrated in accordance with Downspout Full Infiltration Systems in BMP T5.10A in Volume III of the SWMMWW; or (3) approved continuous runoff modeling methods indicate that the entire runoff file is infiltrated.
“Emergency vehicle (EV) access” means an all-weather drivable surface constructed and maintained in accordance with this title that provides emergency access between a public or private street and 150 feet of all portions of an exterior wall of the first story of any structure requiring EV access as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the building.
“Engineer” (also “project engineer”) means a professional civil engineer, currently licensed in the state of Washington, retained by and acting on behalf of the applicant.
“Erodible or leachable materials” means wastes, chemicals, or other substances that measurably alter the physical or chemical characteristics of runoff when exposed to rainfall. Examples include erodible soils that are stockpiled, uncovered process wastes, manure, fertilizers, oily substances, ashes, kiln dust, and garbage dumpster leakage.
“Erosion” means the wearing away of the earth’s surface as a result of the movement of wind, water, or ice.
EV Access. See “emergency vehicle (EV) access.”
“Excavate” means the removal by man of sand, sediment, or other material from an area of land or water for other than commercial or industrial use.
“Fill” means the placement by man of sand, sediment or other material to create new uplands or raise the elevation of the land.
“Filling” means the act of transporting or placing (by any manner or mechanism) earth material, including temporary stockpiling.
“Financial guarantee” means an assignment of funds, surety bond, cash guarantee, escrow account assignment of savings, irrevocable letter of credit, or other means acceptable to or required by the City Engineer or Director of Community Development to guarantee work is in compliance with all applicable requirements.
“Flood” or “flooding” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters, and/or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
“Floodfringe” means the area subject to inundation by the base flood, but outside the limits of the floodway, and which may provide needed temporary storage capacity for flood waters.
“Floodplain” means the total area subject to inundation by the base flood, including the floodfringe and the floodway areas.
“Floodway” means the channel of a river, or other watercourse, and the adjacent land areas that shall be reserved in order to convey and discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by more than one foot, and those areas designated as deep and/or fast-flowing water.
“Frontage” refers to length of a property line along a public street or right-of-way.
“Gate” (at driveway entrance) means a movable fence or other blockade designed to prevent general purpose traffic from entering a private development.
“Grading” means any excavating, filling, or creating of impervious surfaces or combination thereof.
“Ground water” means subsurface water in the subsoil or in a zone of saturation.
“Grubbing” means the removal and disposing of all unwanted vegetative matter from underground, such as sod, stumps, roots, buried logs, or other debris.
“Hard surface” means an impervious surface, a permeable pavement, or a vegetated roof.
“Hearing Examiner” means a person appointed by the City to carry out the functions authorized under Chapter 18A.02 LMC, Administration, and Chapter 35A.63 RCW.
“Hyperchlorinated” means water that contains more than 10 mg/L chlorine.
“IBC” means International Building Code.
“IFC” means International Fire Code.
“Impervious surface” means a nonvegetated surface area that either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil mantle as it entered under natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious surfaces include but are not limited to rooftops, concrete or asphalt paving, paved walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots or storage areas, grasscrete, and oiled, macadam or other surfaces, which similarly impede the natural infiltration of surface water. Open, uncovered retention/detention facilities shall not be considered impervious surfaces for purposes of determining whether the thresholds for application of minimum requirements are exceeded. Open uncovered retention/detention facilities shall be considered impervious surfaces for purposes of runoff modeling.
“Land disturbing activity” means any activity that results in a change in the existing soil cover (both vegetative and nonvegetative) and/or the existing soil topography. “Land disturbing activities” include, but are not limited to, clearing, grading, filling, and excavation. Compaction that is associated with stabilization of structures and road construction shall also be considered a land disturbing activity. Vegetation maintenance practices, including landscape maintenance and gardening, are not considered land disturbing activity. Storm water facility maintenance is not considered land disturbing activity if conducted according to established standards and procedures.
“Land surveyor” means a professional land surveyor currently licensed by the state of Washington.
“Landscaping” means the improvement or installation on a parcel or portion thereof of objects or vegetation for decorative or ornamental effect. Examples include: trees, bushes, shrubs, flowers, grass, weeds, ornamental rocks or figures, and low-lying ground cover, sprinkler systems, sidewalks, and lighting fixtures.
Large Lot. As defined by the City of Lakewood Subdivision Code.
“Level of service” means a way to measure the level of traffic congestion, with “A” being the best level of service, and “F” the lowest.
“Local improvement district” means a special assessment district whereby a capital improvement is financed and paid for over a period of time through assessments on the benefiting properties.
“LOS” means level of service.
“Lot” means a fractional part of divided lands having fixed boundaries, being of sufficient area and dimension to meet minimum zoning requirements for width and area, and developed or built upon as a unit. The term shall include “tracts” or “parcels.”
“Maintained city street” means a road dedicated to the City through various legal instruments or processes, or claimed through usage, and maintained by City maintenance forces on a periodic and regular basis, or as determined by the City. The road shall be listed on the City of Lakewood most recent road log or accepted by the City for inclusion into the City’s road system and not yet shown on the road log.
“Maintenance” means the regular and continual preservation of the private street and appurtenant features within the easement in an “as new” condition.
“Major municipal separate storm sewer outfall” means a municipal separate storm sewer outfall from a single pipe with an inside diameter of 36 inches or more, or its equivalent (discharge from a single conveyance other than circular pipe which is associated with a drainage area of more than 50 acres); or for municipal separate storm sewers that receive storm water from lands zoned for industrial activity (based on comprehensive zoning plans or the equivalent), an outfall that discharges from a single pipe with an inside diameter of 12 inches or more or from its equivalent (discharge from other than a circular pipe associated with a drainage area of 12 acres or more).
“Maximum extent practicable (MEP)” refers to paragraph 402(p)(3)(B)(iii) of the Federal Clean Water Act which reads as follows: Permits for discharges from municipal storm sewers shall require controls to reduce the discharge of pollutants to the maximum extent practicable, including management practices, control techniques, and system, design, and engineering methods, and other such provisions as the Administrator or the State determines appropriate for the control of such pollutants.
“Median” means the portion of a divided street separating the traveled way for traffic in opposing directions.
“MEP” means maximum extent practicable.
“Motor vehicle” includes every device capable of being moved upon a public highway and in, upon, or by which any persons or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway except for mopeds, bicycles and other devices moved by human or animal power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
“Municipal separate storm sewer (MS4)” means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) (1) owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, parish, district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over disposal of wastes, storm water, or other wastes, including special districts under state law such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or a designated and approved management agency under Section 208 of the Clean Water Act that discharges to waters of the United States; (2) designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water; (3) which is not a combined sewer; (4) which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined at 40 CFR 122.2; and (5) which is defined as “large,” or “medium” or “small” or otherwise designated by the Department of Ecology pursuant to 40 CFR 122.26.
“MUTCD” means the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
“National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)” means the national program for issuing, modifying, revoking, and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements, under Sections 307, 318, 402, and 405 of the Federal Clean Water Act, for the discharge of pollutants to surface waters of the state from point sources. These permits are referred to as NPDES permits and, in Washington State, are administered by the Washington Department of Ecology.
“Native vegetation” means vegetation comprised of plant species, other than noxious weeds, that are indigenous to the coastal region of the Pacific Northwest and which reasonably could have been expected to naturally occur on the site. Examples include trees such as Douglas fir, western hemlock, western red cedar, alder, big-leaf maple, and vine maple; shrubs such as willow, elderberry, salmonberry, and salal; and herbaceous plants such as sword fern, foam flower, and fireweed.
“New development” means land disturbing activities, including Class IV general forest practices that are conversions from timber land to other uses; structural development, including construction or installation of a building or other structure; creation of impervious surfaces; and subdivision, short subdivision and binding site plans, as defined and applied in Chapter 58.17 RCW. Projects meeting the definition of redevelopment shall not be considered new development.
“Occupancy” means the purpose for which a building is used or intended to be used. The term shall also include the building or room housing such use. Change of occupancy is not intended to include change of tenants or proprietors.
“Outfall” means point source as defined by 40 CFR 122.2 at the point where discharges leave the MS4 and discharges to waters of the state and does not include open conveyances connecting two municipal separate storm sewers, or pipes, tunnels, or other conveyances which connect segments of the same stream or other waters of the state and are used to convey waters of the state.
“Owner” means the owner of record of real property as shown on the tax rolls of the Pierce County Assessor, or a person who is purchasing a piece of property under contract.
“Parcel” means any portion, piece, or division of land. Fractional part or subdivision of block, according to plat or survey; portion of platted territory measured and set apart for individual and private use and occupancy.
“Parking area” means an area accessible to vehicles, which area is provided, improved, maintained, and used for the sole purpose of accommodating a motor vehicle.
“Paved road” means a road that has been treated or covered with asphalt to create an oil mat surface; a road that has a bituminous surface treatment, asphalt, or cement concrete surface.
“Paved surface” means minimum of two inches of hot mix asphalt per Washington State Department of Transportation specifications, or six inches of Portland cement concrete.
“Percolation” means the downward or lateral movement of water through soil under either saturated or unsaturated ground conditions.
“Permanent erosion control” means continuous on-site and off-site control measures that are needed to control conveyance and/or the deposit of earth, turbidity, or pollutants after construction or development.
“Person” means an individual, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity.
“Plat” means a map or representation of a subdivision, showing thereon the division of a tract or parcel of land into lots, blocks, streets, and alleys or other division and dedications.
“Pollution-generating hard surface (PGHS)” means those hard surfaces considered to be a significant source of pollutants in storm water runoff. See the listing of surfaces under “pollution-generating impervious surface (PGIS).”
“Pollution-generating impervious surface (PGIS)” means those impervious surfaces considered to be significant sources of pollutants in storm water runoff. Such surfaces include those that are subject to vehicular use, industrial activities, or storage of erodible or leachable materials, wastes or chemicals, and that receive direct rainfall or run-on or blow-in of rainfall. Metal roofs are considered to be PGIS unless coated with an inert, nonleachable material. Roofs that are subject to venting of indoor pollutants from manufacturing, commercial or other operations or processes are also considered PGIS.
“Pollution-generating pervious surfaces (PGPS)” means any nonimpervious surface subject to vehicular use, industrial activities or storage of erodible or leachable materials, wastes or chemicals, and that receives direct rainfall or run-on or blow-in of rainfall, use of pesticides and fertilizers or loss of soil. Typical PGPS include permeable pavement subject to vehicular use, lawns, landscaped areas, golf courses, and parks.
“Predeveloped condition” means the native vegetation and soils that existed at a site prior to the influence of Euro-American settlement. The predeveloped condition shall be assumed to be a forested land cover unless reasonable, historic information is provided that indicates the site was prairie prior to settlement.
“Private drainage system” means a system that is totally owned and maintained by an individual, joint venture, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity.
“Private street” means a street which is owned, controlled, and maintained by one or more property owners.
“Private street easement” means an easement or parcel which creates a legal source of access from a public street to an existing or proposed lot or lots of record or project, across other parcels of property.
“Process wastewater” means any water which, during manufacture or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct, or waste product.
“Project engineer” means a professional civil engineer, currently licensed in the state of Washington, retained by and acting on behalf of the applicant.
“Project site” means that portion of a property, properties, or right-of-way subject to land disturbing activities, new impervious surfaces, or replaced impervious surfaces.
“Public drainage system” means a system that is owned by the City of Lakewood or exists through accepted easements.
“RCW” means Revised Code of Washington.
“Receiving waters” means bodies of water or surface water systems to which surface runoff is discharged via a point source of storm water or via sheet flow. Ground water to which surface runoff is directed by infiltration.
“Record drawings” means drawings that reflect changes made during the construction process, recording differences between the original design and the completed structure.
“Recorded” means, unless otherwise stated, filed for record with the Auditor of the County of Pierce, state of Washington.
“Redevelopment” means, on a site that is already substantially developed (i.e., has 35 percent or more of existing impervious surface coverage), the creation or addition of impervious surfaces; the expansion of a building footprint or addition or replacement of a structure; structural development including construction, installation or expansion of a building or other structure; replacement of impervious surface that is not part of a routine maintenance activity; and land disturbing activities.
“Replaced hard surface” means, for structures, the removal and replacement of hard surfaces down to the foundation. For other hard surfaces, the removal down to bare soil or base course and replacement.
“Replaced impervious surface” means, for structures, the removal and replacement of any exterior impervious surfaces or foundation; or, for other impervious surfaces, the removal down to bare soil, or base course, and replacement. Exemptions and partial exemptions are defined in Appendix 1 of the City’s NPDES permit.
“Retention” means the long-term storage of water on site with the dissipation of said water into the ground by means of percolation.
“Right-of-way (ROW)” means that area of land dedicated for public road uses including all road appurtenances, secured by the county or the public for purposes of public traffic, drainage, and/or franchised utilities.
“Runoff” means that portion of the precipitation on a drainage area that is discharged in the form of overland flow from the area to downhill properties, watercourses, or pipe systems.
“Safety concern” means geometric or design conditions on an existing, maintained City street that does not meet the standards of these regulations or the City Engineering Standards Manual.
“Sensitive area” means those areas designated by resolution or ordinance of the City of Lakewood City Council pursuant to LMC Title14 and WAC 197-11-908.
“SEPA” means Washington State Environmental Policy Act.
“Significant contributor” means a discharge that contributes a loading of pollutants considered to be sufficient to cause or exacerbate the deterioration of receiving water quality or instream habitat conditions.
“Site” means any parcel or combination of contiguous parcels where grading, filling, clearing, or creation of an impervious surface is proposed, and which may be controlled by more than one property owner.
“Site development permit” means a permit issued by the City of Lakewood authorizing the applicant to access the property; fill, grade or create an impervious surface or any combination thereof.
Site Development Plan“Site development plans” shall include the following, as specifically required by the City in each instance: Site plan, erosion and sedimentation control plan, grading plan, storm drainage plan, storm water drainage control report, soils report, flood study, entering sight distance variances and verifications, and other documents required in the review of proposed development of the property.
“Site-specific traffic” means that traffic generated by a development. This traffic volume(s) shall be used to determine measures necessary to mitigate significant impacts on the City’s street system.
“Slope” means an inclined earth surface, the inclination of which is expressed as the ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.
“Soils engineer” means a professional civil engineer, licensed by the state of Washington, and experienced and knowledgeable in geotechnical engineering.
“Source control BMP” means a structure or operation that is intended to prevent pollutants from coming into contact with storm water through physical separation of areas or careful management of activities that are sources of pollutants. The SWMMWW separates source control BMPs into two types. Structural source control BMPs are physical, structural, or mechanical devices, or facilities that are intended to prevent pollutants from entering storm water. Operational BMPs are nonstructural practices that prevent or reduce pollutants from entering storm water. See Volume IV of the SWMMWW for details.
“Stockpiling” means the placement of material that will be removed within a six-month period or material that is placed on the property of a licensed business for sale.
“Storm water” means runoff during and following precipitation and snowmelt events, including surface runoff, drainage or interflow.
“Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington (DOE Stormwater Manual)” means the five-volume technical manual (publication number 14-10-055 for the 2012 version amended in December 2014) prepared by Ecology for use by local governments that contains BMPs to prevent, control, or treat pollution in storm water.
“Street frontage improvements” means the construction, reconstruction or repair of the following right-of-way facilities:
    1Curbs, gutters and sidewalks;
    2Storm drainage facilities;
    3Patching the street from its preexisting edge to the new curb line;
    4Overlayment of the existing public street to its centerline;
    5Relocating utilities as necessary;
    6Street frontage landscaping;
    7Street lights;
    8Other such improvements deemed necessary by the City Engineer.
The improvements may be required to be installed along the entire length of abutting public street frontage of property being developed, or for a greater length, as determined by the City Engineer as a condition of project approval for a new construction, new subdivision, short plat, or addition, alteration or tenant improvement project, a local improvement district, or City project. All such frontage improvements shall be constructed to City specifications.
“Structure” means anything that is constructed in or on the ground or over water, including any edifice, gas or liquid storage tank, and any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts and joined together.
Subdivision or Formal Plat. As defined in the City of Lakewood Subdivision Code.
“Subdivisions” means any division or redivision of land into lots, tracts, parcels, or sites for the purpose of sale, lease, or transfer of ownership by formal plat, short plat, large lot division, or planned development district, or other subdivisional process.
“Surveyor” means a professional land surveyor, currently licensed in the state of Washington and retained and acting on behalf of the applicant.
“Threshold discharge area” means an on-site area draining to a single natural discharge location or multiple natural discharge locations that combine within one-quarter mile downstream (as determined by the shortest flow path). The examples in Figure 14.1 below illustrate this definition. The purpose of this definition is to clarify how the thresholds are applied to project sites with multiple discharge points. For projects where storm water will be infiltrated on site the threshold discharge area shall be defined as the entire project area.
[IMAGE: <12A.14_001.jpg>]Figure 14.1 Threshold Discharge Area
Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL)A water cleanup plan, TMDL is a calculation of the maximum amount of a pollutant that a water body can receive and still meet water quality standards, and an allocation of that amount to the pollutant’s sources. A TMDL is the sum of the allowable loads of a single pollutant from all contributing point and nonpoint sources. The calculation shall include a margin of safety to ensure that the water body can be used for the purposes the state has designated. The calculation shall also account for seasonal variation in water quality. Water quality standards are set by states, territories, and tribes. They identify the uses for each water body, for example, drinking water supply, contact recreation (swimming), and aquatic life support (fishing), and the scientific criteria to support that use. The Clean Water Act, Section 303, establishes the water quality standards and TMDL programs.
“Tract” means any parcel of land, lot, building site, or contiguous combination thereof devoted to or intended to be devoted to a principal use and any other uses customarily accessory thereto.
“Traffic impact analysis” means an in-depth analysis of the traffic generated by a new development, redevelopment or increase of traffic related trips due to change of use and its impacts on the surrounding street system. Data shall be presented by a licensed engineer who has special training in and practices in the profession of traffic engineering.
“Traffic impact area” means all public roads within an area which would be impacted by the proposed project.
“Traveled way” means the improved driving surface of the road normally used by the traveling vehicle.
“Trip generation analysis” means a reporting of the number of vehicular trips generated, both average daily traffic (ADT) and p.m. peak hour, by proposed new development, redevelopment or increase of traffic related trips due to change of use. The data may be obtained from the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) manual. Data does not need to be presented by a traffic engineer unless, due to its absence in the ITE manual, traffic data shall be collected.
“USC&GS” means United States Coast and Geodetic Survey.
“USGS” means United States Geodetic Survey.
“Utilities” means public or private facilities including electrical substation, electrical generation facilities, electrical transmission, telephone or communication lines, pipelines, sewer lines, water lines, natural gas lines, or similar transmission facilities, natural gas gate valve and storage facilities, sewage collection and treatment facilities, waste disposal facilities, waste transfer facilities, and water supply facilities.
“Variance” means a modification of regulations of this title when authorized by the Hearing Examiner after finding that the literal application of the provisions of this title would cause undue and unnecessary hardship in view of certain facts and conditions applying to a specific parcel of property.
“Water quality standards” means Surface Water Quality Standards, Chapter 173-201A WAC; Ground Water Quality Standards, Chapter 173-200 WAC; and Sediment Management Standards, Chapter 173-204 WAC.
“Watercourse” means a river, stream, creek, or other course of flowing water which flows intermittently or perennially and discharges into another watercourse or body of water.
“Waters of the state” means those waters as defined as “waters of the United States” in 40 CFR Subpart 122.2 within the geographic boundaries of Washington State and “waters of the state” as defined in Chapter 90.48 RCW which includes lakes, rivers, ponds, streams, inland waters, underground waters, salt waters and all other surface waters and watercourses within the jurisdiction of the state of Washington.
“Wetland” or “wetlands” means an area or areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. “Wetlands” generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
“Wetlands” do not include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland sites, including, but not limited to, irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and landscape amenities or those wetlands created after July 1, 1990, that were unintentionally created as a result of the construction of a road, street, or highway. However, wetlands include those artificial wetlands intentionally created to mitigate conversion of wetlands.
“WSDOT” means Washington State Department of Transportation. [Ord. 648 § 7, 2016; Ord. 501 § 3, 2009.]

Chapter 12.15 SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION

Sections:
12.15.010    Purpose.
12.15.020    Definitions.
12.15.025    Determination of availability.
12.15.030    Notice of availability.
12.15.040    Connection to available sewer system.
12.15.050    Failure to connect and availability charge.
12.15.060    Mandatory connection.
12.15.070    Authority.
12.15.080    Issuance of orders mandating connection.
12.15.090    Requests for deferral of connection.
12.15.100    Criteria for granting of deferrals.
12.15.110    Permits.
12.15.120    Violations.
12.15.130    Penalties and public nuisance.
12.15.140    Appeals.
12.15.150    Charges constitute lien.
12.15.160    Severability.
12.15.170    Chapter to be liberally construed.

12.15.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to implement the goals and policies of the Washington State Growth Management Act and the City of Lakewood comprehensive plan, to protect the public health, safety and welfare, as well as the environment, by establishing a system of regulations intended to cause property owners within the City of Lakewood to connect to public sanitary sewers as currently constructed or as may be constructed in the future. [Ord. 530 § 1, 2011.]

12.15.020 Definitions.
“Availability charge” means a sum of money charged or assessed against a property or property owner when such property has sanitary sewers available to it but the property is not connected to a sanitary sewer. The availability charge shall be in an amount equal to the base monthly sewer rate and applicable surcharges and fees that would be charged against the property, or a similar property or land use, if the property were connected to an available sanitary sewer system.
“Available” means a property which meets the requirements of LMC 12.15.025.
“Building sewer” means a sewer line extending from the structure’s plumbing facilities to the sewer main.
“City Manager” means the City of Lakewood City Manager or such other duly authorized representative or designee as the City Manager may so authorize to act or ensure the enforcement of this chapter. The City Manager may designate a City official or an official from the public sanitary sewer purveyor to act upon, implement or enforce any portion of this chapter.
“Interim on-site septic system” means an existing on-site septic tank system of sewerage in use upon a property when the public sanitary sewer system is available to the property or property owner.
“Sewage” means waste discharged from the plumbing facilities of structures.
“Sewer main” means a public sewer system pipe designed for and used to transport sewage and to which a building sewer can connect. The term “sewer main” excludes building sewers.
“Structure” means any building, manufactured home, or enclosure that contains or should contain plumbing facilities for the disposal of sewage. [Ord. 584 § 1, 2014; Ord. 530 § 1, 2011.]

12.15.025 Determination of availability.
A. Sewer service shall be deemed available to a property if a gravity flow sanitary sewer immediately abuts any portion of a property or a private or public utility easement. A private utility easement will be considered for purposes of availability only if it allows for construction and connection to sanitary sewers.
B. When contiguous properties are either (1) owned in whole or part by the same owner or (2) are governed by the same business license, sewer service shall be deemed available to all properties if any one property satisfies any condition in subsection A of this section. [Ord. 584 § 2, 2014.]

12.15.030 Notice of availability.
Upon determining that a public sewer system is available to a property, the City Manager, or the designee thereof, shall provide a notice of availability to the property owner, as such property owner is identified in the available public records applicable to the property. Such notice of availability to the property owner shall be served in compliance with LMC 12.02.060. Further, a copy of the notice of availability will be filed in the Pierce County real property records for said property. [Ord. 530 § 1, 2011.]

12.15.040 Connection to available sewer system.
A. Sewer Connection Required. After a notice of availability is provided to a property owner that a sewer main is available, it shall be unlawful for that property owner to fail to or neglect to connect the structures on their property to the sanitary sewer.
B. No later than 90 days after service and recording of a notice of availability, the owner of each lot or parcel of real property with sanitary sewer service available shall connect all appropriate structures there upon to the sanitary sewer system. Failure to comply with this requirement within the time frame set forth herein shall subject the property owner to payment of an availability charge as set forth in LMC 12.15.050 and the possibility of future orders directing mandatory connection.
C. All costs of the building sewer lines and connection to the sewer system shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
D. Proof of Connection. Any property owner who is required to connect to sanitary sewers under the provisions of this chapter shall upon request provide documentation or other evidence sufficient to show proof of said connection.
E. Decommissioning of On-site Septic Tank System. All property owners required to connect to an available sanitary sewer system under this chapter shall upon completion of the building sewer connection also decommission any existing interim on-site septic system in accordance with the requirements of the Tacoma-Pierce County Health Department as currently in effect or hereafter amended. [Ord. 530 § 1, 2011.]

12.15.050 Failure to connect and availability charge.
A. Any owner or owners of property who fail through neglect or refusal to connect a property and structure to an available sewer main as required under LMC 12.15.040 within the time specified, shall be assessed an availability charge for continued use of an interim on-site septic system.
B. All interim on-site septic systems will be allowed to remain in use only if the system is in and remains in good working order.
C. The City Manager, or the designee thereof, may order mandatory connection to an available sewer main in the event that a property owner fails to pay availability charges or fails to provide sufficient proof that an existing on-site septic system is in good working order.
D. Any owner(s) of multifamily properties with more than 10 units or mobile home parks with more than 10 units may request a one-time 50 percent reduction of the availability charge for a 12-month period after service and recording of the notice of availability. To be eligible for the reduction, the total construction cost of the sanitary sewer connection must exceed $100,000. The property owner(s) shall submit a request to the City, in writing, that includes an estimate from a licensed civil engineer proving that the total construction costs of the sanitary sewer connection will exceed $100,000. The property owner shall also submit certification from the Tacoma-Pierce County Health Department that the existing septic sewer system is in good working order. Construction costs shall be limited to: engineering, plan review fees, easement document development and recording, sanitary sewer extension construction, and associated restoration costs. Connection fees associated with the sanitary sewer construction shall not be included in the total construction cost calculations. Property owners that request and receive a reduced availability charge under this exception will not be granted an additional deferral of connection per LMC 12.15.090 and shall be connected to sanitary sewer no later than 10 years after service and recording of the notice of availability. Upon the City’s approval of the request the reduction shall be effective commencing the first subsequent availability charge billing cycle. A reduction request and/or subsequent approval by the City does not relieve the property owner(s) from paying the availability charge during the period between service and recording of the notice of availability and availability charge reduction approval. [Ord. 637 § 1, 2016; Ord. 551 § 1, 2012; Ord. 530 § 1, 2011.]

12.15.060 Mandatory connection.
A. After service and recording of a notice of availability, an interim on-site septic system may be allowed to remain in use for 10 years from the date of recording. Any extension beyond five years shall require certification by the Tacoma-Pierce County Health Department that the existing septic system is in good working order. The use of an interim on-site septic system after the longer of any deferrals or expiration of the allowed use of such interim on-site septic system is prohibited.
B. Use of interim on-site septic systems on property within the City of Lakewood shall be discontinued, and connection to the public sewer system mandated, upon the occurrence of any the following events:
    1. When a septic tank, drain field or other private sewerage disposal system becomes inoperable in accordance with the provisions determination of the authorized public health official or authority;
    2. Should the City receive a permit or application proposing a change that intensifies in the use of a structure or residence served by an interim on-site septic system, connection to the public sewer system will be mandated prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or prior to issuance of any applicable permit, license or approval;
    3. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a newly constructed structure upon a property;
    4. Upon the sale of a property within the City, the purchaser shall be required to connect to the public sewer system prior to occupancy or use of a structure;
    5. As necessary to meet planning and development regulations, including issuance of discretionary permits, land use variances and site development permits where the public health, safety and welfare would be served by mandating connection to the public sewer system;
    6. Should lands, buildings or structures be found to exist in a state of public nuisance or in a condition that violates any applicable public health or building code, law or regulation, through issuance of an order to repair or remove such condition, in the discretion of the City Manager, or designee thereof, the owner may be ordered to connect to an available public sewer in order to cure such condition or violation.
    7. At the time that any property is proposed to be subdivided, subjected to a binding site plan, or subject to the formation of a condominium. [Ord. 642 § 1, 2016; Ord. 637 § 2, 2016; Ord. 591 § 77, 2015; Ord. 530 § 1, 2011.]

12.15.070 Authority.
The City Manager, or the authorized designee thereof, shall have authority to make interpretations and issue orders consistent with the terms of this chapter. Orders shall be in writing and shall conform and be served in accordance with the requirements of LMC 12.02.060 and 12.02.070. [Ord. 530 § 1, 2011.]

12.15.080 Issuance of orders mandating connection.
The City Manager, or the designee thereof, may issue orders mandating connection, whereby the property owner will be required to connect a property to the public sanitary sewer system when such orders are appropriate under the provisions of this chapter. All orders mandating connection shall be in writing and shall be served upon the property or property owner in compliance with the provisions of LMC 12.02.060. An order mandating connection to an available public sanitary sewer system shall order the property owner to act within 90 days of issuance of the order. It is further within the discretion of the City Manager, or the designee thereof, to allow one additional 90-day extension of the order mandating connection. [Ord. 530 § 1, 2011.]

12.15.090 Requests for deferral of connection.
A. Deferral of mandatory connection may be authorized for up to three years after the property is subject to a mandatory connection.
B. Requests for deferrals must be made in writing to the City Manager of the City of Lakewood, and such a request should include the following information:
    1. Requestor’s name, mailing address, and the address or parcel number of the property for which a deferral is sought.
    2. Financial, medical, utility or tax information as the requestor deems relevant to the request for a deferral.
    3. Proof of age if the requestor’s age is relevant to the request for a deferral.
    4. Evidence of the structural integrity of the structure on the property and information regarding any plan that the structure will be demolished, refurbished or rebuilt within the deferral period.
    5. Evidence that the existing septic system is in good working order as approved by the Tacoma-Pierce County Health Department.
    6. The length of time for which a deferral is sought.
    7. Additional information as the requestor may deem relevant to the requested deferral.
    8. As to public agencies or entities, information may be provided that would include future plans to decommission, sell or close facilities or buildings.
C. The City Manager, or designee, may revoke a deferral upon the occurrence of any of the events that would compel mandatory connection under LMC 12.15.060. Revocation of a deferral shall be ordered in writing. [Ord. 637 § 3, 2016; Ord. 530 § 1, 2011.]

12.15.100 Criteria for granting of deferrals.
A. Upon receipt of a written request for a deferral, the City Manager, or designee, shall evaluate such a request under the following criteria or any combination of the following criteria:
    1. Whether mandatory connection would be a hardship to an elderly or disabled person, which hardship would be lessened by allowance of a deferral.
    2. Whether the requestor, by virtue of age or disability, has qualified for government subsidies, or reduced tax or utility payments.
    3. Whether the application evidences that the useful life of the structure or structures upon the property is shorter than the period of deferral requested.
    4. Whether the property owner has provided sufficient evidence that structures upon the property will be improved, demolished or rehabilitated, and that deferral is appropriate to facilitate future work contemplated upon the structures or property within the term of the deferral.
    5. Whether the cost of connection to an available sewer system, when compared to the combined assessed value of the property and improvements upon the property, exceeds more than 10 percent of the value of the property.
    6. Whether a public entity or agency plans to sell, decommission or close facilities or structures.
B. Upon receipt of a request for a deferral under this section, the City Manager, or designee, shall act within a reasonable period of time in responding to said request. For the purposes of this section, City action upon a deferral request includes requesting additional information from the requester or scheduling an interview with the requestor.
C. A determination of a deferral request shall be made in writing and mailed to the requestor at the mailing address provided in the request.
D. A determination on a request for deferral may impose conditions upon the requestor, which may include, but are not limited to the filing of a voluntary compliance agreement in the public records, acknowledging that the requestor will connect to the public sanitary sewer system upon occurrence of a specific event or upon expiration of the deferral period, payment of the availability charge and such additional conditions that are lawful and relevant to the nature of any deferral.
E. A determination of a deferral request shall be considered an administrative order of the City.
F. No deferrals shall be granted where connection to the public sewer system is required pursuant to LMC 12.15.060(B). [Ord. 637 § 4, 2016; Ord. 591 § 78, 2015; Ord. 530 § 1, 2011.]

12.15.110 Permits.
The property owner shall be responsible to obtain any and all necessary permits from the City, the sewer provider, and the Tacoma-Pierce County Health Department to carry out the requirements of this chapter. Permits in violation of this chapter shall not be issued. [Ord. 530 § 1, 2011.]

12.15.120 Violations.
It is a violation of this chapter for any property owner or person responsible for a property subject to a notice of availability or order mandating connection to do or allow any of the following:
A. Use, occupy, construct or maintain any structure without connecting the structure to the public sanitary sewer system as required in this chapter;
B. Fail to comply with any order directing that a property be lawfully connected to the public sewer system;
C. Perform or cause to be performed any work upon any structure, land or property within the City without necessary permits or approvals or to conduct work in a manner contrary to the terms and conditions of a permit or authorization issued pursuant to this chapter or other applicable health, safety or building code or regulation;
D. Misrepresent any material fact in any application, plans or other information submitted to the City; or
E. Fail to comply with the requirements of this chapter or any applicable state or local law or regulation. [Ord. 530 § 1, 2011.]

12.15.130 Penalties and public nuisance.
A. Violations of any of the requirements stated within this chapter shall constitute civil infractions pursuant to Chapter 1.44 LMC and are punishable by a fine of up to $500.00 per day for each day that a violation occurs or continues.
B. Any structure constructed, existing or maintained in violation of this chapter is a public nuisance and contrary to the health, safety and welfare of the community. Such a structure is dangerous and shall be subject to abatement as authorized under applicable codes, statutes or the common law. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be liable to the City for any expense, loss, damage, cost of inspection, or cost of correction incurred by the City to correct or abate such violation, including any cost incurred by the City in collecting such loss, damages or expenses.
C. Any property owner, whether a private party or business or corporate representative or agent, who causes, maintains, allows the continuation of or fails to abate a public nuisance after being lawfully ordered to do so shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor crime, punishable by imprisonment for up to 90 days, a fine of up $1,000 or any combination thereof, pursuant to Chapter 9.66 RCW and Chapter 1.44 LMC. [Ord. 530 § 1, 2011.]

12.15.140 Appeals.
A. A property owner may appeal a determination that a public sewer system is available to their property or any other decision or order issued pursuant to the authority provided by this chapter, as set forth in this section.
B. The following time frames shall control the filing of the notice of appeal:
    1. For a determination that sewer service is available, the notice of appeal shall be filed within the latter of 45 days after service of a notice of availability or service of a notice of lien.
    2. For all other matters, the notice of appeal shall be filed within 14 days of service of the determination.
C. The notice of appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk and contain the following: (1) be conspicuously identified as a notice of appeal; (2) set forth a brief statement setting forth the legal interest of the appellants; (3) the specific order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellants; (4) the relief sought, and reasons why it is claimed, and why the protested action or notice and order should be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside; (5) the signatures of all persons named as appellants, and their official mailing addresses; (6) the verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of each appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal. No fee shall be required for the filing of the notice of appeal.
D. As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the City Clerk shall fix a date, time, and place for the hearing of the appeal by the Hearing Examiner. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing by the City Clerk, by mailing a copy addressed to each appellant at his or her address shown on the notice of appeal.
E. At the hearing, the appellant or appellants shall be entitled to appear in person, and to be represented by counsel and to offer such evidence as may be pertinent and material to the denial or to the notice and order. The technical rules of evidence need not apply.
F. Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant or appellants in the written notice of appeal shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.
G. Within 10 business days following conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Examiner shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law, supported by the record, and a decision which may affirm, modify, or overrule the denial or order of the City, and may further impose terms and conditions regarding hook-up to the City sewer.
H. Excepting those instances where, by law, a different time period applies, a decision by the Hearing Examiner under this chapter shall be final and conclusive unless within 21 days from the date of the decision, a party makes application to a court of competent jurisdiction for appropriate relief.
I. If the matter on appeal is a determination that a public sewer system is available to a property, upon the timely filing of a notice of appeal and pending adjudication by the Hearing Examiner, the City shall not undertake efforts to enforce or collect availability charges imposed under this chapter.
J. This section shall not apply to actions governed by LMC 12.15.130. [Ord. 584 § 3, 2014; Ord. 530 § 1, 2011.]

12.15.150 Charges constitute lien.
All unpaid charges provide for herein, or as may be hereafter amended, together with penalties and interest thereon, shall be a lien upon the property to which the charges were imposed. Enforcement of such lien or liens shall be in the manner provided by law. [Ord. 530 § 1, 2011.]

12.15.160 Severability.
If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, or its application held inapplicable to any person, property or circumstance, such invalidity or unconstitutionality or inapplicability shall not effect the validity or constitutionality of any other section, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter or its application to any other person, property or circumstance. [Ord. 530 § 1, 2011.]

12.15.170 Chapter to be liberally construed.
The provisions of this chapter are to be liberally construed in favor of connection to public sanitary sewers as currently constructed or as may be constructed in the future. [Ord. 584 § 4, 2014.]

Chapter 12.16 TRANSPORTATION BENEFIT DISTRICT

Sections:
12.16.010    Transportation Benefit District established.
12.16.020    Governing Board.
12.16.030    Powers of the Lakewood Transportation Benefit District.
12.16.040    Transportation improvements funded.
12.16.050    Establishment of revenue sources.
12.16.060    Expiration of authority to exercise statutory powers.

12.16.010 Transportation Benefit District established.
Pursuant to RCW 35.21.225 and Chapter 36.73 RCW, there is created the Lakewood Transportation Benefit District with geographical boundaries comprised of the corporate limits of the City of Lakewood as they currently exist or as they may exist following future annexations. [Ord. 550 § 2 part, 2012.]

12.16.020 Governing Board.
A. The Lakewood City Council shall have the authority to exercise the statutory powers set forth in Chapter 36.73 RCW and this chapter.
B. The Lakewood City Council adopts the existing TBD policies, procedures and actions including the TBD material change policy to address major plan changes that affect project delivery or the ability to finance the plan, pursuant to the requirements set forth in RCW 36.73.160(1). The City Manager or designee is hereby authorized to amend the language in any such policy, procedure or action to accurately reference City authority rather than TBD authority.
C. Annual Report to the Public. The Lakewood City Council shall issue an annual report, pursuant to the requirements of RCW 36.73.160(2). [Ord. 656 § 2, 2016; Ord. 560 § 1, 2013; Ord. 550 § 2, 2012.]

12.16.030 Powers of the Lakewood Transportation Benefit District.
The City of Lakewood shall possess all of the powers of a Transportation Benefit District authorized pursuant to Chapter 36.73 RCW, including without limitation the power to request voter approval of, and thereafter impose and collect, a sales and use tax in accordance with RCW 82.14.0455. [Ord. 656 § 2, 2016; Ord. 550 § 2, 2012.]

12.16.040 Transportation improvements funded.
The funds generated under the authority of Chapter 82.14 RCW by the City of Lakewood shall be used for the purpose of funding ongoing transportation improvements that preserve, maintain and, as appropriate, construct or reconstruct the transportation infrastructure of the City of Lakewood, consistent with Chapter 36.73 RCW. The funds shall be used specifically for annual improvements for the operation, preservation, and maintenance of the City’s existing transportation improvements, facilities, functions, activities, and programs set forth in the City’s current transportation improvement program, adopted pursuant to Chapter 36.73 RCW, nonmotorized improvement plan and the Lakewood City Council Ad Hoc Committee on Transportation Funding recommendations. Lakewood Transportation Benefit District projects may be amended in accordance with the material change policy described in LMC 12.16.020(B) and in accordance with the notice, hearing and other procedures described in Chapter 36.73 RCW, including RCW 36.73.050(2)(b), as the same may be amended from time to time. [Ord. 656 § 2, 2016; Ord. 560 § 1, 2013; Ord. 550 § 2, 2012.]

12.16.050 Establishment of revenue sources.
The Lakewood City Council shall have the authority to establish fees and other revenue sources consistent with RCW 36.73.065. [Ord. 656 § 2, 2016; Ord. 550 § 2, 2012.]

12.16.060 Expiration of authority to exercise statutory powers.
The authority of the City to exercise the statutory powers set forth in Chapter 36.73 RCW and this chapter shall expire, when all indebtedness, if any, accrued pursuant to that authority has been retired and when all of the anticipated responsibilities of the Transportation Benefit District have been satisfied. This authority shall automatically expire on 12:01 a.m. on July 16, 2032, unless dissolved sooner pursuant to this section. [Ord. 656 § 2, 2016; Ord. 550 § 2, 2012.]

Chapter 12.17 LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS

Sections:
12.17.010    Procedures relating to local improvement districts and utility local improvement districts.
12.17.020    Powers and duties of City Engineer – Assessment roll.
12.17.030    Delinquent installments – Penalties.
12.17.040    Notice of delinquent assessments.
12.17.050    Foreclosure of delinquent assessments.
12.17.060    Issuance of bonds.

12.17.010 Procedures relating to local improvement districts and utility local improvement districts.
A local improvement, the cost of which is to be borne in whole or in part by special assessments on the property benefited thereby, may be ordered only by an ordinance, pursuant either to a resolution or petition therefor and in accordance with the provisions of Chapters 35.43 through 35.56 RCW, as amended. [Ord. 593 § 3, 2014.]

12.17.020 Powers and duties of City Engineer – Assessment roll.
A. The City Engineer is designated as the officer responsible for determining the sufficiency and accuracy of any petition filed to initiate a proceeding for the formation of a local improvement district or utility local improvement district. Upon the filing of a petition found by the City Engineer to be sufficient or upon the adoption of a resolution initiating a proceeding for the formation of a local improvement district or utility local improvement district, the City Engineer shall cause an estimate to be made of the cost and expense of the proposed improvement and shall certify it to the City Council, together with all papers and information in the City Engineer’s possession touching the proposed improvement, a description of the boundaries of the district, and a statement of what portion of the cost and expense of the improvement should be borne by the property owners within the proposed district.
B. The City Engineer shall prepare the final plans and contract documents and shall obtain bids for the construction of the improvement. [Ord. 593 § 4, 2014.]

12.17.030 Delinquent installments – Penalties.
Whenever any installment upon any local improvement district assessment or utility local improvement district assessment shall become delinquent, each such delinquent installment remaining unpaid at the date of delinquency shall have added thereto a penalty equal to the rate of interest provided by ordinance for the bonds or installment note or notes issued to pay the costs of the improvement in such local improvement district or utility local improvement district plus five percent. When not otherwise provided by ordinance, such delinquent installments shall bear interest at the same rate as is provided by ordinance for the final assessment roll for such local improvement district or utility local improvement district or for the bonds or installment note or notes issued in payment or part payment of the cost of the improvement in such local improvement district or utility local improvement district. [Ord. 593 § 5, 2014.]

12.17.040 Notice of delinquent assessments.
It shall be the duty of the City Treasurer on or before July 1st of each year to notify by certified mail the persons whose names appear on the assessment roll as the owners of property charged with assessments or installments which are more than two years delinquent on the July 1st preceding, or for which the final installment has been delinquent since July 1st of the preceding year, for the purpose of foreclosing the delinquent assessment or delinquent installment as provided by Chapter 35.50 RCW. If the person whose name appears on the tax rolls of the Pierce County assessor as the owner of the property, or the address shown for the owner on such rolls differs from that appearing on the City assessment roll, then the City Treasurer shall also mail a copy of the notice to that person or that address. The notice shall state the amount due upon each separate lot, tract, or parcel of land and the date after which proceedings to foreclose will be commenced. [Ord. 593 § 6, 2014.]

12.17.050 Foreclosure of delinquent assessments.
When any local improvement district or utility local improvement district assessment is payable in installments, upon failure to pay any installment due, the assessment shall become immediately due and payable, and the collection thereof shall be enforced by foreclosure. The payment of all delinquent installments, together with interest, penalty and costs, at any time before the entry of judgment in foreclosure shall extend the time of payment on the remainder of the assessment installments as if there had been no delinquency or foreclosure. Foreclosure proceedings may be commenced at any time on or before November 15th of the year in which, on the first day of January of such year, two installments of any local improvement district or utility local improvement district assessment were delinquent or the final installment was delinquent for more than one year. In case of foreclosure, there shall be added to the costs and expenses provided by Chapter 35.50 RCW, such reasonable attorneys’ fees as the court may adjudge to be equitable, and the amount thereof shall be apportioned to each delinquent assessment or installment appearing on that roll. When one or more delinquent installments are paid before the foreclosure proceedings are completed, payment of such costs shall be a prerequisite to the City’s dismissal of such proceedings unless otherwise ordered by the court. [Ord. 593 § 7, 2014.]

12.17.060 Issuance of bonds.
All local improvement district and utility local improvement district bonds shall be issued and registered in compliance with the applicable provisions of state and federal law and the ordinances authorizing the issuance and sale of the bonds. [Ord. 593 § 8, 2014.]

Chapter 12.18 COMPLETE STREETS POLICY

Sections:
12.18.010    Purpose.
12.18.020    Complete streets definition.
12.18.030    Exceptions.
12.18.040    Implementation.
12.18.050    Intergovernmental cooperation.
12.18.060    Best practice criteria.
12.18.070    Performance standards.

12.18.010 Purpose.
The City of Lakewood shall, to the maximum extent practical, scope, plan, design, construct, operate and maintain appropriate facilities for the safe accommodation of pedestrians, bicyclists, transit users, motorists, emergency responders, freight and users of all ages and abilities in all new construction, retrofit or reconstruction projects. Through ongoing operations and maintenance, the City of Lakewood shall identify cost effective opportunities to include complete streets practices. [Ord. 645 § 1, 2016.]

12.18.020 Complete streets definition.
A “complete street” is a road that is designed to be safe for drivers; bicyclists; transit vehicles and users; and pedestrians of all ages and abilities. The complete streets concept focuses not just on individual roads but on changing the decision-making process so that all users are routinely considered during the planning, designing, building and operating of all roadways. [Ord. 645 § 1, 2016.]

12.18.030 Exceptions.
Facilities for pedestrians, bicyclists, transit users and/or people of all abilities are not required to be provided when:
A. Documented absence of current or future need exists;
B. Nonmotorized uses are prohibited by law;
C. Routine maintenance of the transportation network is performed that does not change the roadway geometry or operations, such as mowing, sweeping and spot repair;
D. The cost would be disproportionate to the current need or probable future uses;
E. In instances where a documented exception is granted by the City Manager or his/her designee. [Ord. 645 § 1, 2016.]

12.18.040 Implementation.
A. The City of Lakewood will incorporate complete streets principles into the City’s comprehensive plan, public works standards, parks and recreation master plan, traffic circulation plan and other plans, manuals, rules, regulations and programs as appropriate.
B. As feasible, Lakewood shall incorporate “complete streets infrastructure” into existing public and private streets to create a comprehensive, integrated, connected transportation network for Lakewood that balances access, mobility, health and safety needs of pedestrians, bicyclists, transit users, motorists, emergency responders, freight and users of all ages and abilities, ensuring a fully sustainable, connected, integrated network that provides transportation options.
“Complete streets infrastructure” means design features that contribute to a safe, convenient, or comfortable travel experience for users, including but not limited to features such as sidewalks, shared use paths, bicycle lanes, automobile lanes, paved shoulders, curbs, accessible curb ramps, bulbouts, crosswalks, refuge islands, pedestrian and traffic signals, signage, street lighting, street furniture, bicycle parking facilities, public transportation stops and facilities, and traffic calming devices.
C. Complete streets may be achieved through single projects or incrementally through a series of smaller improvements or maintenance activities over time. All sources of transportation funding should be drawn upon to implement complete streets. Maximum financial flexibility is important to implement complete streets principles. [Ord. 645 § 1, 2016.]

12.18.050 Intergovernmental cooperation.
The City will cooperate with other transportation agencies including Washington State Department of Transportation, Pierce County and adjoining cities to ensure the principles and practices of complete streets are embedded within their planning, design, construction, and maintenance activities. The City will specifically cooperate to ensure the transportation network flows seamlessly between jurisdictions in accordance with local and regional road, transit, bicycle and pedestrian plans. [Ord. 645 § 1, 2016.]

12.18.060 Best practice criteria.
The Public Works Director or designee shall modify, develop and adopt policies, design criteria, standards and guidelines based upon recognized best practices in street design, construction, and operations including but not limited to the latest editions of American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials (AASHTO), Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) and National Association of City Transportation Officials (NACTO) while reflecting the context and character of the surrounding built and natural environments and enhance the appearance of such. [Ord. 645 § 1, 2016.]

12.18.070 Performance standards.
The City of Lakewood shall put into place performance standards with measurable benchmarks to continuously evaluate the complete streets ordinance codified in this chapter for success and opportunities for improvement. Performance standards may include transportation and mode shift, miles of bicycle facilities or sidewalks, public participation, number of ADA accommodations built, and number of exemptions from this policy approved. [Ord. 645 § 1, 2016.]

Title 13 PUBLIC UTILITIES

Chapters:
13.06        Garbage Collection Services

Chapter 13.06 GARBAGE COLLECTION SERVICES

Sections:
13.06.010    Definitions – A.
13.06.011    Definitions – B.
13.06.012    Definitions – C.
13.06.013    Definitions – D.
13.06.014    Definitions – E.
13.06.015    Definitions – F.
13.06.016    Definitions – G.
13.06.017    Definitions – H.
13.06.018    Definitions – I.
13.06.019    Definitions – J.
13.06.020    Definitions – K.
13.06.021    Definitions – L.
13.06.022    Definitions – M.
13.06.023    Definitions – N.
13.06.024    Definitions – O.
13.06.025    Definitions – P.
13.06.026    Definitions – Q.
13.06.027    Definitions – R.
13.06.028    Definitions – S.
13.06.029    Definitions – T.
13.06.030    Definitions – U.
13.06.031    Definitions – V.
13.06.032    Definitions – W.
13.06.033    Definitions – X.
13.06.034    Definitions – Y.
13.06.035    Definitions – Z.
13.06.040    Enforcement authority.
13.06.045    Limitations of service.
13.06.050    Service compulsory – Exceptions.
13.06.055    Unlawful accumulations.
13.06.060    Burying or dumping prohibited.
13.06.070    Residential collection – Method and frequency.
13.06.080    Automated services.
13.06.090    Residential collection – Types of services.
13.06.100    Containerized, bulk containerized and compactor containerized service.
13.06.110    Additional services.
13.06.120    Containers and drop boxes provided.
13.06.130    Holiday collection schedule.
13.06.180    Maintenance of containers.
13.06.190    Dead animals.
13.06.210    Billing for garbage service – Delinquencies.
13.06.220    Violations and penalties.
13.06.300    Transporter permit required.
13.06.310    Transporter permit application.
13.06.320    Collection requirements.
13.06.330    Performance standards.
13.06.340    Recyclables container or cart location registration and fee required.
13.06.350    Access for inspections and delivery of notices.
13.06.360    Disposal prohibited – Record-keeping.
13.06.370    Notice and orders.
13.06.380    Private right of action.

13.06.010 Definitions – A.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:
“Alley” means a strip of land dedicated to public use for access to the rear of properties. Such alleys, to be used for the purpose of refuse collection, must be at least 20 feet wide and open to a public street at each end, or otherwise as approved by the public works director in accordance with the purposes of this chapter.
“Automated carts” means a cart with a tight fitting lid designed to be picked up and emptied by mechanical means.
“Automated service” means garbage or recycling collection services where specific containers or carts are provided that are emptied into a garbage truck by mechanical means controlled by the operator. [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016; Ord. 436 § 1, 2007; Ord. 371 § 2, 2005; Ord. 337 § 2, 2004; Ord. 51 § 1, 1996.]

13.06.011 Definitions – B.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:
“Bale” means material compressed by machine and securely tarped or banded.
“Bulk containerized services” means use of drop boxes in excess of 10 cubic yards in size as approved by the public works director.
“Bulky materials” means empty carriers, cartons, boxes, crates, etc., or materials offered for disposal, all of which may be readily handled without shoveling. [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016.]

13.06.012 Definitions – C.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:
“Can” also referred to as a refuse container, means a can must be made of durable, corrosion-resistant, nonabsorbent material, watertight, with a close fitting cover and two handles. Size to exceed 20 gallons but not to exceed 32 gallons or four cubic feet. A can cannot weigh more than 65 pounds when filled nor more than 12 pounds when empty.
“Cart” means a wheeled plastic container. If supplied by the customer, it must be compatible with the contractor’s equipment. Cart may also be referred to as a toter. Size and type shall be as defined in the sections identifying rates.
“Charge” means a set flat fee for performing a service or the result of multiplying a rate for a unit times the number of units transported.
“City’s contractor” means the private company performing municipal solid waste collection and transportation services under written agreement with the City.
“Commercial account” means any group of dwelling units in excess of two, or places of business providing goods or services.
“Compacted material” means material which has been compressed by any mechanical device either before or after it is placed in the receptacle handled by the contractor.
“Compactor container” refers to use of bulk containerized service where garbage is mechanically compressed into a smaller volume with greater density.
“Compactor disconnect/reconnect charge” means a flat fee established by the solid waste collection company for the service of disconnecting a compactor from a drop box or container prior to taking it to be dumped and then reconnecting the compactor when the drop box or container is returned to the customer’s site.
“Container” means a detachable container which is left at a customer’s premises and emptied into the contractor’s truck and is lifted by mechanical means.
“Containerized service” means service and equipment approved by the Public Works Director, wherein the contractor provides a vehicle equipped for mechanical handling of containers with casters up to 10 cubic yards. Such containers shall be provided by the contractor. [Ord. 634 §1, 2016.]

13.06.013 Definitions – D.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:
“Drop box” means a container which is placed on the contractor’s truck by mechanical means, hauled to a disposal site and returned to customer’s premises.
“Drum” means a metal container of approximately 50 gallon capacity, generally used for oils or solvents. Maximum weight not to exceed 75 pounds when filled. [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016.]

13.06.014 Definitions – E.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows: [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016.]

13.06.015 Definitions – F.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows: [Ord. 634 §1, 2016.]

13.06.016 Definitions – G.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:
“Garbage” means all accumulations of animal, fruit, or vegetable matter which attend the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or storage of meat, fish, fowl, fruits, or vegetables and containers originally used for foodstuffs, yard debris such as tree limbs, grass clippings, leaves, weeds, etc. For the purposes hereof, the terms “garbage” and “refuse” shall be synonymous.
“Gate charge” means a flat fee charged for opening, unlocking or closing gates in order to pickup solid waste. [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016.]

13.06.017 Definitions – H.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows: [Ord. 634 §1, 2016.]

13.06.018 Definitions – I.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows: [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016.]

13.06.019 Definitions – J.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows: [Ord. 634 §1, 2016.]

13.06.020 Definitions – K.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows: [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016.]

13.06.021 Definitions – L.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:
“Licensed contractor” means a company licensed to commercially remove garbage within the City, and is also referred to at times in this chapter as “licensee” or “contractor,” and includes all employees.
“Litter receptacle” means a container not over 60 gallon capacity generally placed in shopping centers and along streets or highways for litter. Maximum weight not to exceed 75 pounds when filled.
“Loose material” means material not set out in bags or containers. Also includes materials which must be shoveled. [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016.]

13.06.022 Definitions – M.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:
“Mini-can” means a can made of durable, corrosion-resistant, nonabsorbent material, watertight with a close fitting cover. Size not to exceed 20 gallons, nor weight to exceed 35 pounds. [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016.]

13.06.023 Definitions – N.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:
“Nonconforming items” means all refuse items placed out for collection which do not constitute regular residential or commercial garbage and which by size, weight or unwieldiness pose increased difficulty for garbage collection services. Examples of such nonconforming items are large bulky items, including tree limbs and stumps over four inches in diameter, furniture and appliances, concrete, building materials, tires, etc. [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016.]

13.06.024 Definitions – O.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows: [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016.]

13.06.025 Definitions – P.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:
“Packer” means a device or vehicle specially designed to pack loose materials.
“Pass-through fees” are fees that are billed directly to the customer without markup or markdown by the solid waste collection company.
“Permanent service” is, in conjunction with containers and drop boxes, when service is provided for a period of more than 90 days.
“Permittee” means a person or entity who collects and transports recyclables under the authority of a permit and/or license issued under this chapter and in compliance with Chapter 70.95 RCW. [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016.]

13.06.026 Definitions – Q.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows: [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016.]

13.06.027 Definitions – R.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:
“Rate” means a price per unit or per service. A rate is multiplied times the number of units transported, or the number of times a service is performed to determine a freight charge.
“Recyclables” means only those materials that are source-separated from and uncontaminated by solid waste by the generator for transformation or remanufacturing into usable or marketable materials for use other than landfill disposal or incineration.
“Recycling cart or container” means a cart, container or receptacle of any size specifically designed, intended or designated for collection of recyclables.
“Residential account” means any dwelling unit or group of dwelling units not exceeding two in number, used exclusively as a place of residence. [Ord. 634 §1, 2016.]

13.06.028 Definitions – S.
For purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:
“Solid waste” means all residential and nonresidential putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid waste generated within the City, excluding recyclables. “Solid waste” includes, but is not limited to, garbage, refuse, rubbish, demolition and construction waste, recyclable materials collected from residential locations, and all residual waste remaining after recycling.
“Special pickup” means a pickup requested by the customer at a time other than the regularly scheduled pickup time, but which does not involve the dispatch of a truck. If a special dispatch is required additional rate charges will apply. [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016.]

13.06.029 Definitions – T.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:
“Temporary service” means rates for temporary service apply only when service is required for a period of 90 days or less in conjunction with containers and drop boxes. Temporary service rates are not to be used for the first 90 days of service when the customer requests, and the carrier provides, service for more than 90 days.
“Toter” is a wheeled plastic container. If supplied by the customer, it must be compatible with the contractor’s equipment. May also be referred to as a cart. Type and size shall be as defined in the sections identifying rates.
“Transporter” means a person or entity offering services consisting of collection and/or transportation of recyclables from generators within the City of Lakewood. For the purposes of this section, “transporter” has the same meaning as contained in RCW 70.95.400, as that section does now exist or as hereinafter may be amended. A lawful transporter is one who is in compliance with or specifically exempted from compliance with LMC 13.06.300 and RCW 70.95.400 prior to collecting and transporting recyclables within the City of Lakewood.
“Trash” means weeds and grasses and waste materials except rocks, concrete, bricks, dirt, plaster and similar building materials. [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016.]

13.06.030 Definitions – U.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:
“Unit” means a garbage or refuse receptacle described as follows:
    1. A can made of durable, corrosion-resistant, nonabsorbent material, watertight, with a close fitting cover and two handles. Size to exceed 20 gallons but not to exceed 32 gallons or four cubic feet. Cannot weigh more than 65 pounds when filled or more than 12 pounds when empty.
    2. Where agreeable between the contractor and a customer (and where allowable under local ordinance) a box, carton, cardboard barrel or other suitable container may be substituted for a garbage can, for single pickup which includes the container, if it meets the size and weight limits shown in subsection (1) of this definition.
“Unlatching charge” is another term for gate charge; a flat fee imposed by the contractor when its personnel must unlatch a gate or door to perform pickup service.
“Unlocking fee” means a flat fee imposed by the contractor when its personnel must unlock padlocks or other locking devices to perform pickup service. [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016.]

13.06.031 Definitions – V.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows: [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016.]

13.06.032 Definitions – W.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows: [Ord. 634 §1, 2016.]

13.06.033 Definitions – X.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows: [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016.]

13.06.034 Definitions – Y.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows: [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016.]

13.06.035 Definitions – Z.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows: [Ord. 634 §1, 2016.]

13.06.040 Enforcement authority.
A. The City Manager or designee (hereinafter referred to as the “City”) shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall have the power to supervise the work performed by the City’s contractor to ensure that the collection, removal, and disposal of refuse solid waste is consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
B. It is unlawful for anyone, except the following, to haul solid waste through the streets in the City:
    1. The City’s contractor;
    2. Citizens who self-haul solid waste originating within their own establishments; and
    3. Businesses who, in their own vehicles, transport solid waste purely as an incidental adjunct to some other established private business owned or operated by them in good faith. This private-carrier exemption does not include persons transporting solid waste from residential sources, such as apartment houses or mobile home parks, in vehicles designed or used primarily for the transport of solid waste. [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016; Ord. 371 § 3, 2005; Ord. 337 § 3, 2004; Ord. 51 § 1, 1996.]

13.06.045 Limitations of service.
A. The contractor may refuse to pick up materials from points where, because of the condition of the streets, alleys or roads, it is impracticable or dangerous to persons or property to operate vehicles.
B. The contractor may refuse to drive into private property when, in the contractor’s judgment, driveways or roads are improperly constructed or maintained or without adequate turnarounds or have other unsafe conditions.
C. The contractor will not be required to enter private property to pick up material while an animal considered or feared to be vicious is loose. The customer will be required to confine the animal on pickup days.
D. The contractor’s schedule will meet reasonable requirements, and shall comply with the local provisions hereof.
E. Garbage pickup may be missed due to weather or road conditions. If garbage is taken on the next pickup day, no credit will be given.
F. The contractor shall provide services in a reasonable manner; provided, that neither the City nor the contractor shall be responsible for articles left on or near cans, units or other receptacles.
G. Where the contractor is requested to provide service, and damage occurs to a customer’s driveway due to reasons not in the control of the contractor or the City, the City and the contractor assume no responsibility. [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016; Ord. 371 § 4, 2005; Ord. 51 § 1, 1996.]

13.06.050 Service compulsory – Exceptions.
All dwellings, apartment houses, and places of business in which garbage or trash accumulates or may be generated within the City shall be required to pay for refuse collection services of the contractor licensed by the City. The City is authorized to determine the level of service required for the customers and subscribers of the garbage collection services. If any customer requests a certain level of collection service but that customer exceeds the amount of garbage allowed for that level of service, the City shall designate the customer’s level of service at the appropriate level, and the customer shall be charged accordingly. [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016; Ord. 371 § 5, 2005; Ord. 51 § 1, 1996.]

13.06.055 Unlawful accumulations.
A. It is unlawful for any occupant or owner of any building, lot or premises in the City to allow accumulations of garbage in a manner or quantity as to constitute a fire or a health hazard. Any accumulation of refuse which constitutes a fire hazard or a menace to public health, safety or welfare is deemed a nuisance. It is the duty of the occupant, owner and person(s) who placed the accumulation at such location to abate the nuisance by removing the accumulation and cleaning the area up.
B. The City shall enforce the provisions hereof. If any occupant, owner or responsible person fails to abate such nuisance, upon a report or request for action filed by the City Manager or designee, the City Council may pass a resolution requiring such occupant, owner or responsible person to abate the nuisance by removal thereof, at such person’s cost and expense within the time specified in the resolution. If the nuisance is not abated within such time, the City Manager or designee may direct abatement of the same as set forth herein below.
C. The resolution of the City Council referred to above shall not be passed until the property owner is given at least five days’ notice of the pendency of the proposed resolution; such notice being given by the City Manager or designee, by mailing a copy of the notice to the owner, occupant or responsible party at the last known address shown on the records of the City or the county treasurer; and if no address is known, a copy of the notice shall be posted on the property, and shall also be published in one issue of the official newspaper of the City. Any mailing, posting or publication shall be made at least five days prior to the consideration by the City Council of the proposed resolution. The notice shall include a description of the resolution, a description of the property involved and the nature of the circumstances constituting the nuisance.
D. If the nuisance is not abated by the occupant, owner or responsible person within the time fixed by the resolution, the City Manager or designee may abate the nuisance, and shall prepare or cause to be prepared a bill covering the costs to the City of such abatement, and the bill shall be mailed or presented to the occupant, owner or responsible person. The bill shall be payable immediately. If the bill is not paid or if no bill can be mailed because no address is known for the occupant, owner or responsible person, the City Manager or designee may, on behalf of the City of Lakewood, file a lien therefor against the property, which lien shall be in the same form filed with the same officer and within the same time and manner and shall be subject to enforcement and foreclosure as provided by law for liens for labor and materials or as otherwise provided by law for liens able to be filed by the City. [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016; Ord. 371 § 6, 2005; Ord. 51 § 1, 1996.]

13.06.060 Burying or dumping prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to bury or dump or permit to be buried or dumped any refuse or garbage in any place within the City. [Ord. 51 § 1, 1996.]

13.06.070 Residential collection – Method and frequency.
A. Cans, containers or carts as defined in this chapter shall be deemed to be acceptable refuse containers in residential areas. No employee for a contractor may remove or cause to be removed from any premises any refuse which is not so contained, except as otherwise provided in this section.
B. The separation of garbage and trash shall not be required.
C. The contractor shall offer weekly, every other week or monthly refuse collection service. Recyclables will be picked up every other week except as otherwise provided for in this section.
D. All curb and alley service customers shall place the refuse at the curb or edge of the street or alley in front of or adjacent to the property being serviced not later than 6:00 a.m. on the day of collection, and shall thereafter remove the refuse containers from the curb or edge of street or alley on the same day of the collection. Provided, however, that whether the service be at the curb or edge of street or in the alley, the house numbers or address shall be visible. [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016; Ord. 371 § 7, 2005; Ord. 51 § 1, 1996.]

13.06.080 Automated services.
In those areas of the City where automated services are available, the customers and residents shall be provided garbage carts by the licensed contractor, which carts shall remain the property of the contractor. Where the contractor provides automated service through an approved mechanical loading device and automated carts they shall be used by customers in residential areas. It shall be the responsibility of the customers or residents to place the carts at the curb or edge of the street or alley in front of or adjacent to the property being serviced not later than 6:00 a.m. on the day of collection, and shall thereafter remove the carts from the curb or edge of street or alley on the same day of the collection. Provided, however, that the house numbers or address shall be visible. [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016; Ord. 371 § 8, 2005; Ord. 51 § 1, 1996.]

13.06.090 Residential collection – Types of services.
A. Curb Service. Customers shall be responsible for placing refuse containers or recycling carts for automated service at the front curbline or at the edge of the street or alley in front of or adjacent to the property being serviced on collection days.
B. Walk-In Service. Walk-in service which requires the refuse collector to go more than five feet beyond the curbline or edge of the street or alley is available to property for an additional charge; provided, that the contractor shall not be required to enter a fenced area to collect refuse. The limitations and charges for walk-in service listed in this chapter shall not apply if the customer is disabled so as to make it impossible for him/her to comply with this section.
C. Drive-In Service. Drive-in service requires the contractor to drive off of public rights-of-way, onto driveways or other private property to collect refuse. There shall be an additional charge for this service; provided, that the contractor shall not be required to enter a fenced area to collect refuse. The limitations and charges for drive-in service listed in this chapter shall not apply if the customer is disabled so as to make it impossible for him/her to comply with this section.
D. Nonconforming Items. Nonconforming items as defined in this chapter placed out to the curb or edge of the street or alley shall not be collected by the contractor.
E. Containerized Service. Containerized service shall be used by all multiple-dwelling units with three or more units.
F. Automated Service. Automated service shall be used in all residential areas where automated carts are provided by the contractor. [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016; Ord. 371 § 9, 2005; Ord. 51 § 1, 1996.]

13.06.100 Containerized, bulk containerized and compactor containerized service.
A. The containers, bulk containers and compactor containers used in connection with containerized service, bulk containerized service and compactor containerized service, if used by a commercial or industrial customer, shall be located at a place specified by the City or by the contractor. Commercial customers with a low volume of refuse may use automated carts with tight-fitting lids if the contractor is able to provide a mechanical loading device for collection.
B. Commercial and industrial customers with a high volume of refuse materials who cannot be adequately served by containerized service shall use bulk containerized service.
C. Collection of refuse from all meat, fish, game and vegetable markets, restaurants, boardinghouses, hotels, hospitals and other like businesses shall be made as often as necessary to avoid odor nuisance or overflowing of container contents. The City’s licensed garbage collection service shall pick up containers, bulk containers and compactor containers not later than 30 hours after the time a request for pickup is made by the customer. The charges for such pickup shall be as provided in this chapter.
D. The charges for container and drop box collection (compacted and noncompacted materials) shall include transporting the container to the disposal site and returning it to the container/drop box site, unless specifically provided otherwise. [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016; Ord. 51 § 1, 1996.]

13.06.110 Additional services.
In addition to regular garbage collection services, the contractor shall provide the following services:
A. Recycling Services. Commingled recycling services shall be available to residential customers of the City, with the collection of recycle materials occurring curbside and in a manner compatible with the collection for regular garbage collection. Commingled recycling collection shall involve collection of newspapers, cardboard, magazines, mail, mixed paper, catalogs, tin and aluminum cans, milk jugs and plastic bottles with necks smaller than their bases, paper milk-type cartons, phone books, shredded paper, paper bags, cereal boxes, and paper frozen food boxes. The commingled recycling cart shall be provided to the customer by the contractor and shall remain the property of the contractor. In connection with commingled recycling services, the following shall apply:
    1. Commingled recycling services will not include the following materials: glass jars or containers, ceramics, Styrofoam peanuts, glassware, batteries, aerosol cans, toxic containers such as oil bottles, plastic tubs, plastic lids, foil, plastic bags, light bulbs, potato chip bags, plastic cups, Styrofoam containers, frozen food bags, pill bottles, juices boxes, clothes hangers, or any food contaminated items such as paper plates, napkins or pizza boxes.
    2. Commingled recycling services for single-family and multifamily residential units up to five units shall be provided every other week collection service at the same time and date throughout the year.
    3. Commingled recycling services for multifamily residential units with six or more units shall be provided on a weekly basis or as needed. Multifamily residential units with six or more units that have garbage collection by a container, drop box or compactor of one yard or greater in capacity shall be charged per dwelling unit at the multifamily rate.
    4. The charges for recycling shall be as set forth in this chapter below. The rates for recycling services will not be charged unless service is provided.
B. Yard Waste Services. The collection of yard waste shall be available for residential properties within the City. Yard waste services shall be subject to the following:
Yard waste includes materials which consist of leaves, brush, tree trimmings, grass clippings, weeds, shrubs, garden waste from vegetable gardens, and other compostable organic materials resulting from landscaping, pruning and yard maintenance generated from residents. Branches or roots must be smaller than four inches in diameter; branches and brush must be of a length to fit in the closed yard waste container.
Yard waste does not include stumps, demolition wood, large amounts of dirt, rocks, glass, plastics, metal, concrete, sheetrock, asphalt or any other nonorganic land clearing debris nor any food such as meat, fish, bones, or fatty foods such as dairy products and cooking oil. If yard waste is found to contain contamination by inclusion of materials not allowed, the container will not be accepted as yard waste, but will instead be transported to the landfill at applicable solid waste collection rates as provided in this chapter.
Yard waste shall be picked up every other week on a year-round basis on the same days as regular garbage collection. [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016; Ord. 371 § 10, 2005; Ord. 51 § 1, 1996.]

13.06.120 Containers and drop boxes provided.
The contractor shall maintain a supply of all sizes of containers and drop boxes for which rates are listed in this code. If the contractor is unable to provide a requested size of drop box within 14 days of a customer request, written notification must be mailed to the customer. The contractor shall then provide alternate sized containers or drop boxes, sufficient to meet the capacity originally requested by the customer at the same rental rates as would have applied on the requested container or drop box. If the contractor provides alternate sized drop boxes or containers, it shall be understood that all lawfully applicable disposal fees resulting from the use of the alternate containers shall be the responsibility of the customer. [Ord. 51 § 1, 1996.]

13.06.130 Holiday collection schedule.
For the purposes of this chapter and the scheduling of the services provided hereby, the following days shall constitute holidays: New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. For regularly scheduled service, when pickup or collection is missed due to the contractors observance of a holiday, the contractor shall provide service on an alternate day at no additional cost to the customer. For the purposes hereof, an alternate day shall mean the day immediately following the regularly scheduled service day, including Sundays. [Ord. 51 § 1, 1996.]

13.06.180 Maintenance of containers.
A. Customers shall keep their refuse containers clean to prevent an odor nuisance, and in good repair. Containers cracked or rusted and therefore not water tight, without two handles, or without a tight-fitting lid, are not acceptable.
B. A contractor shall keep all refuse containers owned by him clean inside and out to prevent an odor nuisance. A contractor shall also place a violation tag, identifying the violation, on refuse containers owned by customers found to be in violation of this section. Containers so tagged by the contractor shall not be emptied until the violation is corrected by the customer.
C. Customers with containers not kept in good repair and so identified by tagging with the contractor shall correct the violation within five days of the tagging. Failure to comply with the tagged notice to repair or replace an unacceptable refuse container shall be unlawful. [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016; Ord. 51 § 1, 1996.]

13.06.190 Dead animals.
No occupant or owner of the premises for which service is rendered shall allow the dead carcass of any animal or fowl owned by him to remain within the City limits for a period of more than 24 hours after the death of same and shall, upon the death of such animal, cause the same to be removed from the limits of the City within 24 hours after the discovery of the death thereof and properly disposed of. Dead animals shall be disposed of through procedures approved and/or accepted by the Pierce County Humane Society or other agency authorized to dispose of dead animals. Dead animals shall not be disposed of as solid waste nor through regular garbage collection services. Violation of this section shall constitute a violation punishable pursuant to LMC 13.06.220. [Ord. 51 § 1, 1996.]

13.06.210 Billing for garbage service – Delinquencies.
A. Pursuant to the provisions hereof, including LMC 13.06.050, and subject to the specific exceptions thereto, the charges for garbage service shall be billed monthly for commercial customers and every other month for residential customers by the licensed contractor to the owner of record, or purchaser of record, of the serviced property, who shall be responsible for the payment thereof as provided by City ordinance. It shall be the duty of each owner or purchaser of said serviced property to maintain said charges in a current paid condition. Charges on accounts shall be paid by the owner or tenant, on or before the twentieth day of the month following date of billing and, if not paid, shall become delinquent after the twentieth day of that month. Payments on garbage service accounts shall be made at the offices of the licensed contractor as indicated on the statement or as otherwise directed by City ordinance.
B. Service may be suspended for nonpayment of garbage collection accounts and billings, however, such suspension shall not relieve the person owing such account of the duty of complying with the provisions of this chapter.
C. In addition to the other remedies available to the City for collection of its charges and enforcement of its lien for City utility services, there shall be a penalty charged on the unpaid balance of delinquent water, sewer and garbage accounts at the rate of one and one-half percent per month, or $1.50, whichever is greater, which penalty shall accrue the date that the billing becomes delinquent, until the total of said charges and penalty have been paid in full. In the event of suit by the City to collect said charges and penalty, the court shall award the City its reasonable attorneys fees and costs incurred thereby. [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016; Ord. 51 § 1, 1996.]

13.06.220 Violations and penalties.
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to violate or fail to comply with the requirements of this chapter. It shall also be a misdemeanor for any person to dump or deposit garbage or garbage containers on the property of another where the result would be to increase or add to the collection services received by the property of another so as to bring that level of service out of conformity with the level of service provided to the property or to make the property of another in violation of the City Code. [Ord. 51 § 1, 1996.]

13.06.300 Transporter permit required.
A. Unless specifically and statutorily exempted from compliance, no transporter other than the City’s contractor shall collect recyclables from generators within the City without having obtained a permit from the City of Lakewood.
B. Permits shall be issued for each calendar year and the permit shall be valid from January 1st through December 31st of the year for which it was issued. A permit or renewal fee shall be paid for each calendar year, and each application for a permit or renewal shall include the full amount of the annual fee for the year for which the permit is sought regardless of when the fee is paid. A permit is not required of the City’s contractor in the transport of recyclables.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the operation of a recycling company or nonprofit entity collecting and transporting recyclables from a buy-back center, drop box, or from a commercial or industrial generator of recyclables within the City, or under agreement with the City’s contractor, so long as a permit is obtained, appropriate fees paid and operations are otherwise in compliance with this chapter.
D. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the operation of a commercial or industrial generator of commercial recyclables, in selling, conveying, or arranging for transportation of recyclables to a recycler for reuse or reclamation, so long as a permit is obtained, appropriate fees paid, and operations are otherwise in compliance with this chapter.
E. Any transporter who collects recyclables within the City without a permit shall be subject to a civil penalty of up to $500.00 per day. [Ord. 436 § 2, 2007; Ord. 337 § 4, 2004.]

13.06.310 Transporter permit application.
Applications for permits or the renewal thereof shall be made to the Public Works Department on forms provided by it, no later than the deadline stated on the form. The application shall include:
A. The name, street and mailing address, and business telephone number of the applicant;
B. Applicant business ownership information, responsible official and contact person;
C. Business license number;
D. Proof of liability insurance;
E. Indemnification language as prescribed by the City;
F. Any other relevant information deemed necessary by the City Manager or his designee, including proof of compliance with state or federal regulations;
G. An application fee of $1,000 or a renewal fee of $1,000; and
H. An agreement to abide by the terms of this chapter. [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016; Ord. 436 § 3, 2007; Ord. 337 § 5, 2004.]

13.06.320 Collection requirements.
A. To the greatest extent practicable, the permittee shall avoid stopping of collection vehicles while collecting recyclables or placing containers, including drop-boxes, in a manner that blocks the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians on public streets or sidewalks.
B. Where a generator has terminated service after following the applicable rules, it is a violation of this chapter for a permittee to leave containers provided by the permittee in place at the generator’s location for more than 10 calendar days after the generator has given written notice of termination.
C. The permittee shall pick up all material in the public right-of-way as a result of being blown, littered, broken, or leaked in the course of collection subsequent to being set out by the generator. [Ord. 337 § 6, 2004.]

13.06.330 Performance standards.
A. The permittee shall ensure that all of its vehicles and containers are constructed, loaded, operated and maintained in a manner to reduce to the greatest extent practicable dropping, leaking, blowing, sifting or escaping of recyclables or the vehicle’s fuel, hydraulic fluid or lubricants from the vehicle onto private property and public streets while stationary or in transit excepting (1) normal leakage of fuel, hydraulic fluid or lubricants typically associated with a properly maintained vehicle; and (2) leakage of fuel, hydraulic fluid or lubricants due to equipment failure; provided, that the failure is immediately corrected and the leakage is cleaned up as soon as practicable.
B. The permittee shall ensure that every open-body collection vehicle has either a cover which shall be an integral part of the vehicle or a separate cover for the vehicle. This cover shall be used while in transit, except during the transportation of bulky waste, including but not limited to stoves, refrigerators and similar “white goods.”
C. Vehicle Identification. 
    1. The permittee shall ensure that all of its vehicles bear a clearly visible motor carrier identification number.
    2. All vehicles shall be clearly identified by displaying the permittee’s name and telephone number prominently and conspicuously on both sides of the vehicle.
D. Compliance with Legal Requirements. 
    1. Permittee shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, including but not limited to all regulations and requirements of the state of Washington and all ordinances and regulations of the City of Lakewood.
    2. Permittee shall notify Lakewood within two days of receiving notice from a responsible agency that it is not in compliance as required in subsection (D)(1) of this section.
    3. If a permittee fails to comply as required in subsection (D)(1) of this section, Lakewood will suspend that permittee’s permit until the permittee has cured the violation in a manner satisfactory to the Public Works Department. In addition, the Public Works Department will not issue a permit to any company that is not in compliance as required in subsection (D)(1) of this section at the time of annual permit renewal each January 1st until any violation is corrected.
    4. All collection equipment must be maintained and operated in compliance with all local and state statutes, ordinances and regulations including compliance with regulations related to the safety of the collection crew and the public.
    5. All parking, storage and maintenance facilities shall comply with all applicable zoning ordinances and any other applicable local and state statutes, ordinances and regulations. Areas for parking, repair, storage or cleaning of vehicles or equipment shall not be located in areas zoned as residential under local zoning ordinances. [Ord. 337 § 7, 2004.]

13.06.340 Recyclables container or cart location registration and fee required.
A. After obtaining a transporter permit, a transporter may place recycling cart or container at any lawful location within the City. Within 30 days after placing a recycling cart or container, the transporter shall notify the Public Works Department in writing of the address and location of each cart or container and shall pay a location registration fee in the amount of $100.00 per cart or container and per location. A recycling cart or container placed in a registered location may be removed or replaced with a different cart or container at the transporter’s discretion.
B. The transporter shall clearly identify all of its recycling collection carts or containers including compactors, by displaying the transporter’s name and telephone number prominently and conspicuously on at least the portion of the container that is visible when the container is being used to store materials. The transporter shall mark every cart, container or receptacle of any size intended for the collection of recyclables using an identification system that gives each container a unique number or number/letter combination to enable tracking the location of carts and containers that are found placed in a public right-of-way.
C. Registration of a location for placing a recyclables cart or container and payment of the fee therefor shall authorize the transporter to have a cart or container in that location for one year, beginning January 1st and ending December 31st of the calendar year for which the location fee was paid and the permit issued. A cart or container location registration must be renewed each year thereafter and a renewal fee of $100.00 must be paid in order to renew the location registration. The registration or renewal fee must be paid in full for the year in which the location is registered regardless of when during the year the fee is paid or the location registered. Cart or container location registration fees are not transferable to a new location or to a different business entity, but must be paid for each location at which a cart or container is placed and for each distinct entity that places a cart or container.
D. Any business that places or maintains a recyclables cart, container or receptacle of any size within the City of Lakewood without first obtaining a transporter’s permit and registering the location with the City Public Works Department and paying the application registration or renewal fee shall be subject to a civil penalty of up to $500.00 per day. [Ord. 436 § 4, 2007; Ord. 337 § 8, 2004.]

13.06.350 Access for inspections and delivery of notices.
A. The permittee shall make all company premises, facilities and records related to its operations under this chapter (including, but not limited to: offices, vehicles, storage areas, nonfinancial records, records pertaining to the origin of any loads collected by the permittee, receipts for the sale or delivery of collected recyclables, customer lists, and all records related to vehicle maintenance and safety) available for inspection by Public Works Department employees within 24 hours of notice by telephone.
B. The permittee shall provide the Public Works Department with an after-hours telephone number to be used in emergencies.
C. The permittee shall notify the Public Works Department of anticipated changes in addresses and telephone numbers for any facilities regulated by this chapter, including but not limited to office, mailing address, yard location(s), and the after-hours phone number. Such notice shall be provided to the Public Works Department in writing no less than 10 business days before such change.
D. The permittee shall notify the Public Works Department in writing of changes in company contact persons and responsible officials within one week after such changes. [Ord. 337 § 9, 2004.]

13.06.360 Disposal prohibited – Record-keeping.
A. Permittees shall deliver recyclables only to manufacturers, recycling centers, material recovery facilities or other processing facilities, and shall not deliver any recyclables to a transfer station or landfill.
B. Permittees shall keep records of locations and quantities specifically identified in relation to a generator name, service date and address and invoice, documenting: where recyclables have been sold, delivered for processing, or otherwise marketed. These records shall be kept for two years from the date of collection. [Ord. 634 § 1, 2016; Ord. 337 § 10, 2004.]

13.06.370 Notice and orders.
The City Manager, or designee thereof, is authorized to adopt and enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter and may condition, revoke or deny any license or permit issued under this chapter. Such administrative actions shall be conducted through issuance and service of notice and orders as referenced under the City’s general business license regulations as stated in LMC Title 5. Appeals of administrative decisions or actions related to this title shall be governed by the procedures of LMC 5.02.190. [Ord. 436 § 5, 2007; Ord. 337 § 11, 2004.]

13.06.380 Private right of action.
Any person may bring a civil action for violation of this chapter by seeking injunctive relief or actual or nominal damages in Pierce County Superior Court. Any such person who prevails under this section shall be entitled to his, her or its reasonable costs and attorney’s fees, including those on appeal. [Ord. 337 § 12, 2004.]

Title 14 ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION*

Chapters:
14.02        Environmental Rules and Procedures
14.142       Critical Areas and Natural Resource Lands Authority, Intent, and General Provisions
14.146       Geologically Hazardous Areas
14.150       Aquifer Recharge Areas
14.154       Fish and Wildlife Habitat Areas
14.158       Flood Hazard Areas
14.162       Wetlands Areas
14.165       Definitions
* Prior legislation note: Ord. 362 repealed Chapters 14.138 through 14.170 and enacted a Title 14A; Ord. 590 repealed Chapters 14.06 through 14.134. Prior to its repeal and reenactment, the title was based on the provisions of Ords. 56, 57 and 585.

Chapter 14.02 ENVIRONMENTAL RULES AND PROCEDURES

Sections:
14.02.010    Authority.
14.02.020    Abbreviations.
14.02.030    Adoption by reference.
14.02.035    Options and additions to provisions adopted by reference.
14.02.040    Additional definitions.
14.02.050    Responsible official designated.
14.02.060    Timing of environmental review.
14.02.070    Determination of categorical exemption.
14.02.080    Use of exemptions.
14.02.090    Environmentally sensitive areas.
14.02.100    Emergency action exemption.
14.02.110    Environmental checklist required.
14.02.120    Fees and costs.
14.02.130    Environmental impact statement.
14.02.140    Public notice.
14.02.150    Internal circulation of environmental documents.
14.02.160    Timing of decision on nonexempt action.
14.02.170    Authority to condition or deny proposals.
14.02.180    Substantive authority.
14.02.190    City responsibilities as consulted agency.
14.02.200    Environmental appeals.
14.02.210    Time limitation on appeals.
14.02.220    Fee to accompany notice of appeal.
14.02.230    Notice of hearing.
14.02.240    Public hearing.
14.02.250    Testimony – Recording.
14.02.260    Substantial weight – Burden of proof.
14.02.270    Decision of the Hearing Examiner.
14.02.280    Dismissal of appeal.
14.02.300    Judicial review – Limitations for appeal.

14.02.010 Authority.
These procedures are adopted under authority of the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA), RCW 43.21C.120, and the SEPA rules, WAC 197-11-904. [Ord. 42 § 1, 1996.]

14.02.020 Abbreviations.
The abbreviations used in this chapter are defined as follows:
A. DEIS – Draft Environmental Impact Statement.
B. DNS – Declaration of Nonsignificance.
C. DS – Declaration of Significance.
D. EIS – Environmental Impact Statement.
E. FEIS – Final Environmental Impact Statement.
F. NEPA – National Environmental Policy Act.
G. SEIS – Supplemental Impact Statement.
H. SEPA – State Environmental Policy Act.
I. WAC – Washington Administrative Code. [Ord. 42 § 1, 1996.]

14.02.030 Adoption by reference.
The following sections of Chapter 173-806 WAC, together with the sections of Chapter 197-11 WAC adopted by reference therein, as presently existing and as may subsequently be amended, are hereby adopted by reference, as if fully set forth herein:
173-806-010 Authority.
173-806-020 Purpose of this part and adoption by reference.
173-806-030 Additional definitions.
173-806-040 Designation of responsible official.
173-806-050 Lead agency determination and responsibilities.
173-806-053 Transfer of lead agency status to a state agency.
173-806-055 Additional considerations in time limits applicable to the SEPA process.
173-806-058 Additional timing considerations.
173-806-065 Purpose of this part and adoption by reference.
173-806-070 Flexible thresholds for categorical exemptions.
173-806-080 Use of exemptions.
173-806-090 Environmental checklist.
173-806-100 Mitigated DNS.
173-806-110 Purpose of this part and adoption by reference.
173-806-120 Preparation of EIS – Additional considerations.
173-806-125 Additional elements to be covered in an EIS.
173-806-128 Adoption by reference.
173-806-132 Public notice.
173-806-140 Designation of official to perform consulted agency responsibilities for the City.
173-806-150 Purpose of this part and adoption by reference.
173-806-155 Purpose of this part and adoption by reference.
173-806-160 Substantive authority.
173-806-170 Appeals.
173-806-173 Notice/statute of limitations.
173-806-175 Purpose of this part and adoption by reference.
173-806-180 Adoption by reference.
173-806-185 Purpose of this part and adoption by reference.
173-806-205 Effective date.
173-806-220 Severability.
173-806-230 Adoption by reference. [Ord. 172 § 1, 1998; Ord. 42 § 1, 1996.]

14.02.035 Options and additions to provisions adopted by reference.
In addition to the WAC provisions adopted by reference herein, the following options are adopted and incorporated herein by this reference:
A. WAC 173-806-050 Lead agency determination and responsibilities. (4) If the City of Lakewood or any of its departments receives a lead agency determination made by another agency that appears inconsistent with the criteria of WAC 197-11-253 or 197-11-922 through 197-11-940, it may object to the determination. Any objection must be made to the agency originally making the determination and resolved within 15 days of receipt of the determination, or the City/county must petition the Department of Ecology for a lead agency determination under WAC 197-11-946 within the 15-day time period. Any such petition on behalf of the City/county may be initiated by the City’s SEPA responsible official.
B. WAC 173-806-058 Additional timing considerations. (1) For nonexempt proposals, the DNS or draft EIS for the proposal shall accompany the City’s/county’s staff recommendation to any appropriate advisory body, such as the Planning Commission.
C. WAC 173-806-100 Mitigated DNS. (1) As provided in this section and in WAC 197-11-350, the responsible official may issue a DNS based on conditions attached to the proposal by the responsible official or on changes to, or clarifications of, the proposal made by the applicant.
    3. The responsible official should respond to the request for early notice within 15 working days. The response shall:
        a. Be written;
        b. State whether the City/county currently considers issuance of a DS likely and, if so, indicate the general or specific area(s) of concern that is/are leading the City/county to consider a DS; and
        c. State that the applicant may change or clarify the proposal to mitigate the indicated impacts, revising the environmental checklist and/or permit application as necessary to reflect the changes or clarifications.
    6. (Note: GMA counties/cities may use either Option 1 or 2; non-GMA counties/cities must use Option 1. A mitigated DNS is issued under either WAC 197-11-340(2), requiring a 14-day comment period and public notice, or WAC 197-11-355, which may require no additional comment period beyond the comment period on the notice of application. [Ord. 172 § 3, 1998.]

14.02.040 Additional definitions.
In addition to those definitions set forth in LMC 14.02.030, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context indicates otherwise:
“Advisory body” means any body, established by the City Council, the responsibilities of which include review of development proposals for the purpose of making recommendations to the Council.
“Council” means the City Council of the City of Lakewood.
“Department” means the Department of Community Development.
“Development” means the rezoning of property, the subdivision of land, the construction of buildings, or any physical alteration of the land which is subject to City approval and to the requirements of SEPA.
“Final staff evaluation of checklist” means that documentation and report of City staff’s analysis of the checklist and any identified impacts. The report identifies any necessary findings, policies and the type of determination.
“Hearing Examiner” means the City Hearing Examiner as established by City of Lakewood Ordinance No. 13.
“SEPA” means Chapter 43.21C RCW, as now existing or as may subsequently be amended.
“SEPA rules” means Chapter 197-11 WAC, adopted by the Department of Ecology, as now existing or as may subsequently be amended.
Terms Adopted by Reference. Unless the context clearly indicates an intent otherwise, any time that the provisions of the Washington Administrative Code adopted by reference in this chapter refer to legislative body, city, county or otherwise, so long as such reference is to the jurisdiction adopting and/or enforcing the environmental policies thereof, or an official thereof, such references shall be construed to mean the City of Lakewood, or an appropriate official thereof. Unless the context clearly indicates an intent otherwise, any time that the provisions of the Washington Administrative Code adopted by reference in this chapter refer to the planning commission of the legislative body adopting and/or enforcing the environmental policies thereof, such references shall be construed to mean the City of Lakewood Planning Commission. Any reference to the position title, department, or office of the jurisdiction adopting and/or enforcing the environmental policies thereof, or an official thereof, such references shall be construed to mean the City of Lakewood SEPA responsible official. [Ord. 604 § 2, 2015; Ord. 172 § 2, 1998; Ord. 42 § 1, 1996.]

14.02.050 Responsible official designated.
The City Manager, or designee, shall be the SEPA responsible official for the City, and shall carry out the duties and functions of the City when it is acting as the lead agency or as a consulted agency under SEPA and the SEPA rules. [Ord. 42 § 1, 1996.]

14.02.060 Timing of environmental review.
A. Subject to the provisions of subsection B of this section, the timing of environmental review shall be determined by the responsible official on a case-by-case basis, consistent with the requirements of SEPA and the SEPA rules. In general, the environmental review process shall take place at the conceptual stage of a project, rather than at the detailed design stage. If the City’s only action will be a decision on a building permit or other license that requires detailed project plans and specifications, the applicant or prospective applicant shall be given the opportunity for environmental review under SEPA prior to submittal of such detailed project plans and specifications. An applicant or prospective applicant wishing to take advantage of the opportunity for preapplication environmental review shall submit a completed environmental checklist to the department, except as otherwise provided by WAC 197-11-315(a).
B. At the latest, the City shall begin the environmental review process when a completed application for City approval of a nonexempt action has been received. The official responsible shall make a threshold determination on a completed application within 90 days after the application and supporting documentation are complete and received, with the determination being made on the direct and indirect cumulative effects on the elements of the environment set forth in WAC 197-11-444. The applicant may request an additional 30 days for the threshold determination. [Ord. 42 § 1, 1996.]

14.02.070 Determination of categorical exemption.
A. Any City department which receives an application for a proposal, or initiates a proposal which is potentially subject to the requirements of SEPA, shall make the following determinations:
    1. Whether the proposal is an “action” as defined by WAC 197-11-704; and
    2. If the proposal is an “action,” whether it is categorically exempt from the requirements of SEPA; and
    3. If the proposal is a nonexempt action, whether appropriate environmental review of the project has been conducted or commenced.
B. The responsible official or the responsible official’s designee shall assist any department in making the determinations required by this section, upon request by the department.
C. The City of Lakewood recognizes that the list of categorical exemptions included in the SEPA rules cannot be relied upon as the final determination of whether a proposed project, regardless of is environmental impact, must comply with SEPA and this chapter. Where the responsible official determines that a proposal has a reasonable likelihood of causing more than a moderate adverse impact on environmental quality, whether that impact is direct, indirect or cumulative, environmental review under SEPA shall be conducted.
D. It is recognized that a particular development or land use, though otherwise consistent with City regulations and policies, may create adverse impacts upon facilities, services, natural systems or the surrounding area when aggregated with the impacts of prior or reasonably anticipated future developments. The City shall evaluate such cumulative environmental impacts and make its environmental determinations and substantive decisions accordingly.
E. Pursuant to the provisions of WAC 197-11-800, proposed actions shall be categorically exempt from threshold determinations and EIS requirements if they do not exceed the levels of activity identified as follows:
    1. The construction or location of residential structures of up to nine dwelling units.
    2. The construction of an office, school, commercial recreational, service or storage building with up to 12,000 square feet of gross floor area.
    3. The construction of an associated or separate parking lot designed for up to 40 automobiles.
    4. Any landfill or excavation of up to 500 cubic yards throughout the total lifetime of the fill or excavation. [Ord. 500 § 1, 2009; Ord. 42 §1, 1996.]

14.02.080 Use of exemptions.
A. When receiving an application for a license, or when receiving a City initiated proposal, the responsible official shall determine whether the license and/or the proposal is exempt. The responsible official’s determination that a proposal is exempt shall be final and not subject to administrative review. If a proposal is exempt, none of the procedural requirements of this chapter apply to the proposal. The City shall not require completion of an environmental checklist for an exempt proposal.
B. In assessing whether or not a proposal is exempt, the responsible official shall determine that the proposal is properly defined and shall identify the governmental licenses required (WAC 197-11-060). If a proposal includes exempt and nonexempt actions, the official shall determine the lead agency, even if the license application that triggers the Department’s consideration is exempt.
C. If a proposal includes both exempt and nonexempt actions, the City may authorize exempt actions prior to compliance with the procedural requirements of this chapter, except that:
    1. The City shall not give authorization for:
        a. Any nonexempt action;
        b. Any action that would have an adverse environmental impact; or
        c. Any action that would limit the choice of the responsible alternatives;
    2. The City may withhold approval of an exempt action that would lead to modification of the physical environment, when such modification would serve no purpose if later approval of a related major action is not secured;
    3. The City may withhold approval of exempt actions that would lead to substantial financial expenditures by a private applicant when the expenditures would serve no purpose if later approval of a major related action is not secured. [Ord. 42 § 1, 1996.]

14.02.090 Environmentally sensitive areas.
A. In accordance with WAC 197-11-908, the City of Lakewood designates environmentally sensitive areas as follows:
    1. Areas designated natural by the City’s shoreline management master program environmental maps;
    2. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, erosion hazard areas, steep slopes, wetlands and streams, as described in the City’s critical areas and natural resources regulations;
    3. The following categorical exemptions set forth in WAC 197-11-800 shall not apply when a project proposal is located in or partially within sensitive areas: WAC 197-11-800(1), (2c), (2e), (2f), (2g), (6a), and (25h).
B. The City shall treat proposals located wholly or partially within an environmentally sensitive area no differently than other proposals under this chapter, making a threshold determination for all such proposals. The City shall not automatically require an EIS for a proposal merely because it is proposed for location in an environmentally sensitive area.
C. Certain exemptions do not apply to lands covered by water, regardless of whether such lands covered by water are mapped. [Ord. 42 § 1, 1996.]

14.02.100 Emergency action exemption.
A. The following actions which must be undertaken immediately or for which there is insufficient time for full compliance with this chapter are exempt from the procedural requirements of this chapter:
    1. Actions necessary to prevent an imminent threat to public health or safety;
    2. Actions necessary to prevent an imminent danger to public or private property;
    3. Actions necessary to prevent an imminent threat of serious environmental degradation.
B. The responsible official shall determine on a case-by-case basis emergency action which satisfies the general requirements of this section.
C. Adoption of interim zoning or moratorium. [Ord. 42 § 1, 1996.]

14.02.110 Environmental checklist required.
A. Whenever the Department determines that a proposal is a nonexempt action for which appropriate environmental review has not been conducted or commenced, the Department shall prepare or shall require the action proponent to prepare and submit an environmental checklist. Upon completion or receipt of a completed environmental checklist, the Department shall immediately transmit the following to the responsible official, or designee:
    1. The original, signed copy of the environmental checklist;
    2. A copy of any completed application form in the Department’s possession relating to the proposal;
    3. A copy of any project description, conceptual plan or plot plan which may have been prepared or submitted;
    4. Any additional information in the Department’s possession addressing the proposed action’s environmental impacts.
B. The environmental review process shall not begin until a complete application (an environmental checklist and requested supporting materials) is received by the responsible official. Incomplete environmental checklist applications will be returned to the applicant for completion as directed by the responsible official.
C. A department initiating a nonexempt City action may request that the responsible official, or designee, assist the department in preparing the necessary environmental checklist.
D. The provisions of this section shall not apply when the responsible official and the proponent of a nonexempt action agree in writing that the proposal is likely to have significant adverse environmental impacts, and further agree that an environmental impact statement (EIS) will be prepared.
E. The responsible official may determine that the City will complete all or part of an environmental checklist for a private proposal with its own staff, or may contract with one or more consultants to prepare or assist in preparation of a checklist, and may charge and collect fees from the applicant to cover costs incurred by the City in preparation of the checklist, if either of the following circumstances exist:
    1. The City has technical information on a question or questions that is unavailable to the applicant; or
    2. The applicant has provided inaccurate or incomplete information on previous proposals or on proposals currently under consideration.
If fees are to be collected, the applicant shall be advised of the estimated costs, and shall be required to make payment of such costs prior to the actual preparation of all or part of the environmental checklist. [Ord. 42 § 1, 1996.]

14.02.120 Fees and costs.
In addition to the fees and costs provided in LMC 14.02.110 and elsewhere in this chapter, the applicant shall be responsible for and shall reimburse the City for all costs and expenses incurred by the City in enforcing the provisions of this chapter relative to his/her application or permit, and for any legal costs, including attorney’s fees, incurred by the City in taking steps to defend or support a position or decision in connection with his/her application for or issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter. [Ord. 42 § 1, 1996.]

14.02.130 Environmental impact statement.
A. Whenever the responsible official has issued a determination of significance (DS) for a nonexempt action, a draft EIS and a final EIS shall be prepared by an independent consultant hired by the City, and the under the supervision of the responsible official. It is provided, however, that it shall be the responsibility of the individual, corporation or agency initiating or proposing the action to reimburse the City for the total costs of having the draft EIS and a final EIS prepared by the consultant. Consultants hired to prepare draft EISs or final EISs shall be selected based on their expertise and knowledge related to the scoped environmental elements to be analyzed in the EIS documents. Regardless of who prepares an EIS, it is the EIS of the City and the responsible official must be satisfied that the EIS complies with this chapter, with SEPA and with the SEPA rules prior to issuance of the EIS.
B. The responsible official may determine that City staff will complete all or part of an EIS for a private proposal, or the City may contract with one or more consultants to prepare or assist in preparation of an EIS, and may charge and collect fees from the applicant to cover costs incurred by the City in preparation of the EIS, if one or more of the following circumstances exist:
    1. The City has technical information on a question or questions that is unavailable to the applicant; or
    2. The applicant has provided inaccurate or incomplete information on previous proposals or on proposals currently under consideration; or
    3. The responsible official and the applicant agree that the City will be responsible for completing the EIS.
    If fees are to be collected, the applicant shall be advised of estimated costs, and shall be required to secure payment of such costs prior to the actual preparation of the EIS. [Ord. 42 § 1, 1996.]

14.02.140 Public notice.
A. Whenever public notice is required under the SEPA rules, the responsible official shall cause notice to be given in the following manner:
    1. By posting the subject property as directed by the City Manager or designee (site specific proposals only); and
    2. By publishing notice in the official newspaper of the City.
B. Additional public notice may be provided for proposals having, or potentially having, unusually widespread, unique or significant adverse impacts, or for other proposals, at the discretion of the responsible official.
C. Where notice is required for an action which has been proposed or initiated by a party other than the City or a City department, the cost of newspaper publication of such notice or notices shall be borne by the proponent or applicant. [Ord. 42 § 1, 1996.]

14.02.150 Internal circulation of environmental documents.
A. Relevant environmental documents shall accompany proposals through existing City project review processes. The responsible official shall ensure that environmental documents are provided to decision makers in the following manner:
    1. Where a nonelected City official is to make a final decision on a nonexempt action, the responsible official shall provide that deciding official with a copy of a final staff evaluation, a determination of nonsignificance (DNS), a mitigated determination of nonsignificance (MDNS) or a final EIS upon issuance of the DNS or FEIS.
    2. Where the Hearing Examiner or other advisory body is to make a recommendation to the Council on a nonexempt action, the responsible official shall transmit to each member of the advisory body a copy of the following:
        a. Environmental checklist.
        b. A final staff evaluation of the checklist.
        c. Determination of nonsignificance (DNS).
        d. Mitigated determination of nonsignificance (MDNS).
        e. Draft environmental impact statement (DEIS).
        f. Final environmental impact statement (FEIS). [Ord. 42 §1, 1996.]

14.02.160 Timing of decision on nonexempt action.
A. For nonexempt actions, the procedural requirements of SEPA, the SEPA rules and this chapter shall be completed prior to the City’s issuance of a license, permit, or other approval, and prior to the City committing to a particular course of action, or prior to the City making a decision which would either have adverse environmental impacts, or limit the choice of reasonable alternatives.
B. A final decision on a nonexempt action for which a DNS has been issued or an EIS has been required, shall not be made until after expiration of the environmental appeal period or if, appealed, shall not be make until the decision on the appeal becomes final. [Ord. 42 § 1, 1996.]

14.02.170 Authority to condition or deny proposals.
A. The policies and goals set forth and referenced by this chapter are supplementary to other zoning, land use, and regulatory ordinances of the City.
B. The City may attach conditions to a permit or approval so long as:
    1. Such conditions are necessary to mitigate probable significant adverse environmental impacts identified in environmental documents prepared pursuant to this chapter; and
    2. Such conditions are in writing; and
    3. The mitigation measures included in such conditions are reasonable and capable of being accomplished; and
    4. The City has considered whether other local, state, or federal mitigation measures applicable to the proposal are sufficient to mitigate the identified impacts; and
    5. Such conditions are based on one or more policies, plans, rules or regulations designated in LMC 14.02.030 as a basis for the exercise of substantive SEPA authority, and cited in the license, permit, ordinance, or other decision document.
C. The City may deny a permit or approval for a proposal on the basis of SEPA so long as:
    1. A finding is made that approval would result in probable significant adverse environmental impacts which are identified in a final EIS prepared pursuant to this chapter; and
    2. A finding is made that there are no reasonable mitigation measures capable of being accomplished which are sufficient to make the identified impacts nonsignificant; and
    3. The denial is based on one or more policies, plans, rules, or regulations designated in LMC 14.02.030 as a basis for the exercise of substantive SEPA authority, and cited in the license, permit, ordinance or other decision document.
D. If the lead agency determines, after the initial review of a project, that a proposed action could not comply with adopted plans, policies, rules or regulations, and where the City has authority other than SEPA to deny the proposal, the project can be denied outright without making a threshold determination, which denial shall be in writing. Proposed actions which are subsequently modified, amended, or deemed to be consistent with adopted plans, policies, rules or regulations shall not receive final approval until the proposed action is in full compliance with SEPA, the SEPA rules, and this chapter.
E. Where the responsible official has issued a mitigated DNS, the decision maker shall not approve the proposal until:
    1. The proponent has modified the proposal, either through modification of plans and other application materials or through a separate written instrument attached to the application, such that the mitigating measures of the mitigated DNS become part of the proposal; or
    2. The decision maker has incorporated the mitigating measures of the mitigated DNS into the license, permit, ordinance or other approval; or
    3. A combination of the aforesaid.
F. Where mitigating measures are agreed to, or imposed, and where the proponent fails to implement such mitigating measures, the City shall have the authority to revoke any permit, license or other approval granted on the basis of such mitigating measures. [Ord. 42 § 1, 1996.]

14.02.180 Substantive authority.
A. The City adopts the following policies as the basis for the City’s exercise of authority pursuant to this section:
    1. The City shall use all practicable means, consistent with other essential considerations of state policy, to improve and coordinate plans, functions, programs, and resources to the end that the state and its citizens may:
        a. Fulfill the responsibilities of each generation as a trustee of the environment for succeeding generations;
        b. Endeavor to achieve for the people of Lakewood safe, healthful, and aesthetically pleasing surroundings;
        c. Attain the widest range of beneficial uses of the environment without degradation, risk to health or safety, or other undesirable and unintended consequences;
        d. Preserve important historic, cultural and natural aspects of our national heritage;
        e. Maintain, wherever possible, an environment which supports diversity and variety of individual choice;
        f. Achieve a balance between population and resource use;
        g. Enhance the quality of renewable resources and approach the maximum attainable recycling of depletable resources.
B. The City supplements its policies set forth herein by the policies, plans, rules and regulations identified, referenced and/or described (in concept or actual name), as they may now exist or as they may subsequently be amended or developed, as a basis for the exercise of substantive authority to approve, condition or deny proposed actions under RCW 43.21C.060 of SEPA, as follows:
    1. City comprehensive plan and related community plan;
    2. Pierce County Shoreline Master Programs and City shoreline use regulations;
    3. Lakewood area update plan;
    4. Lakewood capital improvements plan;
    5. Lakewood six-year street plan;
    6. State growth management legislation or initiatives;
    7. Lakewood subarea plans and policies;
    8. Zoning Code and zoning map;
    9. Subdivision regulations;
    10. Water quality ordinance;
    11. Surface Water Design Manual;
    12. Critical areas and natural resource lands regulations;
    13. Site development regulations;
    14. Flood damage prevention regulations;
    15. Public and private street standards;
    16. Title 8, Pierce County Code, Health and Welfare;
    17. State Environmental Policy Act. [Ord. 42 § 1, 1996.]

14.02.190 City responsibilities as consulted agency.
In carrying out the City’s duties as a consulted agency, the responsible official shall request information from any department potentially affected by or having expertise on a proposal. Information timely received by the responsible official in response to such request shall be transmitted to the lead agency. The responsible official may transmit such information by forwarding copies of any department responses, or by consolidating all department responses into a single City response. [Ord. 42 § 1, 1996.]

14.02.200 Environmental appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a final threshold determination of significance, final determination of nonsignificance, or inadequacy of a final EIS in the case of Process I, II, and III application types (as described in LMC 18A.02.502) may file an appeal. Such appeals shall be considered by the Hearing Examiner in conjunction with any required hearing for the project application, or as a separate hearing if no predecision hearing is required. An appeal of a determination of significance may be considered by the Hearing Examiner prior to the hearing on the proposed action or permit. Appeal of intermediate steps under SEPA (e.g., lead agency determination, scoping, draft EIS adequacy) shall not be allowed. In the case of Process IV and V applications (as described in LMC 18A.02.502) the determinations of the environmental official shall be considered final, and no administrative appeal is allowed. [Ord. 305 § 1, 2003; Ord. 42 § 1, 1996.]

14.02.210 Time limitation on appeals.
A written notice of appeal identifying the grounds for appeal must be filed with the City Clerk within 10 days of the date of issuance of the final threshold determination of significance, final determination of nonsignificance, or final EIS. [Ord. 42 § 1, 1996.]

14.02.220 Fee to accompany notice of appeal.
A fee as set forth in the City’s fee resolution shall accompany the written notice of appeal and be filed within the appeal period with the City Clerk. No notice of appeal shall be accepted unless accompanied by full payment of the filing fee. This fee shall be utilized to cover publication costs, mailing, and other costs directly associated with the appeal. [Ord. 42 § 1, 1996.]

14.02.230 Notice of hearing.
Notice of appeal, timely filed shall be transmitted by the City Clerk to the Hearing Examiner and the SEPA responsible official. The Hearing Examiner shall determine the date, time, and place of a public hearing to consider the appeal, and shall notify the parties thereof. [Ord. 42 §1, 1996.]

14.02.240 Public hearing.
A public hearing upon appeal of a threshold determination shall be conducted by the Hearing Examiner. [Ord. 42 § 1, 1996.]

14.02.250 Testimony – Recording.
All testimony taken at any public hearing shall be taken under oath. The hearing shall be recorded electronically. [Ord. 42 § 1, 1996.]

14.02.260 Substantial weight – Burden of proof.
A threshold determination by the responsible official is entitled to substantial weight. The burden shall be on the appellant to establish that the determination is in error. [Ord. 42 § 1, 1996.]

14.02.270 Decision of the Hearing Examiner.
Upon the basis of all of the information received in public hearing, and all information relied upon by the responsible official, the Hearing Examiner shall prepare a written decision, including findings of fact and conclusions, regarding the SEPA appeal. Such decision shall be final and conclusive. [Ord. 305 § 2, 2003; Ord. 42 § 1, 1996.]

14.02.280 Dismissal of appeal.
The Hearing Examiner may summarily dismiss an appeal without hearing, when such appeal is determined by the Hearing Examiner to be without merit on its face, frivolous, or brought merely to impede a proposal or secure a delay. [Ord. 42 § 1, 1996.]

14.02.300 Judicial review – Limitations for appeal.
The final decision of the Hearing Examiner on appeal from a final SEPA determination of specific Process I, II, and III applications (as described in LMC 18A.02.502) may be appealed to the Superior Court of Pierce County in accordance with Chapter 36.70C RCW, the Land Use Petition Act. Any such appeals must be brought within the time limits specified therein. Any such judicial review shall be conducted on the record compiled by the Hearing Examiner, consistent with other applicable law. [Ord. 305 § 4, 2003; Ord. 42 § 1, 1996.]

Chapter 14.142 CRITICAL AREAS AND NATURAL RESOURCE LANDS AUTHORITY, INTENT, AND GENERAL PROVISIONS*

Sections:
14.142.010   Authority and title.
14.142.020   Intent.
14.142.030   Interpretation.
14.142.040   Applicability and mapping.
14.142.050   Permitted uses.
14.142.060   Regulated uses/activities.
14.142.070   Exemptions.
14.142.080   Reasonable use exception.
14.142.090   Reasonable use exception and modification of critical area requirements for individual single-family residences.
14.142.100   Process.
14.142.110   Variances.
14.142.120   Current use assessment.
14.142.130   Compliance provisions.
14.142.140   Appeal procedures.
14.142.150   Financial guarantees.
14.142.160   Fees.
14.142.170   Title and pat notification.
14.142.180   Nonconforming uses.
14.142.190   Administrative procedures and technical criteria.
14.142.200   Severability.
* Prior legislation note: Ord. 362 repealed provisions concerning critical areas and natural resource lands that were formerly in Chapters 14.138 and 14.142, based on the provisions of Ord. 56.

14.142.010 Authority and title.
This title is established pursuant to the requirements of the Growth Management Act (RCW 36.70A.060) and the State Environmental Protection Act (Chapter 43.21C RCW). This title shall be known as the “Critical Areas and Natural Resource Lands Regulations.” [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.142.020 Intent.
It is the intent of the critical areas and resource lands regulations to:
A. Designate and protect critical areas and natural resource lands, including wetlands, critical aquifer recharge areas, fish and wildlife habitat areas, geologically hazardous areas, flood hazard areas, and mineral resource lands.
B. Protect the natural environment, including air and water, to preserve the community’s high quality of life.
C. Protect unique, fragile and valuable elements of the environment, including fish and wildlife habitat; including suitable habitats to maintain native fish and wildlife species within their natural geographic distribution so that isolated sub-populations are not created.
D. Protect the public against losses from:
    1. Costs of public emergency rescue and relief operations where the causes are avoidable.
    2. Degradation of the natural environment and the expense associated with repair or replacement.
E. Protect members of the public and public resources and facilities from injury, loss of life, or property damage due to landslides, steep slope failures, erosion, seismic events, or flooding.
F. Avoid, minimize and mitigate for impacts arising from land development and other activities affecting critical areas to maintain their ecological functions and values including water quality, flood attenuation, habitat, recreation, education, and cultural preservation.
G. Provide the public with sufficient information and notice of potential risks associated with developing in and adjacent to critical areas.
H. Implement the goals and requirements of the Growth Management Act and the Lakewood comprehensive plan. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.142.030 Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this title, all provisions shall be:
A. Considered the minimum necessary;
B. Liberally construed to serve the purposes of this title; and,
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers under state statute. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.142.040 Applicability and mapping.
A. Applicability. This title shall apply to all lands, land uses and development activity in the City which are designated as critical areas or natural resource lands by the City, including wetlands. Properties containing critical areas or natural resource lands are subject to this title. When the requirements of this title are more stringent than those of other City codes and regulations, the requirements of this title shall apply.
Where a site contains two or more critical areas, the site shall meet the minimum standards and requirements for each identified critical area as set forth in this title.
Critical areas on lands subject to the Washington State Shoreline Management Act (SMA) and regulated by the City’s shoreline management regulations shall be regulated under the shoreline provisions and are not subject to the procedural and substantive requirements of this title. Nothing in this section, however, is intended to limit or change the quality of information to be applied in protecting critical areas within shorelines of the state. Shorelines of the state shall not be considered critical areas under this title except to the extent that specific areas located within such shorelines qualify for critical area designation based on the definition of critical areas provided by RCW 36.70A.030(5) and have been designated as such by the City’s critical areas regulations.
If the City’s shoreline regulations do not include land necessary for buffers for critical areas that occur within shoreline areas, then the City shall continue to regulate those critical areas and their required buffers pursuant to this title.
B. Mapping. Maps may be developed and maintained by the City which show the general location of critical areas for informational purposes. The actual presence of critical areas and the applicability of these regulations shall be determined by the classification criteria established for each critical area. [Ord. 590 § 2, 2014; Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.142.050 Permitted uses.
Uses permitted on properties designated as critical areas or natural resource lands shall be the same as those permitted in the zone classification shown in the City’s Land Use and Development Code unless specifically prohibited by this title. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.142.060 Regulated uses/activities.
A. Unless the requirements of this title are met, the City shall not grant any approval or permission to alter the condition of any land, water or vegetation, or to construct or alter any structure or improvement including but not limited to the following: building permit, commercial or residential; binding site plan; conditional use permit; franchise right-of-way construction permit; site development permit; master plan development; right-of-way permit; shoreline conditional use permit; shoreline environmental redesignation; shoreline substantial development permit; shoreline variance; large lot subdivision, short subdivision; special use permit; subdivision; unclassified use permit; utility and other use permit; variance; zone reclassification; or any subsequently adopted permit or required approval not expressly exempted by this chapter.
B. Compliance with these regulations does not remove an applicant’s obligation to comply with applicable provisions of any other federal, state, or local law or regulation. Requirements include but are not limited to those of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, and the Washington Department of Ecology, which must be met prior to commencing activities affecting wetlands, except as addressed in LMC 14.162.130 regarding Corps of Engineers Section 404 individual permits.
C. The following activities within a critical area and/or buffer, unless exempted by LMC 14.142.070, shall be regulated:
    1. Removing, excavating, disturbing or dredging soil, sand, gravel, minerals, organic matter or materials of any kind;
    2. Dumping, discharging or filling;
    3. Draining, flooding or disturbing the water level or water table. In addition, an activity which involves intentional draining, flooding or disturbing the water level or water table in a wetland, in which the activity itself occurs outside the wetland and buffer, shall be considered a regulated activity;
    4. Driving pilings or placing obstructions, including placement of utility lines;
    5. Constructing, reconstructing, demolishing or altering the size of any structure or infrastructure;
    6. Altering the character of a wetland by destroying or altering vegetation through clearing, harvesting, cutting, intentional burning, shading or planting;
    7. Activities which result in significant changes in water temperature or physical or chemical characteristics of wetland water sources, including changes in quantity of water and pollutant level;
    8. Application of pesticides, fertilizers and/or other chemicals, unless demonstrated not to be harmful to wetland habitat or wildlife;
    9. The division or redivision of land.
D. The Department may require protection measures or erosion control measures such as temporary or permanent fencing to provide for protection of a wetland and buffer when any of the above activities are proposed on a site, but are not proposed within a wetland and/or buffer. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.142.070 Exemptions.
The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this title:
A. Existing Agricultural Activities. The activities cease to be existing when the area on which they were conducted has been converted to a nonagricultural use or has lain idle both more than five years and so long that modifications to the hydrological regime are necessary to resume agricultural activities, unless the idle land is registered in a federal or state soils conservation program.
B. Maintenance or reconstruction of existing roads, paths, bicycle ways, trails, bridges, and associated storm drainage facilities; provided, that reconstruction does not involve significant expansion of facilities. Construction of curbs, gutters, sidewalks or other incidental improvements to existing roadways shall generally be considered to fall within this exemption when undertaken pursuant to best management practices to avoid impacts to critical areas.
C. Activities on improved portions of roads, rights-of-way or easements, provided there is no expansion of ground coverage.
D. Maintenance or reconstruction of existing regional storm drainage facilities; provided, that reconstruction does not involve expansion of facilities.
E. For the following utility line activities, when undertaken pursuant to best management practices to avoid impacts to critical areas:
    1. Normal and routine maintenance or repair of existing utility structures or right-of-way.
    2. Relocation within improved rights-of-way of electric facilities, lines, equipment, or appurtenances, not including substations, with an associated voltage of 55,000 volts or less only when required by a local government agency.
    3. Relocation within improved right-of-way of utility lines, equipment, or appurtenances only when required by a local governmental agency which approves the new location of the facilities.
    4. Installation or construction in improved City road rights-of-way, and replacement, operation, or alteration of all electric facilities, lines, equipment, or appurtenances, not including substations, with an associated voltage of 55,000 volts or less.
    5. Installation or construction in improved City road rights-of-way and replacement, operation, repair, or alteration of all utility lines, equipment, or appurtenances.
F. A utility line (any pipe or pipeline that transports any gaseous, liquid, liquefiable or slurry substance, and any cable, line or wire for the transmission of electrical energy, telephone, and telegraph messages, and radio and television communication, not including activities which drain a wetland, but including pipes that convey drainage from one area to another) may be placed in an underground trench within a Category II, III or IV wetland or its buffer. There must be no resulting changes in preconstruction contours, and trench excavation materials that are temporarily sidecast must be stabilized to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All sidecast materials shall be replaced within the trench or removed after 90 days, unless an extension is granted by the Community Development Department. The trench shall be the minimum size required to construct the utility line. The top 12 inches of the trench shall be backfilled with topsoil from the trench excavation. Trenches in wetlands shall be backfilled with wetland topsoil from the excavation, and appropriate vegetation planted to restore the site to a nearly as practical the pretrenching condition. Trench excavation should be restricted to the dry season. All permits from other regulatory agencies must be obtained.
G. Reconstruction, remodeling, or maintenance of existing single-family residential structures and accessory structures; provided, that cumulative expansion of the building footprint does not increase by more than 25 percent from its size as of October 8, 1991 (the effective date of Pierce County Critical Areas Regulations), and that the new construction or related activity does not further intrude into the critical area or related buffer. The exemption shall not apply to reconstruction which is proposed as a result of structural damage associated with a critical area, such as slope failure in a landslide hazard area.
H. Reconstruction, remodeling, or maintenance of structures, other than single-family structures and accessory structures; provided, that such reconstruction, remodeling, or maintenance does not increase the floor area nor extend beyond the existing ground coverage. The exemption shall not apply to reconstruction which is proposed as a result of site or structural damage associated with a critical area, such as slope failure in a landslide hazard area.
I. Activities in artificial wetlands, except those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland areas created to mitigate conversion of wetlands.
J. Activities affecting Category IV wetlands which are less than 1,000 square feet where the wetland is found to provide no special habitat functions for wildlife or special status plants or plant communities, and the hydrological functions of the exempted wetland are replaced to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
K. Activities in wetlands in areas managed according to a special area management plan or other plan adopted by the City and specifically designed to protect wetland resources.
L. Maintenance activities of landscaping and gardens in a wetland buffer, including, but not limited to, mowing lawns, weeding, harvesting and replanting of garden crops, pruning and planting of vegetation to maintain the condition and appearance of the site existing on February 1, 1992.
M. Activities designed for previously approved maintenance and enhancement of wetlands.
N. Placement of access roads, utility lines and utility poles across a Category IV wetland and/or a buffer for a Category IV wetland if there is no reasonable alternative.
O. Site investigative work necessary for land use application submittals such as surveys, soil logs, percolation tests and other related activities.
P. Emergency action necessary to prevent imminent threat or danger to public health or safety, or to public or private property, or serious environmental degradation. The Department shall review all proposed emergency actions to determine the existence of the emergency and reasonableness of the proposed actions taken.
Q. Activities undertaken to comply with the United States Environmental Protection Ecology Administrative Enforcement Order pursuant to the Model Toxins Control Act, including the following activities:
    1. Remediation or removal of hazardous or toxic substances;
    2. Source control; and
    3. Natural resource damage restoration.
R. Control of noxious weeds that are included on the state noxious weed list. Control methods shall be subject to review and approval of an abatement plan by the Department that minimizes the impacts to the critical area and any associated buffers.
S. Activities undertaken on the site of an existing holding pond where the water flow and/or water table is controlled by a previously approved pump system.
T. Public storm water retention/detention facilities may be constructed within Category II, III and IV wetlands or their buffers; provided, that the following conditions are met: (1) no untreated storm water is released directly into the wetlands; (2) water levels are monitored annually to ensure that preexisting functions and values of the wetland are not significantly lost through fluctuations in wetland hydrology; (3) maintenance activity within the wetland is limited to removal of invasive vegetation and/or removal of sediment accumulation at inflow structures in a manner acceptable to the Community Development Department; (4) there is no loss of wetland area; (5) all construction activity is conducted in accordance with accepted BMPs; and (6) the storm water management activity shall not adversely affect the hydro-period of the wetland or adversely affect water quality.
Storm water conveyance facilities such as bio-swales, culverts, and open trenches, that are not designed to drain wetlands, may be placed within required buffers for Category I, II, III and IV wetlands, subject to meeting the conditions listed above. This conditional exemption would not apply in situations where there are threatened or endangered species, or sensitive plants, unless approved by the State Department of Fish and Wildlife or Department of Natural Resources, respectively. All permits from other regulatory agencies must be obtained.
U. A residential building permit for a lot which was subject to previous reports and assessments as required under this title; provided, that the previous reports and assessments adequately identified the impacts associated with the current development proposal.
V. The installation of an on-site sewage disposal system for a single- or two-family dwelling may be permitted within an aquifer recharge area, subject to the issuance of a permit by the Tacoma-Pierce County Health Department (TPCHD) according to all Washington State Department of Health and Tacoma-Pierce County Board of Health requirements for on-site sewage disposal. The TPCHD shall verify and notify the applicant or applicant’s agent that the approval of the on-site sewage disposal system design complies with all Washington State Department of Health and Tacoma-Pierce County Board of Health requirements. The development shall otherwise be subject to all of the other requirements and restrictions of this title (including exclusion from other identified critical areas), the Lakewood Municipal Code, and other applicable state and federal law. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.142.080 Reasonable use exception.
A. If the application of this title would deny all reasonable use of a site, development may be allowed which is consistent with the general purposes of this title and the public interest.
B. Nothing in this title is intended to preclude all reasonable use of property. An applicant for a development proposal may file a request for a reasonable use exception which shall be considered as a Process III permit action by the City Hearing Examiner at a public hearing, following notice, as required by the City Zoning Code. The request shall include the following information:
    1. A description of the areas of the site which are critical areas and/or natural resource lands or within buffers required under this title;
    2. A description of the amount of the site which is within setbacks required by other standards of the Zoning Code;
    3. A description of the proposed development, including a site plan;
    4. An analysis of the impact that the amount of development described in subsection (B)(3) of this section would have on the natural resource land(s) or critical area(s);
    5. An analysis of what other reasonable uses with less impact on the natural resource land(s) or critical area(s) and associated buffer(s) are possible;
    6. A design of the proposal so that the amount of development proposed as reasonable use will have the least impact practicable on the natural resource land(s) and/or critical area(s);
    7. An analysis of the modifications needed to the standards of this title to accommodate the proposed development;
    8. A description of any modifications needed to the required front, side and rear setbacks; building height; and buffer widths to provide for a reasonable use while providing greater protection to the critical area(s) and/or natural resource land(s); and
    9. Such other information as the Department determines is reasonably necessary to evaluate the issue of reasonable use as it relates to the proposed development.
    10. The Department will forward a copy of a request for reasonable use exception to the Washington State Departments of Fish and Wildlife and Ecology for review, comment, and recommendation.
C. The Hearing Examiner may approve the reasonable use exception, if the Examiner determines the following criteria are met:
    1. There is no other reasonable use to the proposed development with less impact on the natural resource land(s) and/or critical area(s); and
    2. The proposed development does not pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare on or off the site; and
    3. Any alteration of the natural resource land(s) and/or critical area(s) shall be the minimum necessary to allow for reasonable use of the property; and
    4. The inability of the applicant to derive reasonable use of the property is not the result of actions by the applicant in subdividing the property or adjusting a boundary line thereby creating the undevelopable condition after October 8, 1991 (the effective date of Pierce County Critical Areas Regulations); and
    5. The proposal mitigates the impacts on the natural resource land(s) and/or critical area(s) to the maximum extent possible, while still allowing reasonable use of the site.
    6. For reasonable use exceptions involving wetlands, the additional requirements of LMC 14.162.090(D) shall apply.
D. Where appropriate in the context of LMC 14.142.110, the City shall give preference to the modification of the development standards set forth in the Land Use and Development Code (LMC Title 18A) as the first method to accommodate reasonable development on lots constrained by critical areas and/or their buffers. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.142.090 Reasonable use exception and modification of critical area requirements for individual single-family residences.
The purpose of this section is to provide an alternative to the full reasonable use exception process for an individual single-family residence on an existing, legal lot, while minimizing impacts to critical areas. The Director shall have the authority to grant minor variances and/or reasonable use exceptions to modify or waive some or all of the requirements of this chapter in accordance with the provisions of this section, subject to the following procedure:
A. The applicant for the modification or waiver of critical area requirements shall submit any critical area special studies following a preapplication review meeting as well as such other documents or studies, as requested by the Director.
B. The Director may adjust critical area requirements or grant minor variances for single-family residence applications provided:
    1. The proposal is the minimum necessary to accommodate the building footprint and access. In no case, however, shall the building footprint and outdoor activity areas encroaching into the critical area or required buffer exceed 7,000 square feet;
    2. Access shall be located so as to have the least impact on the critical area and its buffer;
    3. The proposal shall be designed to preserve the functions and values of the critical area(s) to the maximum extent possible;
    4. Adverse impacts resulting from alterations of steep slopes shall be minimized;
    5. The proposal includes on-site mitigation to the maximum extent possible;
    6. The proposal will not significantly affect drainage capabilities, flood potential, and steep slopes and landslide hazards on neighboring properties; and
    7. The proposal first develops noncritical area land, then the critical area buffer before the critical area itself is developed.
C. The Director may require reasonable, noncompensatory mitigation measures to mitigate and minimize the loss of the functions and values of the critical areas and may impose mitigating conditions to the modification, waiver or variance in order to meet the standards of this subsection.
D. Modifications pursuant to this chapter that relate only to the buffer requirements for single-family residential permits shall be reviewed and decided as a Process I determination in conjunction with the building permit application. Modifications that would impinge upon the critical area itself or require an administrative building setback variance shall be reviewed and decided using Process 2 procedures.
E. This section shall not apply to the following critical areas:
    1. Steep slope hazard areas that are unmitigatable landslide hazard areas;
    2. Steep slope hazard areas of slope greater than 70 percent where either the lot or slope are abutting and above a Class I or II wetland stream, and associated buffer, or an open storm water conveyance system.

14.142.100 Process.
A. The Department shall perform a critical areas and natural resource lands review of any City permit or approval requested for any regulated activity including, but not limited to, those set forth in LMC 14.142.060, on a site which includes or is adjacent to or abutting one or more natural resource lands or critical areas and their buffers, unless otherwise provided in this title.
B. As part of all development applications:
    1. The Department shall review the information submitted by the applicant to:
        a. Confirm the nature and type of the natural resource land and/or critical area and evaluate any required studies;
        b. Determine whether the development proposal is consistent with this title;
        c. Determine whether any proposed alterations to the site containing natural resource lands or critical areas are necessary;
        d. Determine if the mitigation and monitoring plans proposed by the applicant are sufficient to protect the public health, safety and welfare consistent with the goals, purposes, objectives and requirements of this title.
C. A threshold determination may not be made prior to Departmental review of any special studies or technical reports required by this title, except where the applicant requests a declaration of significance so that environmental review is required.
D. The City may approve, approve with conditions, or deny any development proposal in order to comply with the requirements and carry out the goals, purposes, objectives and requirements of this title.
E. Approval of a development proposal does not discharge the obligation of the applicant or any successors in interest to comply with the provisions of this title. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.142.110 Variances.
Variance applications for exceptions to the development standards of the City’s Land Use and Development Code may be used as a method for reducing impacts to critical areas. The City’s Hearing Examiner or Community Development Director may consider impacts to critical areas as an undue hardship, and as a basis for finding that unique circumstances apply to a specific property in support of the granting of variances. Variance applications shall be considered by the City according to variance procedures in the City Land Use and Development Code. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.142.120 Current use assessment.
A. The Department shall notify the Assessor-Treasurer’s Office when restrictions on development occur on a particular site.
B. The City shall provide the Assessor-Treasurer’s Office with relevant information regarding critical areas and buffering requirements of this chapter in determining the fair market value of the land. Any owner of an undeveloped buffer which has been placed in a separate tract or tracts, protective easement, public or private land trust dedication, or other similarly preserved area may petition the County Assessor-Treasurer’s Office to have that portion of land assessed consistent with those restrictions. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.142.130 Compliance provisions.
A. General Provisions. 
    1. The Department shall have authority to enforce this title, any rule or regulation adopted, and any permit, order or approval issued pursuant to this title, against any violation or threatened violation thereof. The Department is authorized to issue civil infraction citations and administrative orders, levy fines, and/or institute legal actions in court including prosecution of misdemeanor violations. Recourse to any single remedy shall not preclude recourse to any of the other remedies. Each violation of this title, or any rule or regulation adopted, or any permit, permit condition, approval or order issued pursuant to this title, shall be a separate offense, and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day’s continuance shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense. An application for a required permit, when pursued in good faith, shall stay the accumulation of violations. All costs, fees, and expenses in connection with enforcement actions may be recovered as damages against the violator.
    2. The Department is authorized to make site inspections and take such actions as necessary to enforce this title. A Department representative may enter private property with the consent of the owner or occupant or pursuant to a warrant.
    3. The Department shall have the authority to order restoration, rehabilitation or replacement measures to compensate for the destruction or degradation of critical areas or natural resource lands at the owner’s expense.
    4. The Department may bring appropriate actions at law or equity, including actions for injunctive relief, to ensure that no uses are made of critical areas or buffers which are inconsistent with this title. Enforcement actions shall include civil infractions, administrative orders, prosecution of misdemeanors, and actions for damages and restoration.
    5. Aiding or Abetting. Any person who, through an act of commission or omission procures, aids or abets in the violation shall be considered to have committed a violation of this title.
    6. Any person found to have violated any provision of this title or who knowingly makes a false statement, representation or certification in any application, record or other document filed or required to be maintained under this title or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device, record or methodology required to be maintained pursuant to this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by up to 90 days in jail and/or a fine of up to $1,000.
    7. Orders and penalties issued pursuant to this section may be appealed as provided for by this title.
B. Administrative Orders. 
    1. The Department may serve an administrative order when any person makes or partakes in any use of land, development or any activity on regulated critical areas and/or buffers in violation of this title. The order shall include the following:
        a. A description of the specific nature, location, extent and time of violation. The order may include the damage or potential damage resulting from the violation.
        b. A notice that the violation or the potential violation cease and desist or, in appropriate cases, the specific corrective action to be taken within a given time. A civil penalty may be issued with the order.
        c. Effective Date. The cease and desist order issued under this section shall become effective immediately upon receipt by the person to whom the order is directed.
        d. Compliance. Failure to comply with the terms of an administrative order can result in enforcement actions including, but not limited to, the issuance of a civil penalty.
        e. The order may include specific corrective measures to be taken to mitigate environmental damage.
        f. The order shall state that a hearing may be requested by an affected party by sending a written request for a hearing to the Hearing Examiner within 10 days of the receipt of said order and upon payment of the applicable appeal fee.
        g. Failure to comply with the terms and provisions of an administrative order issued under this title shall constitute public nuisance and may be abated and prosecuted according to applicable law including Chapter 8.16 LMC and Chapters 7.48 and 9.66 RCW.
        h. Administrative orders pursuant to this title shall be served upon the property owner or person or party occupying the property by personal service or by mailing a copy of the order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the property owner at the property address or to the mailing address listed upon public records regarding the property. In the event that personal service or certified mail service cannot be completed, or the property owner cannot be identified or located, service of the order may be achieved by posting the administrative order in a conspicuous location upon the property.
    2. Any person who undertakes any activity within a regulated critical area or buffer without first obtaining an approval required by this title, or who violates one or more conditions of any approval required by this title, shall be subject to a Class 2 civil infraction citation with a mandatory $250.00 fine. Any person who violates one or more conditions of administrative order issued under this title may be subject to prosecution for a misdemeanor, and a maximum penalty of 90 days in jail and/or a $1,000 fine may be imposed. Each violation and, in the case of a continuing violation, each violation and each day of activity without a required approval shall be a separate and distinct violation. An application for a required permit, when pursued in good faith, shall stay the accumulation of violations. The penalty provided shall be appealable as provided by law.
C. Penalties and Enforcement. Any person, party, firm, corporation or other legal entity convicted of violating any of the provisions of this title, shall be guilty of a civil infraction or misdemeanor. Each day or portion of a day during which a violation of this title is continued, committed, or permitted shall constitute a separate offense. Any development carried out contrary to the provisions of this title shall constitute a public nuisance and may be enjoined as provided by the statutes of the state of Washington.
D. Suspension and Revocation. In addition to other penalties provided for elsewhere, the Department may suspend or revoke any project permit approval if it finds that the applicant has not complied with any or all of the conditions or limitations set forth in the approval, has exceeded the scope of work set forth in the approval, or has failed to undertake the project in the manner set forth in the approved application. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.142.140 Appeal procedures.
Requests for reconsideration and appeals of a decision issued under this title shall be considered by the City according to procedures provided in the City’s Land Use and Development Code for the underlying permit or entitlement, or as an appeal of an administrative decision. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.142.150 Financial guarantees.
The City shall require an applicant to submit a financial guarantee to the City to guarantee any performance, mitigation or monitoring required as a condition of permit approval under this title. The permit shall not be granted until the financial guarantee is received by the Department.
A. Financial guarantees required under this title shall:
    1. Be in addition to the site development construction guarantee required by the City’s Site Development Regulations;
    2. Be submitted on financial guarantee forms found in the City’s Site Development Regulations Appendix;
    3. Be 125 percent of the estimate of the cost of mitigation or monitoring to allow for inflation and administration should the City have to complete the mitigation or monitoring;
    4. Be released by the City only when City officials have inspected the site(s) and the applicant’s engineer and/or appropriate technical professional has provided written confirmation that the performance, mitigation or monitoring requirements have been met. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.142.160 Fees.
The City shall establish an appropriate fee structure for permit processing and technical review by separate resolution. [Ord. 362 § 1, 2004.]

14.142.170 Title and pat notification.
If more than one critical areas/resource lands exist on the site subject to the provisions of this title, then one notice which addresses all of the critical areas/resource lands shall be sufficient. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.142.180 Nonconforming uses.
An established use or existing structure that was lawfully permitted prior to adoption of this chapter, but which is not in compliance with this chapter, may continue subject to the following:
A. Nonconforming uses shall not be expanded, or changed in any way that increases the nonconformity without a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter;
B. Existing structures shall not be expanded or altered in any manner which will increase the nonconformity without a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, except one-family dwellings and accessory structures may be expanded or altered as provided in LMC 14.142.070(G);
C. Activities or uses which are discontinued for 12 consecutive months shall be allowed to resume only if they are in compliance with this chapter; and
D. Nonconforming structures destroyed by fire, explosion, or other casualty may be replaced or restored if reconstruction is commenced within one year of such damage and is substantially completed within 18 months of the date such damage occurred. The reconstruction or restoration shall not serve to expand, enlarge or increase the nonconformity. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.142.190 Administrative procedures and technical criteria.
The Department shall develop administrative procedures, including technical requirements, to guide decision making in implementing provisions of this chapter. In particular, the Department shall adopt procedures for determining the category of specific wetlands. In so doing, the Department shall solicit the views of wetland specialists, ecologists, developers and interested citizens. Administrative procedures can be modified from time to time, and can include material by reference to state or federal criteria subject to notice to the public and consideration of public views and input. Administrative procedures shall be made available to the public upon request, and shall be consistent with the provisions of this chapter. Upon request, the Department shall provide the City Council with copies of all administrative procedures, including modifications, to ensure consistency with the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.142.200 Severability.
If any provision of this title or any of its subsections, or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this regulation or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

Chapter 14.146 GEOLOGICALLY HAZARDOUS AREAS*

Sections:
14.146.010   Purpose.
14.146.020   Designation of erosion and landslide hazard areas.
14.146.030   Protection standards for erosion and landslide hazard areas.
14.146.040   Designation of seismic hazard areas.
14.146.050   Protection standards in seismic hazard areas.
* Prior legislation note: Ord. 362 repealed provisions concerning geologically hazardous areas that were formerly in this chapter, based on the provisions of Ord. 56.

14.146.010 Purpose.
The intent behind the classification and designation of geologically hazardous areas is to classify and designate areas on which development should be prohibited, restricted, or otherwise controlled because of danger from geological hazards. For purposes of this title, geologically hazardous areas include the following: erosion and landslide hazard areas and seismic hazard areas. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.146.020 Designation of erosion and landslide hazard areas.
A. General. Erosion hazard areas are those areas that because of natural characteristics, including vegetative cover, soil texture, slope, gradient, and rainfall patterns, or human-induced changes to such characteristics, are vulnerable to erosion. Landslide hazard areas are areas potentially subject to risk of mass movement due to a combination of geologic, topographic, and hydrologic factors.
B. Classification. 
    1. Criteria. 
        a. Erosion hazard areas are identified by the presence of vegetative cover, soil texture, slope, and rainfall patterns, or human-induced changes to such characteristics, which create site conditions which are vulnerable to erosion. Erosion hazard areas are those areas that are classified as having moderate to severe, severe or very severe erosion potential by the Soil Conservation Service, United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). The geologic units considered as potential erosion hazards within areas of slopes greater than 15 percent may consist of the following: m (modified land), Qal (alluvium), Qw (wetland deposits), Qb (beach deposits), Qtf (tide flat deposits), Qls (landslide deposits), Qf (fan deposits), the Qvr and Qvs series (Vashon recessional outwash, and Steilacoom Gravel), and Qvi (ice contact deposits). These units are identified because of density and composition.
        b. Landslide hazard areas are those areas meeting any of the following criteria:
            i. Areas of historic failures, including areas of unstable old and recent landslides;
            ii. Areas with all three of the following characteristics:
                (A) Slopes steeper than 15 percent; and
                (B) Hillsides intersecting geologic contacts with a relatively permeable sediment overlying a relatively impermeable sediment or bedrock; and
                (C) Springs or ground water seepage;
            iii. Slopes that are parallel or sub-parallel to planes of weakness, such as bedding planes, joint systems, and fault planes, in subsurface materials;
            iv. Slopes having gradients steeper than 80 percent subject to rockfall during seismic shaking;
            v. Areas potentially unstable as a result of rapid stream incision, streambank erosion, and undercutting by wave action;
            vi. Areas located in a canyon or on an active alluvial fan, presently or potentially subject to inundation by debris flows or catastrophic flooding;
            vii. Any area with a slope of 30 percent or steeper and with a vertical relief of 10 or more feet. A slope is delineated by establishing the toe and top and measured by averaging the inclination over at least 10 feet of vertical relief;
            viii. Areas which have a “severe” limitation for building site development because of slope conditions, according to the Soil Conservation Service.
    2. Mapping. Areas meeting the criteria established above may be delineated in the following documents:
        a. Soil Survey of Pierce County Area, Washington, 1979, Soil Conservation Service, United States Department of Agriculture (USDA);
        b. Coastal Zone Atlas for Washington, Washington Department of Ecology;
        c. Areas designated as slumps, earthflows, mudflows, lahars, or landslides on maps published by the United States Geological Survey or Washington Department of Natural Resources Division of Geology and Earth Resources;
        d. Geologic Map of the Steilacoom 7.5-Minute Quadrangle, Washington 2003. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.146.030 Protection standards for erosion and landslide hazard areas.
A. Prohibited Development Areas. In areas meeting all three of the following characteristics, no structure or disturbance of vegetation is permitted:
    1. An area with a slope of 100 percent or steeper (45 degrees); and
    2. Hillside intersecting geological contacts with a relatively permeable sediment overlying a relatively impermeable sediment or bedrock; and
    3. Springs or ground water seepage.
B. Regulation – Geotechnical Report Required. For all regulated activities proposed within landslide and erosion hazard areas, a geotechnical report prepared by a professional geotechnical engineer or geologist licensed by the state of Washington shall be submitted (see subsection (B)(2) of this section). Where the applicant can clearly demonstrate to the Department through submittal of a geological assessment (see subsection (B)(1) of this section) that the regulated activity or any related site alterations will not occur within the landslide or erosion hazard area or any associated buffers, the requirements for a geotechnical report may be waived. A geological assessment may be prepared by a professional engineer licensed by the state of Washington with expertise in geotechnical engineering or by a professional geologist/hydrologist or soils scientist who has earned a bachelor’s degree in geology, hydrology, soils science, or closely related field from an accredited college or university, or equivalent educational training, and has at least five years experience assessing erosion and landslide hazards.
    1. Geological Assessments. 
        a. Should the applicant question the presence of landslide or erosion hazard areas on the site, the applicant may submit a geological assessment.
        b. The geological assessment shall include at a minimum the following:
            i. A description of the topography, surface and subsurface hydrology, soils, geology, and vegetation of the site; and
            ii. An evaluation of the analysis area’s inherent landslide and erosion hazards; and
            iii. A site plan of the area delineating all areas of the site subject to landslide and erosion hazards, based on mapping and criteria referenced in LMC 14.146.020.
    The submittal must include a contour map of the proposed site, at a scale of one inch equals 20 feet or as deemed appropriate by the Department. Slopes shall be clearly delineated for the ranges between 15 and 29 percent, and 30 percent or greater, including figures for aerial coverage of each slope category on the site. When site specific conditions indicate the necessity, the Department may require the topographic data to be field surveyed.
    2. Geotechnical Reports. The geotechnical report shall be prepared by a professional geotechnical engineer or geologist licensed by the state of Washington, and shall address the existing geologic, topographic, and hydrologic conditions on a site, including an evaluation of the ability of the site to accommodate the proposed activity. The geotechnical report shall include at a minimum the following:
        a. Site Geology Information Required. 
            i. Topographic Data. Submittal must include a contour map of the proposed site, at a scale of one inch equals 20 feet or as deemed appropriate by the Department. Slopes shall be clearly delineated for the ranges between 15 and 29 percent, and 30 percent or greater, including figures for aerial coverage of each slope category on the site. When site specific conditions indicate the necessity, the Department may require the topographic data to be field surveyed.
            ii. Subsurface Data. Submittal must include boring logs and exploration methods; soil and rock stratification, ground water levels and seasonal changes of ground water levels. Subsurface data shall include any evidence of the presence of any organic fill or other conditions that would have the potential to affect buildings or development on the site.
            iii. Site History. Submittal must include a description of any prior grading, soil instability, or slope failure.
            iv. Seismic Hazard. Submittal of data concerning the vulnerability of the site to seismic events, including potential for liquefaction of soils.
        b. Geotechnical Engineering Information Required. 
            i. Slope stability studies and opinion(s) of slope stability for the predeveloped and post-developed condition. Site specific setbacks and buffers from landslide hazard areas should be based on the results of the stability analysis;
            ii. Proposed angles of cut and fill slopes and site grading requirements;
            iii. Structural foundation requirements and estimated foundation settlements;
            iv. Soil compaction criteria;
            v. Proposed surface and subsurface drainage;
            vi. Lateral earth pressures;
            vii. Vulnerability of the site to erosion;
            viii. Suitability of on-site soil for use as fill;
            ix. Laboratory data and soil index properties for soil samples; and
            x. Building limitations.
    Where a valid geotechnical report has been prepared within the last five years for a specific site, and where the proposed land use activity and surrounding site conditions are unchanged, said report may be utilized and a new report may not be required. If any changed environmental conditions are associated with the site, or surrounding the site, the applicant shall submit an amendment to the geotechnical report.
    The development proposal may be approved, approved with conditions, or denied based on the Department’s evaluation of the ability of the proposed mitigation measures to reduce risks associated with the erosion and landslide hazard area.
    3. Protection – Performance Standards. The Department shall evaluate all geotechnical reports for landslide and erosion hazard areas to ensure that the following standards are met:
        a. Location and Extent of Development. 
            i. Development shall be located to minimize disturbance and removal of vegetation;
            ii. Structures shall be clustered where possible to reduce disturbance and maintain natural topographic character; and
            iii. Structures shall conform to the natural contours of the slope and foundations should be tiered where possible to conform to existing topography of the site.
        b. Design of Development. 
            i. All development proposals shall be designed to minimize the building footprint and other disturbed areas within the identified geologically hazardous area;
            ii. All development shall be designed to minimize impervious lot coverage;
            iii. Roads, walkways and parking areas shall be designed to parallel the natural contours;
            iv. Access ways shall be designed to avoid geological hazards to the extent feasible. If hazardous areas cannot be avoided, then hazards shall be mitigated as directed by a professional engineer licensed by the state of Washington.
        The Department may approve, approve with conditions, or deny development proposals based on these performance standards.
    4. Protection – Buffer Requirement. A buffer, consisting of undisturbed natural vegetation, and measured in a perpendicular direction from all landslide and erosion hazard areas, shall be required from the top of slope and toe of slope of all landslide or erosion hazard areas that measure 10 feet or more in vertical elevation change from top to toe of slope, as identified in the geotechnical report, maps, and field-checking. The minimum buffer distance requirements from the top of slope and toe of slope of landslide or erosion hazard areas shall be the same as for setbacks from slopes as identified in the International Building Code Section 1805.3, as may be amended by the State Building Code Council, or as indicated by a site-specific geotechnical report. In addition, a setback from the buffer area shall be provided as described in subsection (B)(6) of this section. In no case shall the building setback from the top, sides and toe of a landslide hazard area be less than 10 feet.
    To increase the functional attributes of the buffer, the Department may require that the buffer be enhanced through planting of appropriate native species that will provide effective protection against erosion and landslides. The edge of the buffer area shall be clearly staked, flagged, and fenced prior to any site clearing or construction. The buffer boundary markers shall be clearly visible, durable, and permanently affixed to the ground. Site-clearing shall not commence until the engineer has submitted written notice to the Department that buffer requirements of this chapter are met. Field-marking shall remain until all construction and clearing phases are completed, and final approval has been granted by the Department. The identified critical area and buffer shall be placed in a separate critical area tract or tracts, protective easement, public or private land trust dedication, or similarly preserved through an appropriate permanent protective mechanism as determined by the Department.
    5. Modifications to Buffer Width. When the geotechnical report demonstrates that a lesser buffer distance, and design and engineering solutions, will meet the intent of this chapter, such reduced buffer and design and engineering solutions may be permitted. Should the geotechnical report indicate that a greater buffer than that required by subsection (B)(4) of this section is needed to meet the intent of this chapter, the greater buffer shall be required.
    6. Building Setback and Construction Near Buffer. Eight-foot minimum setback lines shall be required from the buffer area required in subsection (B)(4) of this section, for construction of any impervious surface(s) greater than 120 square feet of base coverage. Clearing, grading, and filling within eight feet of the buffer shall only be allowed when the applicant can demonstrate that vegetation within the buffer will not be damaged.
    7. On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems. On-site sewage disposal systems, including drain fields within landslide or erosion hazard areas and related buffers as identified in subsection (B)(4) of this section, shall meet all requirements of the Tacoma-Pierce County Board of Health and the Washington State Department of Health for on-site sewage disposal (Chapter 246-272 WAC).
    8. Erosion Control Plan. Erosion control plans shall be required for all regulated activities in erosion hazard areas. The erosion control plans shall be consistent with the City Site Development Regulations, Section 3.04.
    9. Notification. 
        a. Title Notification. The owner of any site within an erosion hazard or landslide hazard area, as identified in LMC 14.146.020, on which a development proposal is submitted, shall record a notice with the Pierce County Auditor in the form set forth below:
        b. Form of notice:EROSION OR LANDSLIDE HAZARD AREA NOTICE
        Parcel Number: ____________________
        Address: _________________________
        Legal Description: __________________
        Present Owner: ____________________
        Notice: This site lies within an erosion or landslide area as defined by Chapter 14.___ of the Lakewood Municipal Code. The site was the subject of a development proposal for application number ____________
         filed on (date) ___________________
        Restrictions on use or alteration of the site may exist due to natural conditions of the site and resulting regulation. Review of such application has provided information on the location of the erosion or landslide hazard area and any restriction on use.
        _____________________________
        Signature of Owner(s)
        _____________________________
        (NOTARY ACKNOWLEDGMENT)
        c. Plat Notification. For all proposed short subdivision and subdivision proposals within erosion hazard or landslide hazard areas, the applicant shall include a note on the face of the plat. The note shall be as set forth below:Notice: This site lies within or includes an erosion hazard or landslide hazard area as defined in Chapter 14.146 of the City Code. Restrictions on use or alteration of the site may exist due to natural conditions of the site and resulting regulation.
[Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.146.040 Designation of seismic hazard areas.
A. General. Seismic hazard areas are areas subject to severe risk of earthquake damage from seismically induced settlement or lateral spreading as a result of soil liquefaction in an area underlain by cohesionless soils of low density and usually in association with a shallow ground water table.
B. Classification. 
    1. Criteria. Seismic hazard areas are generally those areas susceptible to ground failure during seismic events. Failure can consist of soil liquefaction, slope failure, settlement, ground rupture, or lateral displacement. Settlement and soil liquefaction conditions occur in areas underlain by cohesionless soils, usually fine sand, of low density, typically in association with a shallow ground water table.
    2. Mapping. Seismic hazard areas may be identified using the Geologic Map of the Steilacoom 7.5-Minute Quadrangle, Washington 2003; and the “Preliminary Liquefaction Susceptibility Map of Pierce County, Washington, September 2003” published by the Washington Department of Natural Resources. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.146.050 Protection standards in seismic hazard areas.
A. Regulation – Geotechnical Report Required. For all regulated activities, except the construction of wood frame structures under 5,000 square feet, mobile homes, fences, and/or subdivision of property, proposed within seismic hazard areas, a geotechnical report prepared by a professional engineer licensed by the state of Washington with expertise in geotechnical engineering shall be submitted (see subsection (A)(2) of this section). Retaining walls may also be excluded from the requirement of a geotechnical report when the height of soil fills on the upper side are not in excess of four feet above the toe of the wall, backfills do not exceed a top surface slope of 4:1 (H:V), and there is no permanent structure existing or proposed within a distance of three times the height of the wall. Where an applicant can demonstrate through submittal of a geological assessment (see subsection (A)(1) of this section), that there are no seismic hazards on site, the requirement for the geotechnical report may be waived. A geological assessment may be prepared by a professional geotechnical engineer or by a professional geologist licensed by the state of Washington.
    1. Geological Assessments. 
        a. Should the applicant question the presence of seismic hazard areas on the site, the applicant may submit a geological assessment.
        b. The geological assessment shall include at a minimum the following:
            i. A description of the topography, surface and subsurface hydrology, soils, geology, and vegetation of the site; and
            ii. An evaluation of the analysis area’s inherent seismic hazards; and
            iii. A site plan of the area delineating all areas of the site subject to seismic hazards, based on mapping and criteria referenced in LMC 14.146.040.
    If the geological assessment demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the Department, that the proposed site is not located in any seismic hazard areas, based upon the criteria set forth in subsection (A)(1)(b) of this section, then the requirements of this section shall not apply.
    2. Geotechnical Report. The geotechnical report shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed by the state of Washington with experience in geotechnical engineering and shall address the existing geologic, topographic, and hydrologic conditions on a site, including an evaluation of the ability of the site to accommodate the proposed activity. The geotechnical report shall include at a minimum the following:
        a. A discussion of the surface and subsurface geologic conditions of the site;
        b. A site plan of the area delineating all areas of the property subject to seismic hazards, based on mapping and criteria referenced in LMC 14.146.040;
        c. A discussion of mitigation measures which can be taken to reduce seismic risks associated from liquefaction, ground shaking, settlement or slope failure with the underlying surficial geology; and
        d. An evaluation of the effectiveness of the proposed mitigation measures. Where a valid geotechnical report has been prepared within the last five years for a specific site, and where the proposed land use activity and surrounding site conditions are unchanged, said report may be utilized and a new report may not be required. If any changed environmental conditions are associated with the site, or surrounding the site, the applicant shall submit an amendment to the geotechnical report.
    The development proposal may be approved, approved with conditions, or denied based on the Department’s evaluation of the ability of the proposed mitigation measures to reduce seismic risks associated with the underlying surficial geology.
    3. Notification. 
        a. Title Notification. The owner of any site within a seismic hazard area as identified in LMC 14.146.040, on which a development proposal is submitted, shall record a notice with the Pierce County Auditor in the form set forth below:Form of Notice:
        SEISMIC HAZARD AREA NOTICE
        Parcel Number: _____________________
        Address: ___________________________
        Legal Description: ___________________
        Present Owner: ____________________
        Notice: This site lies within a seismic hazard area as defined by Chapter 14.146 of the Lakewood Municipal Code. The site was the subject of a development proposal for application number ____________
         filed on (date) _____________
        Restrictions on use or alteration of the site may exist due to natural conditions of the site and resulting regulation. Review of such application has provided information on the location of a seismic hazard area and any restrictions on use.
        ___________________________
         Signature of owner(s)
        __________________________
        NOTARY ACKNOWLEDGMENT
        b. Plat Notification. For all proposed short subdivision and subdivision proposals within seismic hazard areas, the applicant shall include a note on the face of the plat. The note shall be as set forth below:Notice: This site lies within a seismic hazard area as defined in Chapter 14.146, of the City Code. Restrictions on use or alteration of the site may exist due to natural conditions of the site and resulting regulation.
[Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

Chapter 14.150 AQUIFER RECHARGE AREAS*

Sections:
14.150.010   Purpose.
14.150.020   Designation of aquifer recharge areas.
14.150.030   Protection standards in aquifer recharge areas.
14.150.040   Hydrogeological assessments.
* Prior legislation note: Ord. 362 repealed provisions concerning aquifer recharge areas that were formerly in this chapter, based on the provisions of Ord. 56.

14.150.010 Purpose.
The Growth Management Act requires the City of Lakewood to designate areas and adopt development regulations for the purpose of protecting areas within the City critical to maintaining ground water recharge and quality. The Growth Management Act, Water Pollution Control Act, Water Resources Act of 1971, and the Ground Water Quality Standards require that these actions be taken to protect ground water quality and quantity such that its use as potable water can be preserved for current and future uses. This chapter shall define a scientifically valid methodology by which the City of Lakewood will designate areas determined to be critical in maintaining both ground water quantity and quality. This chapter shall specify regulatory requirements to be enacted when development within these areas is proposed to occur. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.150.020 Designation of aquifer recharge areas.
A. General. Aquifer recharge areas are areas where the prevailing geologic conditions allow infiltration rates which create a high potential for contamination of ground water resources or contribute to the replenishment of ground water.
B. Classification. For the purposes of this chapter, the boundaries of the City’s aquifer recharge areas are:
    1. The boundaries of the two highest DRASTIC zones which are rated 180 and above on the DRASTIC index range, as identified in Map of Ground Water Pollution Potential, Pierce County, Washington, National Water Well Association, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; and
    2. The Clover/Chambers Creek Aquifer Basin boundary, as identified in Draft Clover/Chambers Creek Basin Ground Water Management Program and Environmental Impact Statement, Brown and Caldwell for Washington State Department of Ecology.
    3. Any site located within the Clover/Chambers Creek Basin boundary or the two highest DRASTIC zone boundaries is included in the aquifer recharge area. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.150.030 Protection standards in aquifer recharge areas.
A. Exemptions. In addition to the exemptions listed in LMC 14.142.070, the following uses shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter:
    1. Sewer lines and appurtenances.
    2. Individual on-site domestic sewage disposal (septic) systems releasing less than 14,500 gallons of effluent per day, subject to permitting by the Tacoma-Pierce County Health Department.
B. Plat Notification. For all proposed short subdivision and subdivision proposals within the City, the applicant shall include a note on the face of the plat. The note shall be as set forth below:Notice: This subdivision lies within an aquifer recharge area as defined in Chapter 14.150 of the Lakewood Municipal Code. Restrictions on use or alteration of the site may exist due to natural conditions of the site and resulting regulation.
C. Prohibited Activities. Because of high potential for contamination, and low potential for remediation of ground waters used as potable water sources, the following uses of land shall be prohibited within the City of Lakewood:
    1. Landfills, including hazardous or dangerous waste, municipal solid waste, special waste, and wood waste. Inert and demolition waste landfills may be permitted subject to the requirements of subsection D of this section.
    2. Underground injection wells, except as may be proposed by a public agency for remediation of ground water contamination or aquifer enhancement.
    3. Metals mining.
    4. New sand and gravel mining.
    5. Wood treatment facilities.
    6. Storage of more than 70,000 gallons of liquid petroleum or other hazardous substance.
D. Regulated Activities. The following land uses may only be permitted after review and approval of a hydrogeological assessment by the Tacoma-Pierce County Health Department. Uses requiring a hydrogeological assessment may be conditioned or denied based upon the TPCHD’s evaluation of the hydrogeologic assessment. Other state and federal regulations pertaining to the specific activities listed should be referenced in the hydrogeologic assessment and agency review:
    1. Aboveground storage tanks (WAC 173-303-640);
    2. Automobile washing facilities (Chapter 173-216 WAC, DOE Publication WQ-R-95-56);
    3. Below-ground storage tanks (Chapter 173-360 WAC);
    4. Residential structures housing three or more units and utilizing on-site septic systems (Chapter 246-272 WAC, TPCHD Regulations);
    5. Sludge land application sites categorized as S-3, S-4 and S-5, as defined above;
    6. Animal containment area (Chapters 173-216 and 173-220 WAC);
    7. Inert and demolition waste landfills (Chapter 173-304 WAC);
    8. Facilities with the potential to generate hazardous waste, including, but not limited to, boat repair facilities, biological research facilities, dry cleaners, furniture stripping, motor vehicle service garages, photographic processing, and printing shops (Chapter 173-303 WAC).
E. Storage Tank Permits. The Fire Marshal specifically regulates and authorizes permits for underground storage tanks, pursuant to the Uniform Fire Code (Article 79) and this chapter. The Washington Department of Ecology also regulates and authorizes permits for underground storage tanks (Chapter 173-360 WAC). The TPCHD regulates and authorizes permits for the removal of underground storage tanks (Pierce County Code, Chapter 8.34).
    1. Facilities with Underground Tanks – New Underground Tanks. All new underground storage facilities used or to be used for the underground storage of hazardous substances or hazardous wastes shall be designed and constructed so as to:
        a. Prevent releases due to corrosion or structural failure for the operational life of the tank;
        b. Be protected against corrosion, constructed of noncorrosive material, steel clad with a noncorrosive material, or designed to include a secondary containment system to prevent the release or threatened release of any stored substance; and
        c. Use material in the construction or lining of the tank which is compatible with the substance to be stored.
        d. The installation of underground storage tanks shall also be subject to state and local permit requirements.
    2. Aboveground Tanks. 
        a. No new aboveground storage facility or part thereof shall be fabricated, constructed, installed, used, or maintained in any manner which may allow the release of a hazardous substance to the ground, ground waters, or surface waters of Lakewood within an aquifer recharge area.
        b. No new aboveground tank or part thereof, with the exception of tanks for potable water, shall be fabricated, constructed, installed, used, or maintained without having constructed around and under it an impervious containment area enclosing or underlying the tank or part thereof.
        c. A new aboveground tank that will contain hazardous substances shall be of double wall construction and shall include a secondary containment system separate from the tank that will hold 110 percent of the tank’s capacity. The secondary containment system must be designed and constructed to contain the material stored in the tank. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.150.040 Hydrogeological assessments.
A. The hydrogeologic assessment may be submitted by a state of Washington licensed hydrogeologist, or professional engineer with a strong background in geology as demonstrated by course work from an accredited college or university. Persons who believe they are qualified to conduct a hydrogeologic assessment may petition the TPCHD for consent.
B. The hydrogeologic assessment shall include, but is not limited to:
    1. Information sources;
    2. Geologic setting: include well logs or borings used to identify information;
    3. Background water quality;
    4. Ground water elevations;
    5. Location/depth to perched water tables;
    6. Recharge potential of facility site (permeability/transmissivity);
    7. Ground water flow direction and gradient;
    8. Currently available data on wells located within 1,000 feet of site;
    9. Currently available data on any spring within 1,000 feet of site;
    10. Surface water location and recharge potential;
    11. Water source supply to facility (e.g., high capacity well);
    12. Any sampling schedules necessary;
    13. Discussion of the effects of the proposed project on the ground water resource;
    14. Other information as required by the TPCHD.
C. Uses requiring a hydrogeologic assessment may be conditioned or denied based upon the TPCHD’s evaluation of the hydrogeologic assessment. Any project denied a permit based upon the Tacoma-Pierce County Health Department’s evaluation of the hydrogeologic assessment shall receive a written explanation of the reason(s) for denial and an explanation of measures required, if any, to comply with these regulations. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

Chapter 14.154 FISH AND WILDLIFE HABITAT AREAS*

Sections:
14.154.010   Purpose and intent.
14.154.020   Designation of critical fish and wildlife habitat areas.
14.154.030   Habitat protection standards.
14.154.040   Title and plat notification.
14.154.050   Habitat protection for rivers and streams.
14.154.060   Habitat protection for lakes.
14.154.070   Habitat protection for ponds.
14.154.090   Provisions for fish and wildlife, habitat buffers, where required.
* Prior legislation note: Ord. 362 repealed provisions concerning fish and wildlife habitat areas that were formerly in this chapter, based on the provisions of Ord. 56.

14.154.010 Purpose and intent.
Many land use activities can impact the habitats of fish and wildlife. Where areas of critical fish and wildlife habitat are subject to development, land use shall be managed to protect critical habitats. Managing land use to protect critical habitats is intended to allow proposed development to occur in a manner that is sensitive to the habitat needs of critical fish and wildlife species. The purpose of this chapter is to identify critical fish and wildlife species and habitats and establish habitat protection procedures and mitigation practices that are designed to achieve no “net loss” of species and habitat due to new development or other regulated activities.
As a necessary first step in achieving the necessary protection of critical fish and wildlife species, it is the intent of this chapter to:
A. Define and identify critical fish and wildlife species and habitats;
B. Emphasize and encourage education, information and voluntary action to enhance, protect, rehabilitate, and restore critical fish and wildlife species and habitats;
C. Rely primarily upon existing procedures and laws, such as the State Environmental Policy Act, Chapter 43.21C RCW; the City’s Shoreline Use Regulations; and the Shoreline Management Act, Chapter 90.58 RCW, that, directly or indirectly, protect fish and wildlife species and habitats; and
D. Establish buffers adjacent to rivers, streams, and other identified critical habitat areas and locations to protect critical fish and wildlife habitats.
It is not intended that this chapter repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing law or regulations. If the buffering provisions of this chapter conflict with any existing City law or regulation, the more stringent shall apply. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.154.020 Designation of critical fish and wildlife habitat areas.
A. General. This chapter applies to proposed regulated activities within critical fish and wildlife habitat areas. Critical fish and wildlife habitat areas are those areas identified either by known point locations of specific species (such as a nest or den) or by habitat areas or both.
B. Identification of Critical Fish and Wildlife Species and Habitats. 
    1. Critical Fish and Wildlife Habitat Areas. 
        a. Federal and State Listed Species and Their Associated Habitats. Areas which have a primary association with federally or state listed endangered, threatened, or sensitive species of fish or wildlife (specified in 50 CFR 17.11, 50 CFR 17.12, WAC 232-12-014 and 232-12-297) and which, if altered, may reduce the likelihood that the species will maintain and reproduce over the long term.
        b. Habitats and species of local importance, including the following:
            i. Areas with which state listed monitor or candidate species or federally listed candidate species have a primary association, and which, if altered, may reduce the likelihood that the species will maintain and reproduce over the long term.
            ii. Documented habitat areas or outstanding potential habitat areas for fish and wildlife species. These areas include specific habitat types which are infrequent in occurrence in Pierce County and Lakewood, and may provide specific habitats with which endangered, threatened, sensitive, candidate, or monitor species have a primary association, such as breeding habitat, winter range, and movement corridors. These areas include the following:
                (A) Priority Oregon white oak woodlands.
                (B) Prairies.
                (C) Old growth forests.
                (D) Caves.
                (E) Cliffs.
                (F) Snag-rich areas.
                (G) Rivers and streams with critical fisheries.
                (H) Naturally occurring ponds under 20 acres and their submerged aquatic beds that provide fish or wildlife habitat.
                (I) Waters of the state, including all water bodies classified by the Washington Department of Natural Resources (DNR) water typing classification system as detailed in WAC 222-16-030, together with associated riparian areas.
                (J) Lakes, ponds, streams, and rivers planted with game fish by a governmental entity or tribal entity.
                (K) State natural area preserves and natural resource conservation areas.
    2. Mapping. The resources listed below provide information on fish and wildlife habitat areas:
        a. Puget Sound Environmental Atlas, Puget Sound Water Quality Authority.
        b. The following Washington Department of Natural Resources documents and data sources:
            i. Stream typing maps.
            ii. Natural Heritage Database.
        c. The following Washington Department of Wildlife documents and data sources:
            i. Priority Habitats and Species Program.
            ii. Nongame Database.
            iii. Washington Rivers Information System.
        d. The following Washington Department of Fisheries documents:
            i. Water Resource Index Areas (WRIA). [Ord. 630 § 1, 2015; Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.154.030 Habitat protection standards.
A. Education and Information. A voluntary education program to explain the need for and methods of habitat management will help provide for long-term protection and enhancement of critical fish and wildlife habitat areas. By informing citizens of the declining populations of several fish and wildlife species in Pierce County, the diminishing animal habitat available, and the management techniques that individuals can use to preserve and restore fish and wildlife habitat areas, the City can foster good stewardship of the land by property owners.
    1. The Department will provide educational materials and lists of additional sources of information to applicants proposing regulated activities in the vicinity of critical fish and wildlife habitat areas. Materials will be selected from a variety of state and local resources.
    2. The Department will accumulate information on the number of proposed activities associated with fish and wildlife habitat areas as identified by this chapter and indicated by County maps to be in the vicinity of identified critical fish and wildlife habitats pursuant to LMC 14.154.020. Information shall include the number of single-family residences and other development occurring in the vicinity of critical fish and wildlife areas. Based on this information, additional regulations may be developed.
B. Use of Existing Procedures and Laws, Biological Assessments. The primary procedures used to implement this chapter shall include this chapter itself, the City’s Land Use and Development Code, the State Environmental Policy Act (Chapter 43.21C RCW), the City’s environmental regulations, the State Shoreline Management Act (Chapter 90.58 RCW), and the City’s shoreline management regulations.
Regulated activities subject to environmental review shall be reviewed with consideration for impacts on critical fish and wildlife habitat as identified in this title. The Community Development Director may require a biological assessment prepared by a qualified wildlife biologist whenever the Director finds that a project site may contain, affect, or be affected by, species or habitats designated in this chapter. Biological assessments shall be prepared in accordance with LMC 14.154.050(B), and are subject to the review and approval of the Director.
Projects undergoing review for fish and wildlife considerations shall be routed to the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, the Washington Department of Ecology, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and any other appropriate state and federal agencies. These agencies will have an opportunity to provide specific habitat information on proposed development sites, advise the City of their jurisdiction and applicable permit requirements, and suggest appropriate project modifications and/or other mitigation.
The City shall give substantial weight to the management recommendations contained in the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife Priority Habitats and Species Program, particularly the management recommendations for Oregon white oak woodlands. [Ord. 630 § 2, 2015; Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.154.040 Title and plat notification.
For regulated activities where a habitat assessment or habitat management plan has been prepared as part of the proposal’s environmental review, the owner of the site shall record a notice of the reports with the Pierce County Auditor so that information is known if the property ownership changes.
A. Title Notification. The owner of any site where a habitat assessment or habitat management plan has been prepared for a development proposal shall record a notice with the Pierce County Auditor in the form set forth below:Form of Notice:
FISH AND WILDLIFE HABITAT AREA
NOTICE
Parcel Number: __________________
Address: _______________________
Legal Description: __________________
Present Owner: ___________________
Notice: This site lies within/contains a critical fish and wildlife habitat area as defined by Chapter 14.154 of the Lakewood Municipal Code. The site was the subject of a development proposal for ____________
 application number ________________
 filed on ____________________ (date).
Restrictions on use or alteration of the site may exist due to natural conditions of the site and resulting regulation. Review of such application has provided information on the location of the fish and wildlife habitat area and any restriction on use.
____________________
Signature of Owner(s)
____________________
Date
(NOTARY ACKNOWLEDGMENT)
B. Plat Notification. For all proposed short subdivision and subdivision proposals within critical fish and wildlife habitat areas, the applicant shall include a note on the face of the plat. [Ord. 630 § 3, 2015; Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.154.050 Habitat protection for rivers and streams.
Regulated activities proposed along rivers and streams shall provide for habitat protection.
A. Habitat Protection for Rivers and Streams Shall Be Provided through Buffers. 
    1. The buffer, consisting of undisturbed natural vegetation, shall be required along all streams, as classified by the DNR water typing classification system (WAC 222-16-030). The buffer shall extend landward from the ordinary high water mark of the water body.
        a. Outside of the buffer removal of native vegetation shall not exceed 35 percent of the surface area of the portion of the site in the regulatory floodplain. Native vegetation within the buffer portion of the property can be counted toward this requirement.
    2. The buffer of a river or stream shall not extend landward beyond an existing substantial improvement such as an improved road, dike, levee, or a permanent structure which reduces the impact proposed activities would have on the river or stream.
    3. Buffer widths shall be as established by the City of Lakewood Shoreline Master Program (SMP) as contained in Chapter 4, Section C of the SMP.
    4. If a proposed project does not meet the criteria established in LMC 18A.40.180(A) and (B) a habitat impact assessment shall be conducted in accordance with subsection B of this section, and if necessary, a habitat mitigation plan shall be prepared and implemented in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Habitat Impact Assessment. Unless allowed under LMC 18A.40.180, a permit application to develop in the special flood hazard area (SFHA), for that portion of any parcel located within the area between the boundary of a buffer as established in the SMP, Chapter 4, Table 2, and the boundary of any buffer as required by the National Marine Fisheries Service’s Puget Sound Biological Opinion of September 22, 2008, shall include an assessment of the impact of the project on water quality and aquatic and riparian habitat. The assessment shall be:
    1. A biological evaluation or biological assessment that has received concurrence from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service or the National Marine Fisheries Service, pursuant to Section 7 of the Endangered Species Act; or
    2. Documentation that the activity fits within a habitat conservation plan approved pursuant to Section 10 of the Endangered Species Act; or
    3. Documentation that the activity fits within Section 4(d) of the Endangered Species Act; or
    4. An assessment prepared in accordance with the most current Regional Guidance for Floodplain Habitat Assessment and Mitigation, FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency) Region X. The assessment shall determine if the project would adversely affect:
        a. The primary constituent elements identified when a species is listed as threatened or endangered;
        b. Essential fish habitat designated by the National Marine Fisheries Service;
        c. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas;
        d. Vegetation communities and habitat structures;
        e. Water quality;
        f. Water quantity, including flood and low flow depths, volumes and velocities;
        g. The channel’s natural planform pattern and migration processes;
        h. Spawning substrate, if applicable; and/or
        i. Floodplain refugia, if applicable.
C. Habitat Mitigation Plan. 
    1. If the assessment conducted under subsection B of this section concludes the proposed project is expected to have an adverse effect on water quality and/or aquatic or riparian habitat or habitat functions, the applicant shall provide a plan to mitigate those impacts, in accordance with the current Regional Guidance for Floodplain Habitat Assessment and Mitigation, FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency) Region X.
        a. If the proposed project is located outside of the protected area, the mitigation plan shall include such avoidance, minimization, restoration, or compensation measures as are appropriate for the situation.
        b. If the proposed project is located within the protected area, the mitigation plan shall include such appropriate measures as are needed to ensure that there is no adverse effect due to the project. Minimization measures are not allowed in the protected area, unless they, in combination with other measures, result in no adverse effect. No compensatory mitigation is allowed in the protected area.
    2. The plan’s habitat mitigation activities shall be incorporated into the proposed project. The floodplain development permit shall be based on the redesigned project and its mitigation components.
    3. A certificate of occupancy or final inspection approval for a project shall not be issued until all work identified in the biological evaluation, biological assessment, or mitigation plan has been completed or the applicant has provided the necessary assurances that unfinished portions of the project will be completed.
D. Compensatory Storage. New development shall not reduce the effective flood storage volume of the regulatory floodplain. A development proposal shall provide compensatory storage if grading or other activity displaces any effective flood storage volume. Compensatory storage shall:
    1. Provide equivalent volume at equivalent elevations to that being displaced. For this purpose, “equivalent elevation” means having similar relationship to ordinary high water and to the best available 10-year, 50-year and 100-year water surface profiles;
    2. Be hydraulically connected to the source of the flooding; and
    3. Provide compensatory storage in the same construction season as when the displacement of flood storage volume occurs and before flood season begins.
    4. The newly created storage area shall be graded and vegetated to allow fish access during flood events without creating fish stranding sites. [Ord. 659 § 2, 2017; Ord. 630 § 4, 2015; Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.154.060 Habitat protection for lakes.
A. Regulated activities proposed on lakes that are urban in character will not be subject to the buffering requirements of this chapter. The following lakes are urban in character:
    1. American.
    2. Gravelly.
    3. Louise.
    4. Steilacoom.
For proposed regulated activities on lakes that are subject to the State Shoreline Management Act, habitat protection shall be provided through education, voluntary agreements, and existing laws as referenced in LMC 14.154.030(B), and regulation via the City’s Shoreline Master Program and shoreline management regulations.
B. Regulated activities proposed on lakes that are not subject to the State Shoreline Management Act shall be subject to a 35-foot buffer requirement. The buffer, consisting of undisturbed natural vegetation, shall extend landward from the ordinary high water mark of the water body. Existing laws as referenced in LMC 14.154.030(B) may also affect such proposals. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.154.070 Habitat protection for ponds.
Regulated activities proposed on ponds will not be subject to the buffering requirements of this section. Habitat protection for ponds shall be provided through education, voluntary agreements and existing laws as referenced in LMC 14.154.030(B). Ponds shall be regulated as wetlands where appropriate. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.154.090 Provisions for fish and wildlife, habitat buffers, where required.
A. Building Setback and Construction Near Buffer. A minimum setback of eight feet from the buffer shall be required for construction of any impervious surface(s) greater than 120 square feet of base coverage. Clearing, grading, and filling within eight feet of the buffer shall only be allowed when the applicant can demonstrate that vegetation within the buffer will not be damaged.
B. Marking of the Buffer Area. The edge of the buffer area shall be clearly staked, flagged, and fenced prior to and through completion of construction. The buffer boundary markers shall be clearly visible, durable, and permanently affixed to the ground.
C. Fencing from Farm Animals. The Director shall determine if fencing is necessary to protect the functions and values of the critical area. If found to be necessary, the Director shall condition any permit or authorization issued pursuant to this chapter to require the applicant to install a permanent fence around the habitat conservation area or buffer, when fencing will prevent future impacts to the habitat conservation area. The applicant shall be required to install a permanent fence around the habitat conservation area or buffer when domestic grazing animals are present or may be introduced on site. Fencing installed as part of a proposed activity or as required in this subsection shall be designed so as not to interfere with species migration, including fish runs, and shall be constructed in a manner that minimizes habitat impacts.
D. Enhancements to natural buffers consistent with the education program (such as revegetation or nest boxes) are allowed.
E. Allowable Activities within Buffers. The following activities may occur within the buffer after notification to the Department; provided, that any other required permits are obtained.
    1. Removal of diseased trees and trees that present an imminent threat to properties. The Director may require a written report by a registered landscape architect, certified nursery professional, or certified arborist assessing the condition of any tree that is purported to be diseased or hazardous.
    2. Repair of existing fences.
    3. Construction, reconstruction, remodeling, or maintenance of docks and bulkheads as authorized and pursuant to the shoreline management regulations.
    4. Construction of a pervious path for purposes of private access to the shoreline.
    5. Trimming of vegetation for purposes of providing view corridors; provided, that trimming shall be limited to view corridors of 20 feet or less; and provided, that benefits of the buffer to fish and wildlife habitat are not reduced. Trimming shall be limited to pruning of branches and vegetation. Trimming shall not include felling or removal of trees.
    6. Construction of public trails.
    7. Roadways, bridges, rights-of-way, and utility lines where no feasible alternative exists, and where the development minimizes impacts on the stream and buffer area. Clear documentation explaining the lack of alternatives and measures taken to minimize impacts on the critical area and buffer shall be provided to the Community Development Department prior to approval. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

Chapter 14.158 FLOOD HAZARD AREAS*

Sections:
14.158.010   Purpose.
14.158.020   Designation.
14.158.030   Protection.
* Prior legislation note: Ord. 362 repealed provisions concerning flood hazard areas that were formerly in this chapter, based on the provisions of Ord. 56.

14.158.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to:
A. Promote the general health, welfare and safety of the City’s residents.
B. Prevent the establishment of certain structures and land uses unsuitable for human habitation because of the danger of flooding, unsanitary conditions or other hazards.
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding.
D. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for sound use and development in flood-prone areas and to minimize prolonged business interruptions.
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities located in flood hazard areas.
F. Ensure that potential home and business buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
G. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood relief and control projects.
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.158.020 Designation.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for Pierce County, and Incorporated Areas” dated March 7, 2017, and any revisions thereto, with an accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRM), and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The flood insurance study and the FIRM are on file at the City of Lakewood, 6000 Main Street SW, Lakewood, WA. The flood insurance study shall be kept on file by the City Engineer. [Ord. 659 § 3, 2017; Ord. 630 § 5, 2015; Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.158.030 Protection.
All development in areas of special flood hazard shall be regulated according to the City’s Site Development Regulations, and LMC 18A.40.100, Flood Hazard Overlay. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

Chapter 14.162 WETLANDS AREAS*

Sections:
14.162.010   Purpose.
14.162.020   Designation of wetland areas.
14.162.030   Wetland categories.
14.162.040   Regulated activities.
14.162.050   Exemptions.
14.162.060   Special permitted uses.
14.162.070   Delineation, and wetland analysis requirements.
14.162.080   Protection standards – Establishing buffers.
14.162.090   Protection standards for allowing regulated activities in wetlands and buffers.
14.162.100   Mitigation.
14.162.110   New agricultural activities.
14.162.120   Alternative review process, Corps of Engineers Section 404 individual permits.
14.162.130   Wetland review procedure, fees, and title notification.
* Prior legislation note: Ord. 362 repealed provisions concerning wetland areas that were formerly in this chapter, based on the provisions of Ord. 56.

14.162.010 Purpose.
The purpose of these regulations is to avoid, or in appropriate circumstances, to minimize, rectify, reduce or compensate for impacts arising from land development and other activities affecting wetlands, and to maintain and enhance the biological and physical functions and values of wetlands with respect to water quality maintenance, storm water and floodwater storage and conveyance, fish and wildlife habitat, primary productivity, recreation, education, and historic and cultural preservation. When avoiding impacts is not reasonable, mitigation shall be implemented to achieve no net loss of wetlands in terms of acreage, function and value. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.162.020 Designation of wetland areas.
Identification of wetlands and delineation of their boundaries pursuant to this chapter shall be done in accordance with the approved federal wetland delineation manual and applicable regional supplements. All areas within the City meeting the wetland designation criteria in that procedure are hereby designated critical areas and are subject to the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 630 § 6, 2015; Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.162.030 Wetland categories.
In order to provide information on the functions and values of wetlands in a time- and cost-effective way, wetland analysis reports shall categorize wetlands by their attributes and characteristics. Wetlands shall be rated using the latest adopted version of the Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington published by the Washington State Department of Ecology (“State Wetland Rating System”).
The State Wetland Rating System provides the detailed criteria for establishing wetland categories. Wetlands are generally designated as follows:
A. Category I wetlands are those that (1) represent a unique or rare wetland type; or (2) are more sensitive to disturbance than most wetlands; (3) are relatively undisturbed and contain ecological attributes that are impossible to replace within a human lifetime; or (4) provide a high level of functions. Generally, these wetlands are not common and make up a small percentage of the wetlands in the region. The following are considered Category I wetlands:
    1. Bogs.
    2. Mature and old-growth forested wetlands.
    3. Wetlands that perform many functions very well: wetlands scoring 23 to 27 points using the Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington, Ecology Publication No. 14-06-029.
B. Category II wetlands are difficult, though not impossible, to replace, and provide high levels of some functions. These wetlands occur more commonly than Category I wetlands, but still need a relatively high level of protection. Category II wetlands in western Washington include wetlands that perform functions well: wetlands scoring between 20 and 22 points using the Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington. Wetlands scoring 20 to 22 points were judged to perform most functions relatively well, or performed one group of functions very well and the other two moderately well.
C. Category III wetlands are wetlands with a moderate level of functions (scores between 16 and 19 points) using the Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington. Category III wetlands usually have been disturbed in some ways, and are often less diverse or more isolated from other natural resources in the landscape than Category II wetlands.
D. Category IV wetlands have the lowest levels of functions (scores between nine and 15 points) and are often heavily disturbed. These are wetlands that we should be able to replace, and in some cases be able to improve. These wetlands may provide some important functions. [Ord. 630 § 7, 2015; Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.162.040 Regulated activities.
A list of regulated activities is included in LMC 14.142.060. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.162.050 Exemptions.
A list of exempt activities is included in LMC 14.142.070. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.162.060 Special permitted uses.
A. The following uses are normally regulated but may be allowed, subject to a Process I administrative determination by the Director, provided the listed criteria are met.
B. Educational and Recreational Facilities. Minor structural fill may be allowed for the construction and enhancement of public trails, such as bridging, and trail-related facilities such as benches, interpretive signs, and viewing platforms. Construction of such features on all previously filled areas is allowed. The following conditions must be met:
    1. An alternative location outside the wetland is not feasible. Trails and related facilities within wetlands shall, to the extent possible, be placed on other previously disturbed areas;
    2. Associated facilities, such as interpretive centers, restrooms, or parking areas are not allowed within wetlands or buffers by this conditional exemption;
    3. The fill on which the trails or trail-related facilities is placed is limited to the minimum dimensions necessary for the actual crossing and shall not cover more than 5,000 square feet of wetland area;
    4. Project design shall minimize adverse impacts to wetlands/buffers and wildlife habitat. Pervious surfaces shall be used;
    5. All construction work in the wetland shall be done during the summer dry season (July 15th to October 15th). A time extension may be granted by the Department;
    6. Native vegetation disturbed by trail construction activities shall be salvaged and replanted in the disturbed areas to the extent feasible.
C. Minor Road or Trail Crossings. Fills for the construction of a road or trail crossing shall be allowed in wetlands or buffers; provided, that crossings of wetlands shall be avoided to the extent possible. Fills for the construction of a road crossing through a Category I wetland shall not be allowed by this conditional exemption. Crossings shall follow the following criteria:
    1. An alternative location outside the wetland is not reasonably feasible;
    2. The fill on which the road or trail is placed is limited to the minimum dimensions necessary for the actual crossing;
    3. The fill placed in wetlands shall not cover more than 5,000 square feet of wetland area;
    4. Crossings shall utilize design which minimizes the adverse impacts to the wetland and hydrology of the existing system;
    5. Wetland disturbance shall be limited to no greater than five feet beyond the designated toe-of-fill;
    6. All construction work in the wetland shall be done during the summer dry season (July 15th to October 15th). A time extension may be granted in writing by the Department; and
    7. Crossings shall serve multiple purposes and properties, whenever possible.
D. Erosion Control. Bank stabilization activities necessary for erosion prevention shall be allowed in buffers and Category II, III, and IV wetlands as part of a single and complete project. Bank stabilization projects shall meet all other applicable local, state and federal laws and the following criteria:
    1. The minimum amount of material needed for erosion prevention is used;
    2. The bank stabilization activity is no more than 500 feet in length, 15 feet high, and will not exceed an average of one-half cubic yard of fill per running foot of bank;
    3. No material is placed in any location or manner that may impair surface water movement into or out of any wetland area or other water body;
    4. No material is placed in any location or manner that may be eroded by normal or anticipated high flows; and
    5. The disturbed area shall be revegetated within 60 days after completion of the project with native species indigenous to the site. Hydro-seeding with approved mix may be used for temporary erosion control.
E. The construction of utility lines and poles in Category II, III or IV wetlands and buffers provided there are no feasible alternatives and impacts are mitigated. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.162.070 Delineation, and wetland analysis requirements.
A. Wetland Review Procedures – General Requirements. 
    1. The Critical Areas Atlas – City Wetland Inventory Maps provides an indication of where potential wetlands are located within the county. The actual presence or location of a potential wetland or a potential wetland that has not been mapped, but may be present on or adjacent to a site shall be determined using the procedures and criteria established in this chapter.
    2. The Department will complete a review of the Critical Areas Atlas – Wetland Inventory Maps and other source documents for any proposed regulated activity to determine whether the project area for a proposed single-family dwelling unit or other proposed development is located in the vicinity of a known wetland. Identification of a potential wetland may also occur as a result of field investigations conducted by Department staff.
    3. When the Department’s maps, sources, or field investigation indicate that a potential wetland is located within 200 feet of the project area for a proposed one-family dwelling unit or other proposed regulated activities, the Department shall require a wetland verification report to determine whether or not a regulated wetland is present and if so, its relative location in relation to the proposed project area or site. The findings of the wetland verification report shall be documented as outlined in subsections (B)(1) of this section.
    4. If Department staff completes a field investigation and determines that no regulated wetlands are present, then wetland review will be considered complete.
    5. If it is determined that a wetland exists within 165 feet of a project site, then a wetland analysis report shall be required. All wetland analysis reports shall include a proposed categorization of the wetland in accordance with the guidelines set forth in LMC 14.162.030, and a calculation of the standard wetland buffer as set forth in LMC 14.162.080.
B. General Wetland Review. General wetland review shall include the submittal of a wetland verification report or a wetland analysis report, together with a wetland review fee as established in the City’s fee schedule.
    1. Wetland Verification Report. 
        a. A wetland verification report shall be submitted when a field investigation or review of the City’s Critical Areas Atlas determines that a regulated wetland may be present within 200 feet of the site.
        b. A wetland verification report may determine that:
            i. No regulated wetland is, in fact, present within 200 feet of the project site; or
            ii. Wetlands are identified but are evaluated and found to be nonregulated; or
            iii. A regulated wetland is present within 200 feet of the project site, in which case a wetland analysis report may be required to determine the limits of the wetland, its classification and appropriate buffer width and other appropriate mitigations necessary to protect the wetland functions and values; or
            iv. A regulated wetland is present; however, categorization can be summarily determined and it is apparent that the standard buffer does not extend within the site.
        c. The wetland verification report shall include data sheets, site maps, and other field data and information necessary to confirm wetland presence or absence and category. If nonregulated wetlands are identified, a site plan must be provided that identifies their location.
        d. The wetland verification report shall identify and discuss wetland boundaries within the site as well as those that extend off site. Off-site wetlands and associated standard buffers do not have to be marked in the field.
        e. Department staff shall review the wetland verification report and either:
            i. Accept the report and approve the wetland application; or
            ii. Reject the report and require the submittal of a wetland analysis report.
    2. Wetland Analysis Report. 
        a. If a regulated wetland or its standard buffer extends onto the site, the Department shall require a wetland analysis report. Information required in a wetland analysis report is identified in Appendix C of the Critical Areas Regulations – Administrator’s Manual.
        b. If the Department determines that a Category I wetland is on site which is associated with documented habitat for endangered, threatened, or sensitive species or for potentially extirpated plant species recognized by state or federal agencies, the Department shall also require the submittal of a habitat assessment report as set forth in LMC 14.154.030(B).
        c. If the Department determines that additional mitigation is necessary to offset the identified impacts, the applicant shall comply with the additional mitigation requirements set forth in the wetland analysis report, biological assessment, or SEPA determination.
        d. The Department shall review and approve the wetland analysis report to determine the appropriate wetland category and buffer, and shall include the wetland in the City’s Wetland Atlas. The Department shall approve the report’s findings and proposals unless specific, written reasons are provided which justify not doing so.
        e. Approval of the wetland review shall be concluded upon a determination that the wetland analysis report and mitigation plan, if applicable, are thorough and accurate, and meet all requirements of this title, and that the monitoring program and contingency plan are tied to an acceptable financial guarantee as set forth in LMC 14.142.150 to assure that the requirements will be followed. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.162.080 Protection standards – Establishing buffers.
A. Requirements. The buffer widths in Table 14.1 have been established in accordance with the best available science. They are based on the category of wetland and the habitat score as determined by a qualified wetland professional using the Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington.
    1. The use of the buffer widths in Table 14.1 requires the implementation of the measures in Table 14.2, where applicable, to minimize the impacts of the adjacent land uses.
    2. If an applicant chooses not to apply the mitigation measures in Table 14.2, then a 33 percent increase in the width of all buffers is required. For example, a 75-foot buffer with the mitigation measures would be a 100-foot buffer without them.
    3. The buffer widths in Table 14.1 assume that the buffer is vegetated with a native plant community appropriate for the ecoregion. If the existing buffer is unvegetated, sparsely vegetated, or vegetated with invasive species that do not perform needed functions, the buffer should either be planted to create the appropriate plant community, or the buffer should be widened to ensure that adequate functions of the buffer are provided.
    4. The buffer at its narrowest point is never less than either three-quarters of the required width or 75 feet for Category I and II, 50 feet for Category III and 25 feet for Category IV, whichever is greater.
+----------------------------------+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
|                                  | Buffer width (in feet) based on habitat score  |
+----------------------------------+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
|         Wetland Category         |    3-4     |     5     |    6-7    |    8-9    |
+----------------------------------+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Category I: Based on total       | 75         | 105       | 165       | 225       |
| score                            |            |           |           |           |
+----------------------------------+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Category I: Bogs and wetlands    | 190                                | 225       |
| of high conservation value       |                                    |           |
+----------------------------------+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Category I: Coastal lagoons      | 150                    | 165       | 225       |
+----------------------------------+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Category I: Interdunal           |                        | 225       | 225       |
+----------------------------------+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Category I: Forested             | 75         | 105       | 165       | 225       |
+----------------------------------+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Category I: Estuarine            | 150 (buffer width not based on habitat scores) |
+----------------------------------+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Category II: Based on score      | 75         | 105       | 165       | 225       |
+----------------------------------+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Category II: Interdunal wetlands | 110                    | 165       | 225       |
+----------------------------------+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Category II: Estuarine           | 110 (buffer width not based on habitat scores) |
+----------------------------------+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Category III (all)               | 60         | 105       | 165       | 225       |
+----------------------------------+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Category IV (all)                | 40                                             |
+----------------------------------+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
+----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------+
|        Disturbance         |               Required Measures to Minimize Impacts               |
+----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Light                      | • Direct lights away from wetland                                 |
+----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Noise                      | • Locate activity that generates noise away from wetland          |
|                            | • If warranted, enhance existing buffer with native vegetation    |
|                            | plantings adjacent to noise source                                |
|                            | • For activities that generate relatively continuous, potentially |
|                            | disruptive noise, such as certain heavy industry or mining,       |
|                            | establish an additional 10-foot heavily vegetated buffer          |
|                            | strip immediately adjacent to the outer wetland buffer            |
+----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Toxic runoff               | • Route all new, untreated runoff away from wetland while         |
|                            | ensuring wetland is not dewatered                                 |
|                            | • Establish covenants limiting use of pesticides within 150       |
|                            | feet of wetland                                                   |
|                            | • Apply integrated pest management                                |
+----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Storm water runoff         | • Retrofit storm water detention and treatment for roads and      |
|                            | existing adjacent development                                     |
|                            | • Prevent channelized flow from lawns that directly enters        |
|                            | the buffer                                                        |
|                            | • Use low intensity development techniques (for more information  |
|                            | refer to the drainage ordinance and manual)                       |
+----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Change in water            | • Infiltrate or treat, detain, and disperse into buffer new       |
| regime                     | runoff from impervious surfaces and new lawns                     |
+----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Pets and human disturbance | • Use privacy fencing OR plant dense vegetation to delineate      |
|                            | buffer edge and to discourage disturbance using vegetation        |
|                            | appropriate for the ecoregion                                     |
|                            | • Place wetland and its buffer in a separate tract or protect     |
|                            | with a conservation easement                                      |
+----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Dust                       | • Use best management practices to control dust                   |
+----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Disruption of corridors    | • Maintain connections to off-site areas that are undisturbed     |
| or connections             | • Restore corridors or connections to off-site habitats by        |
|                            | replanting                                                        |
+----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------+
B. Buffer widths may be modified by averaging, reducing, or increasing.
    1. Buffer width averaging may be allowed only where the applicant demonstrates the following:
        a. Buffer encroachment is unavoidable.
        b. A habitat assessment has been submitted which demonstrates that the site does not provide habitat for any endangered, threatened, or sensitive fish or animal species; or
        c. For wetlands and/or required buffers associated with documented habitat for endangered, threatened, or sensitive fish or wildlife species, a habitat assessment report has been submitted that demonstrates that the buffer modification will not result in an adverse impact to the species of study.
        d. The wetland contains variations in sensitivity due to existing physical characteristics; and
        e. Width averaging will not adversely impact the wetland or critical fish and wildlife habitat; and
        f. The total buffer area after averaging is no less than the buffer area prior to averaging; and
        g. The minimum buffer width will not be less than 75 percent of the widths established in subsection A of this section.
        h. The averaging is accomplished within the project boundaries.
        i. Buffer width averaging shall only be permitted where it is shown that there are no feasible alternatives to the site design that could be accomplished without buffer averaging.
    2. Buffer width reduction may be allowed only where the applicant demonstrates the following circumstances. Such reduction shall not result in greater than a 25 percent reduction in the buffer width established in subsection A of this section and shall result in a buffer no less than 30 feet in any case.
        a. The proposed buffer area is extensively vegetated and has less than 15 percent slopes, and the reduction will not result in adverse impacts to the wetland; or
        b. The project includes a buffer enhancement plan, as part of the mitigation required by LMC 14.162.100. The buffer enhancement plan shall use plant species which are indigenous to the project area, and shall substantiate that an enhanced buffer will improve the functional attributes of the buffer to provide additional protection for wetland functional values; or
        c. The acreage included in the buffer would substantially exceed the size of the wetland and the reduction will not result in adverse impacts to the wetland or the project includes a buffer enhancement plan which ensures that the reduction will not result in adverse impacts to the wetland.
    3. The Department may require increased buffer width when a larger buffer is necessary to protect wetland functions and values based on local conditions. This determination shall be reasonably related to protection of the functions and values of the regulated wetland. Such determination shall demonstrate that:
        a. A larger buffer is necessary to maintain viable populations of existing species; or
        b. The wetland is used by species listed by the federal government or the state as endangered, threatened, sensitive or as documented priority species or habitats, or essential or outstanding potential sites such as heron rookeries or raptor nesting areas; or
        c. The adjacent land is susceptible to severe erosion and erosion control measures will not effectively prevent adverse wetland impacts; or
        d. The adjacent land has minimal vegetative cover or slopes greater than 15 percent.
C. Buffers shall be measured perpendicular from the wetland edge.
D. When buffer boundaries have been determined, they shall be marked in the field by a licensed surveyor. The markers shall be clearly visible, durable, and permanently affixed to the ground.
E. A building setback line of eight feet shall be required from the edge of a buffer.
F. Except as otherwise specified, buffers shall be retained in a natural condition.
G. A wetland buffer shall not be required to extend beyond an existing substantial improvement such as an improved road, dike, levee, or a permanent structure, where the existing improvement obviates the beneficial impact that the buffer would provide for the wetland. [Ord. 630 § 8, 2015; Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.162.090 Protection standards for allowing regulated activities in wetlands and buffers.
A. Regulated activities in Category III and IV wetlands and/or buffers for Category III and IV wetlands may be allowed when the applicant demonstrates to the Department that all adverse impacts to wetlands will be mitigated according to LMC 14.162.100.
B. The placement of access roads, utility lines, and utility poles may be allowed in buffers for Category II wetlands if the following conditions are met:
    1. There is no feasible alternative location for an access road and/or utilities to the site; and
    2. The applicant demonstrates that all adverse impacts to wetlands will be mitigated according to a mitigation plan which complies with LMC 14.162.100.
C. The following activities may be allowed in a buffer without a complete mitigation plan if the applicant demonstrates to the Department that all adverse impacts to wetlands will be mitigated according to LMC 14.162.100. In cases that require environmental review, a threshold environmental determination may not be made until the Department is satisfied that adequate mitigation will occur. The allowed activities are as follows:
    1. One well and necessary appurtenances, including a pump and appropriately sized pump house, but not including a water storage tank (unless the water storage tank can be contained within the pump house), may be allowed on each site in a buffer if all the following conditions are met:
        a. The pump house is a one-story building with a ground area of less than 220 square feet; and
        b. The well is more than 75 feet deep; and
        c. For Category I and II wetlands, the minimum distance from the well and appurtenances to the wetland edge is no less than 50 percent of the buffer widths established in the table in LMC 14.162.080(A); and
        d. Access to the well and pump house shall be by a pervious trail for pedestrian traffic only, or, if necessary, by an unimproved access for a maintenance vehicle.
    2. Pervious walkways and trails and associated viewing platforms; provided, that those pathways are limited to minor crossings having no adverse impact on water quality. They should be generally parallel to the perimeter of the wetland, located only in the outer 25 percent of the wetland buffer area and located to avoid removal of significant trees. They should be limited to pervious surfaces no more than five feet in width for pedestrian use only. Raised boardwalks utilizing nontreated pilings may be acceptable. In the case of Category I wetlands the minimum distance from the wetland edge is no less than 50 percent of the buffer width established in the table in LMC 14.162.080(A).
    3. The placement of utility lines which do not require excavation, or utility poles, in any part of a buffer for a Category II, III, or IV wetland. They may be placed in a buffer for a Category I wetland; provided, that the minimum distance from the wetland edge is no less than 50 percent of the Category I buffer width established in the table in LMC 14.162.080(A).
    4. Activities within that area of a buffer in which a direct line to the wetland is obstructed by an existing substantial improvement such as an improved road or a permanent structure, the presence of which significantly reduces the likely impact of the proposed activity on the wetland.
A zoning certification, building permit, and/or site development permit shall not be issued for these regulated activities until the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Department that all adverse impacts to wetlands will be mitigated according to LMC 14.162.100.
D. Reasonable Use Exception – Category I and II Wetlands. Regulated activities in Category I and II wetlands and/or buffers for Category I and II wetlands may be allowed only if, following a public hearing, the Hearing Examiner determines that a reasonable use exception is warranted pursuant to LMC 14.142.080, and the following criteria are met:
    1. No reasonable use with less impact on the wetland is possible; and
    2. There is no feasible on-site alternative to the proposed activities, including phasing of project implementation, change in timing of activities, revision of road and lot layout, and/or related site planning and density considerations, that would allow a reasonable economic use with less adverse impacts to wetlands; and
    3. The proposed activities will result in minimum feasible alteration or impairment to the wetland’s functional characteristics and existing contours, vegetation, fish and wildlife resources, and hydrological conditions; and
    4. The disturbance of wetlands has been minimized by locating any necessary activities outside the wetland to the extent possible; and
    5. The proposed activities will not jeopardize the continued existence of species listed by the federal government or the state as endangered, threatened, sensitive, or documented priority species or priority habitats; and
    6. The proposed activities will not cause significant degradation of ground water or surface water quality; and
    7. The proposed activities comply with all state, local and federal laws, including, but not limited to, those related to sediment control, pollution control, floodplain restrictions, and on-site wastewater disposal; and
    8. Any and all regulated activities in wetlands and buffers will be mitigated according to LMC 14.162.100. The Examiner may require the preparation of a formal mitigation plan; and
    9. There will be no damage to nearby public or private property and no threat to the health or safety of people on or off the property; and
    10. The inability to derive reasonable economic use of the property is not the result of actions by the applicant in segregating or dividing the property and creating the undevelopable condition after the effective date of this chapter.
E. Reasonable Use Provision, Categories III and IV Wetlands. If an applicant for a regulated activity on a Category III or IV wetland and/or associated buffer cannot obtain permission through the procedures described in subsections A and C of this section, the activity may be allowed if, following a public hearing, the Hearing Examiner determines the criteria of subsection D of this section are met. [Ord. 630 § 9, 2015; Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.162.100 Mitigation.
A. All activities in wetlands and/or buffers shall be mitigated according to this section. Mitigation sequencing is used to determine the type and extent of mitigation and is considered in order of preference, however there may be circumstances when an alternative mitigation strategy is preferable such as a mitigation bank, in-lieu fee program, or advance mitigation project that is implemented according to federal and state rules, state policy and state water quality regulations.
The order of preference for mitigation is:
    1. Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of actions, and providing specified buffers and setbacks. Provision of specified buffers and setbacks is the expected method of mitigation unless an activity is listed as exempt, a reasonable use exception has been granted according to the provisions of this chapter, or an appropriate alternative mitigation program has been approved through a formal mitigation plan.
    2. Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation, by using appropriate technology, or by taking affirmative steps to reduce impacts.
    3. The following types of mitigation (no order of preference):
        a. Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment;
        b. Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the action;
        c. Compensating for the impact by replacing or providing substitute resources or environments.
    4. Monitoring the impact and compensation and taking appropriate corrective measures.
    5. Mitigation for individual actions may include a combination of the above measures.
B. Compensatory mitigation for alterations to wetlands shall be used only for impacts that cannot be avoided or minimized and shall achieve equivalent or greater biologic functions. Compensatory mitigation plans shall be consistent with Wetland Mitigation in Washington State – Part 2: Developing Mitigation Plans – Version 1 (Ecology Publication No. 06-06-011b, Olympia, WA, March 2006, or as revised), and Selecting Wetland Mitigation Sites Using a Watershed Approach (Western Washington) (Publication No. 09-06-32, Olympia, WA, December 2009).
    1. Mitigation ratios shall be consistent with subsection (B)(3) of this section.
    2. Mitigation requirements may also be determined using the credit/debit tool described in Calculating Credits and Debits for Compensatory Mitigation in Wetlands of Western Washington: Final Report (Ecology Publication No. 10-06-011, Olympia, WA, March 2012, or as revised).
    3. Wetland Mitigation Ratios[1]. 
    +-----------------------+-----------------------------+----------------+--------------+
    |   Category and Type   | Creation or Reestablishment | Rehabilitation | Enhancement  |
    |      of Wetland       |                             |                |              |
    +-----------------------+-----------------------------+----------------+--------------+
    | Category I:           |                             |                |              |
    +-----------------------+-----------------------------+----------------+--------------+
    | Bog, natural heritage | Not considered possible     | Case by case   | Case by case |
    | site                  |                             |                |              |
    +-----------------------+-----------------------------+----------------+--------------+
    | Category I:           |                             |                |              |
    +-----------------------+-----------------------------+----------------+--------------+
    | Mature forested       | 6:1                         | 12:1           | 24:1         |
    +-----------------------+-----------------------------+----------------+--------------+
    | Category I:           |                             |                |              |
    +-----------------------+-----------------------------+----------------+--------------+
    | Based on functions    | 4:1                         | 8:1            | 16:1         |
    +-----------------------+-----------------------------+----------------+--------------+
    | Category II           | 3:1                         | 6:1            | 12:1         |
    +-----------------------+-----------------------------+----------------+--------------+
    | Category III          | 2:1                         | 4:1            | 8:1          |
    +-----------------------+-----------------------------+----------------+--------------+
    | Category IV           | 1.5:1                       | 3:1            | 6:1          |
    +-----------------------+-----------------------------+----------------+--------------+
    1Ratios for rehabilitation and enhancement may be reduced when combined with 1:1 replacement through creation or reestablishment. See Table 1a, Wetland Mitigation in Washington State – Part 1: Agency Policies and Guidance – Version 1 (Ecology Publication No. 06-06-011a, Olympia, WA, March 2006, or as revised).
    4. The detailed mitigation plan shall be signed by the wetland specialist to indicate that the plan is according to specifications determined by the wetland specialist. A signed original mitigation plan shall be submitted to the Department.
    5. Approval of the detailed mitigation plan shall be signified by a notarized memorandum of agreement signed by the applicant and Department Director or designate, and recorded with the County Auditor. The agreement shall refer to all requirements for the mitigation project.
    6. The mitigation project shall be completed according to a schedule agreed upon between the Department and the applicant.
    7. Wetland mitigation shall occur according to the approved wetland mitigation plan, and shall be consistent with provisions of this chapter.
    8. On completion of construction for the wetland mitigation project, the wetland specialist shall notify the Department. The Department will inspect and review the construction project prior to acceptance. [Ord. 630 § 10, 2015; Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.162.110 New agricultural activities.
An applicant may use the following procedure to initiate agricultural activities:
A. Where the Department determines that a regulated wetland may be present within 150 feet of the proposed activity, the applicant shall select one of the following options:
    1. The applicant shall provide the Department with a report prepared by a wetland specialist which recommends the appropriate wetland category and includes rationale for the recommendation. The Department will review and approve the wetland category and buffer as follows:
    +------------------+----------+
    | Wetland Category |  Buffer  |
    +------------------+----------+
    | I                | 150 feet |
    +------------------+----------+
    | II               | 100 feet |
    +------------------+----------+
    | III              | 50 feet  |
    +------------------+----------+
    | IV               | 25 feet  |
    +------------------+----------+
    2. Alternatively, the Department, upon request, shall determine the appropriate wetland category. The buffer width shall be according to the table in subsection (A)(1) of this section.
B. The Department will determine whether the activity would intrude into the buffer, the wetland, or both.
    1. If the Department determines that the proposed activity may intrude into the wetland and/or buffer, the applicant shall prepare a delineation report subject to approval by the Department; or
    2. If the Department determines that the proposed activity may intrude only into the buffer, the Department, upon request, shall delineate the wetland.
C. Following approval of the delineation report or the Department’s completion of the delineation, the applicant shall place permanent, clearly visible markers on site at the edge of the buffer. Placement of markers by a licensed surveyor is not required. No regulated activities shall occur within the wetland and/or buffer except as allowed in subsection D of this section. Temporary intrusion into the buffer necessary for construction activities may be allowed if the buffer can be adequately restored. Livestock shall be fenced from the wetland and buffer, unless the requirements of subsection D of this section are met.
D. Agricultural activities may be initiated:
    1. In a buffer, if the applicant demonstrates to the Department that all adverse impacts to wetlands will be mitigated.
    2. In the wetland after Department approval of the following reports, which shall be prepared by a wetland specialist obtained by the applicant:
        a. A report which recommends the appropriate wetland category and includes rationale for the recommendation, unless the category has already been determined by the Department; and
        b. A wetland delineation report, unless a delineation has already been approved by the Department; and
        c. A best management plan developed by the Pierce County Conservation District or USDA Soil Conservation Service. A wetland specialist shall review the plan and specify mitigation for all impacts to wetlands, other than water quality impacts reviewed by the Conservation District or Soil Conservation Service; and
        d. A report prepared by a wetland specialist which demonstrates that the proposed activity:
            i. Will not jeopardize the continued existence of species listed by the federal government or the state as endangered, threatened, sensitive, or documented priority species or priority habitats;
            ii. Will not cause significant degradation of ground water or surface water quality; and
            iii. Will not damage public or private property and will not threaten public health or safety. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.162.120 Alternative review process, Corps of Engineers Section 404 individual permits.
A. The alternative review process outlined below will be used in cases where a Section 404 individual permit is required from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. (Refer to 33 CFR Sections 320.1, 323.2(g), and 325.5(b)(1).)
    1. The applicant shall notify the Department when the applicant applies for the Section 404 permit or contacts the Corps concerning a specific project. The applicant shall apprise the Department of the Corps’ permitting process, including notifying the Department of all hearings or meetings scheduled to discuss the applicant’s project, potential mitigation or approval. The review process of the Corps will substitute for the review process outlined in LMC 14.162.130. The City participation in the Corps’ review process does not constitute approval of the applicant’s project by the City. The substantive provisions of this chapter are still applicable and authorization of regulated activities will be approved or denied by the Department based upon those provisions. However, the Department shall consider the mitigation requirements as set forth by the commenting agencies during the Corps’ review process and shall concur with that mitigation, if it is functionally equivalent with the requirements of this chapter.
    2. The applicant shall submit the information specified in LMC 14.162.070 and 14.162.100 to the Department when filing for the Corps permit. The Department may also require the submittal of any additional information deemed necessary.
    3. Notice of Application. A notice of application will be required for any permit applications subject to LMC 18A.02.670. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

14.162.130 Wetland review procedure, fees, and title notification.
A. Procedure. The provisions of this section regarding wetlands regulation shall be incorporated and integrated into other City permitting requirements including, but not limited to, the review and issuance of zoning certifications, site development permits, clearing and grading permits, building permits, environmental reviews under SEPA, administrative and conditional use permits, shoreline permits and subdivisions.
B. Fees. Each applicable fee shall be payable at the time the applicant submits an application or document to which a fee applies according to the City’s fee schedule.
C. Notice on Title. When the City determines that activities not exempt from this chapter are proposed, the property owner shall file for record with the Pierce County Auditor a notice approved by the Department in a form substantially as set forth below. The notice shall provide notice in the public record of the presence of a wetland or buffer, the application of this chapter to the property, and that limitations on actions in or affecting such wetlands and buffers may exist. The notice shall be notarized and shall be recorded prior to approval of any land use proposal for the site.
Notice on title is not required for utility line easements on lands not owned by the jurisdiction conducting the regulated activity.Form of notice:
WETLAND AND/OR WETLAND BUFFER NOTICE
Tax Parcel Number:
Name:
Address:
Legal Description:
NOTICE: This property contains wetlands or wetland buffers as defined by the City Code 14.162. Restrictions on use or alteration of the wetlands or wetland buffers may exist due to natural conditions of the property and resulting regulations.
Signature of owner _________________________________________
Date: __________
(NOTARY ACKNOWLEDGMENT)
D. Wetland Tract. 
    1. Prior to final approval of any development application on a property containing a wetland or wetland buffer, the part of the wetland and/or buffer which is on the site shall be placed in a separate wetland tract or tracts, protective easement, public or private land trust dedication, or similarly preserved through an appropriate permanent protective mechanism as determined by the City. All wetland tracts, protective easements, land trust dedications and other similarly preserved areas shall remain undeveloped in perpetuity, except as they may be allowed to be altered pursuant to this chapter.
    2. Prior to final approval of any development application on a property containing a wetland or wetland buffer, the common boundary between a wetland tract, protective easement, land trust dedication, or other similarly preserved area and the adjacent land shall be permanently identified with permanent signs. Sign locations, wording, and size and design specifications shall be as required by the Department.
    3. At any time after a wetland tract, protective easement, land trust dedication, or other similarly preserved area has been established, the owner may submit a delineation report to the Department. If the Department determines that a boundary change has occurred, or that a wetland no longer exists, the wetland tract, protective easement, land trust dedication, or other similarly preserved area may be altered or eliminated, as appropriate. If the Department determines that wetland boundaries have changed or that a wetland has been eliminated due wholly or in part to illegal activity, a change or elimination of wetland tract, protective easement, land trust dedication, or other similarly preserved area shall not be permitted.
    4. A wetland tract, protective easement, land trust dedication, or other similarly preserved area is not required for utility lines in easements on lands not owned by the jurisdiction conducting the regulated activity.
E. Review and Approval. Provisions for the protection of wetlands in conjunction with regulated activities shall be reviewed and approved by the Department. Approval shall be granted upon a determination that the wetland analysis report and mitigation plan meet all applicable requirements of this chapter, and that the monitoring program and contingency plan are tied to an acceptable financial guarantee to assure that the requirements will be complied with.
F. Expiration. Approvals shall be valid for a period of three years from the date of issue unless a longer or shorter period is specified by the Department. An extension of an original approval may be granted upon submittal of a written request to the Department prior to expiration. Prior to the granting of an extension, the Department may require updated studies if, in its judgment, the original intent of the approval is altered or enlarged by the renewal, if the circumstances relevant to the review and issuance of the original permit have changed substantially, or if the applicant failed to abide by the terms of the original approval. [Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

Chapter 14.165 DEFINITIONS

Sections:
14.165.010   Definitions.

14.165.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this title, in addition to the definitions in LMC 18A.90.200, the following definitions shall apply:
“Abutting” means bordering upon, to touch upon, in physical contact with. Sites are considered abutting even though the area of contact may be only a point.
“Activity” means any use conducted on a site.
“Agricultural activities” means the production of crops and/or raising or keeping livestock, including operation and maintenance of farm and stock ponds, drainage ditches, irrigation systems, and normal operation, maintenance and repair of existing serviceable agricultural structures, facilities or improved areas, and the practice of aquaculture. Forest practices regulated under Chapter 76.09 RCW, Title 222 WAC are not included in this definition.
“Alluvial geologic unit” means geologically recent stream, lake, swamp and beach deposits of gravel, sand, silt and peat.
“Animal containment area” means a site where two or more animal units of large animals per acre or three-quarters of an animal unit of small animals per acre are kept, and where a high volume of waste material is deposited in quantities capable of impacting ground water resources.
“Animal unit” means the equivalent of 1,000 pounds of animal.
“Applicant” means a person, party, firm, corporation, or other legal entity that proposes a development on a site.
“Aquifer” means a saturated geologic formation which will yield a sufficient quantity of water to serve as a private or public water supply.
“Aquifer recharge area” means areas where the prevailing geologic conditions allow infiltration rates which create a high potential for contamination of ground water resources or contribute significantly to the replenishment of ground water with potential to be used for potable water. For the purposes of this title, all of the area located within the Clover/Chambers Creek Basin boundary or the two highest DRASTIC zone boundaries is included in the aquifer recharge area.
“Aquifer susceptibility” means the ease with which contaminants can move from the land surface to the aquifer based solely on the types of surface and subsurface materials in the area. Susceptibility usually defines the rate at which a contaminant will reach an aquifer unimpeded by chemical interactions with the vadose zone media.
“Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also referred to as the “100-year flood.” The area subject to the base flood is the special flood hazard area designated on flood insurance rate maps as Zones “A” or “V.”
“Base flood elevation” means the elevation of the base flood above the datum of the effective firm.
“Basement” means any area of structure having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides.
“Best management plan” means a plan developed for a property which specifies best management practices for the control of animal wastes, storm water runoff, and erosion.
“Buffer” means an area contiguous with a critical area that is required for the integrity, maintenance, function, and structural stability of the critical area.
“Building footprint” means the horizontal area measured within the outside of the exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal and accessory buildings on a lot.
“Channel migration area” means that area within the lateral extent of likely stream channel movement due to stream bank destabilization and erosion, rapid steam incision, aggradation, avulsions, and shifts in location of stream channels plus 50 feet.
“Class” means one of the wetland classes used to categorize wetlands by their attributes and characteristics. Wetlands shall be rated using the latest adopted version of the Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington published by the Washington State Department of Ecology.
“Class I injection well” means a well used to inject industrial, commercial, or municipal waste fluids beneath the lowermost formation containing, within one-quarter mile of the well bore, an underground source of drinking water.
“Class II injection well” means a well used to inject fluids: brought to the surface in connection with conventional oil or natural gas exploration or production and may be commingled with wastewaters from gas plants that are an integral part of production operations, unless those waters are classified as dangerous wastes at the time of injection; for enhanced recovery of oil or natural gas; or for storage of hydrocarbons that are liquid at standard temperature and pressure.
“Class III injection well” means a well used for extraction of minerals, including but not limited to the injection of fluids for: in-situ production of uranium or other metals that have not been conventionally mined; mining of sulfur by Frasch process; or solution mining of salts or potash.
“Class IV injection well” means a well used to inject dangerous or radioactive waste fluids.
“Class V injection wells” means all injection wells not included in Class I, II, III, or IV.
“Classification” means defining value and hazard categories to which critical areas and natural resource lands will be assigned.
“Clearing” means the cutting, moving on site, or removal of standing or fallen timber; the removal or moving on site of stumps; or the cutting or removal of brush, grass, ground cover, or other vegetative matter from a site in a way which exposes the earth’s surface of the site. In addition to the above, clearing is an activity which does not require reforestation per an approved forest practices application/notification issued by the Department of Natural Resources.
“Cliff” means a steep vertical or overhanging face of rock or earth greater than 25 feet in height.
“Compensatory mitigation” means mitigation to compensate for loss of wetland habitat due to filling of wetlands or other regulated activities in wetlands.
“Confined aquifer” means an aquifer bounded above and below by beds of distinctly lower permeability than that of the aquifer itself and that contains ground water under sufficient pressure for the water to rise above the top of the aquifer.
“Confining formation” means the relatively impermeable formation immediately overlying an artesian aquifer.
“Contaminant” means any chemical, physical, biological, or radiological substance that does not occur naturally or occurs at concentrations and duration as to be injurious to human health or welfare or shown to be ecologically damaging.
“Critical aquifer recharge area” means areas that are determined to have a critical recharging effect on aquifers used as a source for potable water, and are vulnerable to contamination from recharge.
“Critical areas” means wetlands, flood hazard areas, fish and wildlife habitat areas, aquifer recharge areas, and geologically hazardous areas as defined in this chapter.
“Critical facilities” means those facilities occupied by populations or which handle dangerous substances including but not limited to hospitals, medical facilities; structures housing, supporting or containing toxic or explosive substances; covered public assembly structures; school buildings through secondary including day-care centers; buildings for colleges or adult education; jails and detention facilities; and all structures with occupancy of greater than 5,000 people.
“Degraded” means to have suffered a decrease in naturally occurring functions and values due to activities undertaken or managed by persons, on or off a site.
“Delineation” means identification of wetlands and their boundaries done in accordance with the approved federal wetland delineation manual and applicable regional supplements.
“Delineation report” means a written document prepared by a wetland specialist which includes data sheets, findings of the delineation and a site plan which identifies the wetland boundaries.
“Department” means the City of Lakewood Department of Community Development.
“Designation” means taking formal legislative and/or administrative action to adopt classifications, inventories, and regulations.
“Developed lot” means any lot developed with a primary use and structure(s), not generally subject to further development with additional units or other primary uses.
“Development” means any human-induced change to improved or unimproved real property including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings or other structures, placement of manufactured home/mobile, mining, dredging, clearing, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, subdivision of property, removal of substantial amounts of vegetation, or alteration of natural site characteristics.
“Director” means the Director of the Department of Community Development or his/her designee.
“DRASTIC” means a model developed by the National Water Well Association and Environmental Protection Agency used to measure aquifer susceptibility.
“Dry certificate” means any combination of structural and nonstructural measures that prevent flood waters from entering a structure.
“Earth/earth material” means naturally occurring rock, soil, stone, sediment, or combination thereof.
“Ecotone” means a transition area between two adjacent vegetation communities.
“Elevation certificate” means the official form (FEMA form 81-31) used to provide elevation information necessary to ensure compliance with provisions of this title and determine the proper flood insurance premium rate.
“Enhancement” means actions performed to improve the condition of existing degraded wetlands and/or buffers so that the quality of wetland functions increases (e.g., increasing plant diversity, increasing wildlife habitat, installing environmentally compatible erosion controls, removing nonindigenous plant or animal species, removing fill material or solid waste).
“Erosion” means the wearing away of the earth’s surface as a result of the movement of wind, water, or ice.
“Erosion hazard areas” means those areas that because of natural characteristics, including vegetative cover, soil texture, slope, gradient, and rainfall patterns, or human-induced changes to such characteristics, are vulnerable to erosion.
“Excavation” means the mechanical removal of earth material.
“Existing” means those uses legally established prior to incorporation whether conforming or nonconforming.
“Extirpation” means the elimination of a species from a portion of its original geographic range.
“Fill/fill material” means a deposit of earth material, placed by human or mechanical means.
“Filling” means the act of placing fill material on any surface, including temporary stockpiling of fill material.
“Fish and wildlife habitat areas” means those areas identified as being of critical importance to maintenance of fish, wildlife, and plant species, including: areas with which endangered, threatened, and sensitive species have a primary association; habitats and species of local importance; naturally occurring ponds under 20 acres and their submerged aquatic beds that provide fish or wildlife habitat; waters of the state; lakes, ponds, streams, and rivers planted with game fish by a governmental or tribal entity, or private organization; state natural area preserves and natural resource conservation areas.
“Fisheries biologist” means a professional with a degree in fisheries, or certification by the American Fisheries Society, or with five years’ professional experience as a fisheries biologist.
“Flood hazard areas” means areas of land located in floodplains which are subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. These areas include, but are not limited to, streams, rivers, lakes, coastal areas, wetlands, and the like.
“Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
“Flood or flooding” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
    1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
    2. The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
“Flood protection elevation” (FPE) means the elevation above the datum of the effective FIRM to which the new and substantially improved structures must be protected from flood damage.
“Floodfringe” means the area subject to inundation by the base flood, but outside the limits of the floodway, and which may provide needed temporary storage capacity for flood waters.
“Floodplain” means the total area subject to inundation by the base flood, including the floodfringe and the floodway areas.
“Floodway” means the channel of a river, or other watercourse, and the land areas that must be reserved in order to convey and discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by more than one foot, and those areas designated as deep and/or fast-flowing water.
“Geological assessment” means an assessment prepared by a professional engineer licensed by the state of Washington with expertise in geotechnical engineering or prepared by a professional geologist, hydrologist, or soils scientist, who has earned the related bachelor’s degree from an accredited college or university, or equivalent educational training, and has a minimum of five years’ experience assessing the relevant geologic hazard. A geological assessment must detail the surface and subsurface conditions of a site and delineate the areas of a property that might be subject to specified geologic hazards.
“Geologically hazardous areas” means areas that, because of their susceptibility to erosion, sliding, earthquake, or other geological events, may pose a risk to the siting of commercial, residential, or industrial development consistent with public health or safety concerns.
“Geotechnical report” means a report prepared by a professional engineer licensed by the state of Washington with expertise in geotechnical engineering, evaluating the site conditions and mitigating measures necessary to reduce the risks associated with development in geologically hazardous areas.
“Grading” means any excavating, filling, clearing, creating (or combination thereof) of impervious surfaces.
“Ground amplification” means an increase in the intensity of earthquake induced ground shaking which occurs at a site whereby thick deposits of unconsolidated soil or surficial geologic materials are present.
“Ground water” means all water found beneath the ground surface, including slowly-moving subsurface water present in aquifers and recharge areas.
“Ground water management area” means a specific geographic area or subarea designated pursuant to Chapter 173-100 WAC for which a ground water management program is required.
“Ground water management program” means a comprehensive program designed to protect ground water quality, to assure ground water quantity, and to provide for efficient management of water resources while recognizing existing ground water rights and meeting future needs consistent with local and state objectives, policies and authorities within a designated ground water management area or subarea and developed pursuant to Chapter 173-100 WAC.
“Habitat assessment” means a report prepared by a professional wildlife biologist or fisheries biologist, which identifies the presence of fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas in the vicinity of the proposed development site.
“Habitat management plan” means a report prepared by a professional wildlife biologist or fisheries biologist, which discusses and evaluates the measures necessary to maintain fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas on a proposed development site.
“Habitat of local importance” means an area, range or habitat within which a species has a primary association and which, if altered, may reduce the likelihood that the species will maintain and reproduce over the long term. Examples include areas of high relative density or species richness, breeding habitat, winter range, and movement corridors. These areas may also include habitats that are of limited availability or high vulnerability to alteration. The Lakewood City Council may designate specific habitats of local importance by ordinance or resolution.
“Hazardous substance(s)” means any liquid, solid, gas, or sludge, including any materials, substance, product, commodity, or waste, regardless of quantity, that exhibits any of the physical, chemical or biological properties described in WAC 173-303-090 or 173-303-100.
“Hazardous substance processing or handling” means the use, storage, manufacture, or other land use activity involving hazardous substances, but does not include individually packaged household consumer products or quantities of hazardous substances of less than five gallons in volume per container. Hazardous substances shall not be disposed on site unless in compliance with Dangerous Waste Regulations, Chapter 173-303 WAC, and any pertinent local ordinances, such as sewer discharge standards.
“Hazardous waste” means and includes all dangerous waste and extremely hazardous waste as designated pursuant to Chapter 70.105 RCW and Chapter 173-303 WAC.
    1. “Dangerous waste” means any discarded, useless, unwanted, or abandoned substances including, but not limited to, certain pesticides, or any residues or containers of such substances which are disposed of in such quantity or concentration as to pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, wildlife, or the environment because such wastes or constituents or combinations of such wastes:
        a. Have short-lived, toxic properties that may cause death, injury, or illness or have mutagenic, teratogenic, or carcinogenic properties; or
        b. Are corrosive, explosive, flammable, or may generate pressure through decomposition or other means.
    2. “Extremely hazardous waste” means any waste which:
        a. Will persist in a hazardous form for several years or more at a disposal site and which in its persistent form presents a significant environmental hazard and may be concentrated by living organisms through a food chain or may affect the genetic make-up of humans or wildlife; and
        b. Is disposed of at a disposal site in such quantities as would present an extreme hazard to humans or the environment.
“Hazardous waste treatment and storage facility” means a facility that treats and stores hazardous waste and is authorized pursuant to Chapter 70.105 RCW and Chapter 173-303 WAC. It includes all contiguous land and structures used for recycling, reusing, reclaiming, transferring, storing, treating, or disposing of hazardous waste. Treatment includes using physical, chemical, or biological processing of hazardous wastes to make such waste nondangerous or less dangerous and safer for transport, amenable for energy or material resource recovery. Storage includes the holding of waste for a temporary period but not the accumulation of waste on the site of generation as long as the storage complies with applicable requirements of Chapter 173-303 WAC.
“Historic structure” means a structure that:
    1. Is listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the Washington Heritage Register, or the Washington Heritage Barn Register; or
    2. Has been certified to contribute to the historical significance of a registered historic district.
“Hydrogeologic assessment” means a report detailing the subsurface conditions of a site and which indicates the susceptibility and potential for contamination of ground water supplies.
“Hydrologic soil groups” means soils grouped according to their runoff-producing characteristics under similar storm and cover conditions. Properties that influence runoff potential are depth to seasonally high water table, intake rate and permeability after prolonged wetting, and depth to a low permeable layer. Hydrologic soil groups are normally used in equations that estimate runoff from rainfall, but can be used to estimate a rate of water transmission in soil. There are four hydrologic soil groups: A, with low runoff potential and a high rate of water transmission; B with moderate infiltration potential and rate of water transmission; C, with a slow infiltration potential and rate of water transmission; and D, with a high runoff potential and very slow infiltration and water transmission rates.
“Hydrologically isolated wetland” means a wetland which:
    1. Is not contiguous to any 100-year floodplain of a lake, river or stream; and
    2. Has no contiguous surface hydrology, hydric soil or hydrophytic vegetation between the wetland and any other wetland or stream system.
“Hyporheic zone” means a saturated layer of rock or sediment beneath and/or adjacent to a stream channel that contains some proportion of channel water or that has been altered by channel water infiltration.
“Impervious surface” means natural or human-produced material on the ground that does not allow surface water to penetrate into the soil. Impervious surfaces may consist of buildings, parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks, and any other areas of concrete, asphalt, plastic, etc.
“Infiltration” means the downward entry of water into the immediate surface of soil.
“In-kind mitigation” means to replace wetlands with substitute wetlands whose characteristics and functions and values are intended to replicate those destroyed or degraded by a regulated activity.
“Lakes” means impoundments of open water 20 acres or larger in size.
“Landfill” means a disposal facility or part of a facility at which solid waste is permanently placed in or on land and which is not a landspreading disposal facility.
“Landslide” means the abrupt downslope movement of soil, rocks, or other surface matter on a site. Landslides may include, but are not limited to, slumps, mudflows, earthflows, rockfalls, and snow avalanches.
“Landslide hazard areas” means areas which are potentially subject to risk of mass movement due to a combination of geologic, topographic, and hydrologic factors.
“Large animal” means an animal with an average weight of 100 pounds or more.
“Liquefaction” means a process by which a water-saturated granular (sandy) soil layer loses strength because of ground shaking commonly caused by an earthquake.
“Long-term commercial significance” means the growing capacity, productivity, and soil composition of land which makes it suitable for long-term commercial production, in consideration with the land’s proximity to population areas, and the possibility of more intense uses of land.
“Mineral resource lands” means lands primarily devoted to the extraction of minerals or which have known or potential long-term commercial significance for the extraction of minerals.
“Minerals” means gravel, sand, and valuable metallic substances.
“Mitigation” means to avoid, minimize or compensate for adverse environmental impacts. “Mitigation” includes:
    1. Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;
    2. Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation, by using appropriate technology, or by taking affirmative steps to avoid or reduce impacts;
    3. Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment;
    4. Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the action;
    5. Compensating for the impact by replacing, enhancing, or providing substitute resources or environments; and/or
    6. Monitoring the impact and taking appropriate corrective measures.
“Natural floodplain functions” means the contribution that a floodplain makes to support habitat, including but not limited to providing flood storage and conveyance, reducing flood velocities, reducing sedimentation, filtering nutrients and impurities from runoff, processing organic wastes, moderating temperature fluctuations and providing breeding and feeding grounds for aquatic and riparian species.
“Natural resource lands” means mineral resource lands which have long-term commercial significance.
“New construction” for flood hazard purposes refers to structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title.
“Old growth forests” means stands of at least two tree species, forming a multi-layered canopy with occasional small openings; with at least 20 trees/hectare (eight trees/acre) more than 81 centimeters (32 inches) dbh or more than 200 years of age; and more than 10 snags/hectare (four snags/acre) over 51 centimeters (20 inches) diameter and 4.6 meters (15 feet) tall; with numerous downed logs, including 10 logs/hectare (four logs/acre) more than 61 centimeters (24 inches) diameter and more than 15 meters (50 feet) long. High elevation stands (more than 762 meters (2,500 feet)) may have lesser dbh (more than 76 centimeters (30 inches)), fewer snags (more than 0.6/hectare (1.5/acre)), and fewer large downed logs (0.8 logs/hectare (two logs/acre)) that are more than 61 centimeters (24 inches) diameter and more than 15 meters (50 feet) long.
“Ordinary high water” means that mark on all lakes, streams, ponds, and tidal water that will be found by examining the bed and banks and ascertaining where the presence and action of water are so common and usual, and so long continued in all ordinary years, as to mark upon the soil a character distinct from that of the abutting upland, in respect to vegetation as that condition exists on the effective date of this chapter or as it may naturally change thereafter; provided, that in any area where the ordinary high water mark cannot be found, the ordinary high water mark adjoining fresh water shall be the mean high water.
“Oregon white oak” means the species Quercus garryana, also known as a Garry oak. All references to oak trees in this chapter refer to Oregon white oak. See also “priority Oregon white oak woodland.”
“Out-of-kind mitigation” means to replace wetlands with substitute wetlands whose characteristics do not approximate those destroyed or degraded by a regulated activity.
“Perched ground water” means ground water in a saturated zone is separated from the main body of ground water by unsaturated rock.
“Permanent erosion control” means continuous on-site and off-site control measures that are needed to control conveyance and/or deposition of earth, turbidity or pollutants after development, construction, or restoration.
“Permeability” means the capacity of an aquifer or confining bed to transmit water. It is a property of the aquifer and is independent of the force causing movement.
“Permeable surfaces” mean sand, gravel, and other penetrable deposits on the ground which permit movement of ground water through the pore spaces, and which permit the movement of fluid to the ground water.
“Person” means an individual, firm, company, partnership, association, corporation, or other legal entity.
“Ponds” means naturally occurring impoundments of open water less than 20 acres in size and larger than 2,500 square feet which maintain standing water throughout the year.
“Potable water” means water that is safe and palatable for human use.
“Prairies” means open areas predominated by native, drought-resistant, grasses, forbs (flowering nonwoody plants) and herbs. In Pierce County, prairies are an unusual vegetation regime found in areas of extremely well-drained soils.
“Priority Oregon white oak woodland” means forested areas of pure oak, or of oak/conifer associations one acre or larger, and all oak trees located within, where oak canopy coverage of the area is at least 25 percent. Stands of oaks less than one acre in size may also be considered priority habitat when found to be particularly valuable to fish and wildlife (i.e., they contain many cavities, have a large diameter at breast height (dbh), are used by priority species, or have a large canopy).
“Private organization” means a nonprofit corporation organized pursuant to Chapter 24.03 RCW, which includes the planting of game fish among its purposes for organizing as a nonprofit corporation.
“Protected area” means the lands that lie within the boundaries of the floodway, the riparian habitat zone and the channel migration area. Because of the impact that development can have on flood heights and velocities and habitat, special rules apply in the protected area.
“Public services” include fire protection and suppression, law enforcement, public health, education, recreation, environmental protection, and other governmental services.
“Qualified ground water scientist” means a hydrogeologist, geologist, engineer, or other scientist who meets all the following criteria:
    1. Has received a baccalaureate or post-graduate degree in the natural sciences or engineering; and
    2. Has sufficient training and experience in ground water hydrology and related fields as may be demonstrated by state registration, professional certifications, or completion of accredited university programs that enable that individual to make sound professional judgments regarding ground water vulnerability.
“Recessional outwash geologic unit” means sand and gravel materials deposited by melt-water streams from receding glaciers.
“Recharge” means the process involved in the absorption and addition of water to ground water.
“Regolith” means any body of loose, noncemented particles overlying and usually covering the bedrock.
“Regulated activities” include, but are not limited to, any activities which are directly undertaken or originate in a regulated critical area or resource land or their buffer that require any of the following entitlements from the City: building permit, commercial or residential; binding site plan; boundary line adjustment; conditional use permit; franchise right-of-way construction permit; site development permit; master plan development; right-of-way permit; shoreline conditional use permit; shoreline environmental redesignation; shoreline substantial development permit; shoreline variance; large lot subdivision, short subdivision; special use permit; subdivision; unclassified use permit; utility and other use permit; variance; zone reclassification; or any subsequently adopted permit or required approval not expressly exempted by this chapter. Regulated activities also include those specific activities listed in LMC 14.142.060.
“Regulatory floodplain” means the area of the special flood hazard area and all protected areas within the jurisdiction of the City of Lakewood.
“Restoration” means the reestablishment of ecological and/or habitat resources and features from a previously disturbed or degraded critical area site.
“Riparian” means of, adjacent to, or living on, the bank of a river, lake, pond, ocean, sound, or other water body.
“Seismic hazard areas” means areas subject to severe risk of damage as a result of earthquake induced ground shaking, slope failure, settlement, or soil liquefaction.
“Short subdivision” or “short plat” means the division or redivision of land into four or fewer lots, tracts, parcels, sites or divisions for the purpose of sale, lease, or transfer of ownership.
“Site” means a lot, parcel, tract, or combination of lots, parcels, or tracts where a development is proposed.
“Slope” means an inclined earth surface, the inclination of which is expressed as the ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.
“Slump” means the downward and outward movement of a mass of bedrock or regolith along a distinct surface of failure.
“Snag-rich areas” means forested areas which contain concentrations of standing dead trees, averaging 10 snags or greater per acre, and averaging greater than 15 inches in diameter at breast height.
“Soil survey” means the most recent National Cooperative Soil Survey for the local area or county by the Soil Conservation Service, United States Department of Agriculture.
“Sole source aquifer” means an area designated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under the Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974, Section 1424(e). The aquifer(s) must supply 50 percent or more of the drinking water for an area without a sufficient replacement available.
“Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means the land subject to inundation by the base flood. Special flood hazard areas are designated on flood insurance rate maps with the letters “A” or “V,” including AE, AO, AH, A1-99, and VE. The special flood hazard area is also referred to as the area of special flood hazard or SFHA.
“Species of local importance” means species that are of local concern due to their population status or their sensitivity to habitat manipulation.
“Start of construction” for flood hazard purposes includes substantial improvements, and means the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement that occurred before the permit’s expiration date. The “actual start” is either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the excavation for a basement, footing, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on property of accessory structures not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the “actual start of construction” means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
“Stockpiling” means the placement of material with the intent to remove it at a later time.
“Subdivision” or “formal subdivision” means the division or redivision of land into five or more lots, tracts, parcels, sites, or division for the purpose of sale, lease, or transfer of ownership.
“Substantial damage” for flood hazard purposes means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial damage also means flood-related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
“Substrate” means the soil, sediment, decomposing organic matter or combination of those located on the bottom surface of a wetland.
“Temporary erosion control” means on-site and off-site control measures that are needed to control conveyance or deposition of earth, turbidity or pollutants during development, construction, or restoration.
“Toe of slope” means a distinct topographic break in slope at the lowermost limit of the landslide or erosion hazard area.
“TPCHD” means the Tacoma-Pierce County Health Department.
“Unconfined aquifer” means an aquifer not bounded above by a bed of distinctly lower permeability than that of the aquifer itself and containing ground water under pressure approximately equal to that of the atmosphere. This term is synonymous with the term “water table aquifer.”
“Underground tank” means any one or a combination of tanks (including underground pipes connected thereto) which are used to contain or dispense an accumulation of hazardous substances or hazardous wastes, and the volume of which (including the volume of underground pipes connected thereto) is 10 percent or more beneath the surface of the ground.
“Urban governmental services” include those governmental services historically and typically delivered by cities, and includes storm and sanitary sewer systems, domestic water systems, street cleaning services, and other public utilities associated with urban areas and normally not associated with nonurban areas.
“Urban growth” refers to growth that makes intensive use of the land for the location of buildings, structures, and impermeable surfaces to such a degree as to be incompatible with the primary use of such land for the production of food, other agricultural products, or fiber, or the extraction of mineral resources. When allowed to spread over wide areas, urban growth typically requires urban governmental services. “Characterized by urban growth” refers to land having urban growth located on it, or to land located in relationship to an area with urban growth on it as to be appropriate for urban growth.
“Utility line” means pipe, conduit, cable or other similar facility by which services are conveyed to the public or individual recipients. Such services shall include, but are not limited to, water supply, electric power, gas, communications and sanitary sewers.
“Vadose zone” is the distance between the land surface and the uppermost aquifer. This distance is also defined as the “depth to water” zone or unsaturated zone.
“View corridor” means an area which affords views of lakes, mountains, or other scenic amenities normally enjoyed by residential property owners.
“Water table” means that surface in an unconfined aquifer at which the pressure is atmospheric. It is defined by the levels at which water stands in wells that penetrate the aquifer just far enough to hold standing water.
“Water typing” means a system for classifying water bodies according to their size and fish habitat characteristics. The Washington Department of Natural Resources Forest Practices Water Typing classification system defines four water types:
    1. Type “S” = Shoreline: streams that are designated “shorelines of the state,” including marine shorelines.
    2. Type “F” = Fish: streams that are known to be used by fish or meet the physical criteria to be potentially used by fish.
    3. Type “Np” = Nonfish Perennial streams.
    4. Type “Ns” = Nonfish Seasonal streams.
“Well” means a bored, drilled or driven shaft, or a dug hole whose depth is greater than the largest surface dimension.
“Wellhead protection area” means the surface and subsurface area surrounding a well or well field that supplies a public water system through which contaminants are likely to pass and eventually reach the water well(s) as designated under the Federal Clean Water Act.
“Wetland” or “wetlands” means areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Wetlands generally do not include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland sites, including, but not limited to, irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and landscape amenities. However, wetlands may include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland areas created to mitigate conversion of wetlands, if permitted by the City.
“Wetland specialist” means a person with experience and training in wetlands issues, and with experience in performing delineations, analyzing wetland functions and values, analyzing wetland impacts, and recommending wetland mitigation and restoration. Qualifications include:
    1. Bachelor of Science or Bachelor of Arts or equivalent degree in biology, botany, environmental studies, fisheries, soil science, wildlife, agriculture or related field, and two years of related work experience, including a minimum of one year of experience delineating wetlands using the Unified Federal Manual and preparing wetland reports and mitigation plans. Additional education may substitute for one year of related work experience; or
    2. Four years of related work experience and training, with a minimum of two years’ experience delineating wetlands using the Unified Federal Manual and preparing wetland reports and mitigation plans.
    The person should be familiar with the Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands, the City Site Development Regulations, the City wetland management policies, and the requirements of this title.
“Wildlife biologist” means a professional with a degree in wildlife, or certification by the Wildlife Society, or with five years’ professional experience as a wildlife biologist. [Ord. 630 § 11, 2015; Ord. 362 § 3, 2004.]

Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION*

Chapters:
15.05        Adoption of International Codes
15.25        Electrical Code
* Prior legislation note: Ord. 347 repealed this title and enacted a Title 15A. Prior to its repeal and reenactment, the title was based on the provisions of Ords. 29, 81, 121, 144, 176 and 285.

Chapter 15.05 ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL CODES

Sections:
15.05.010    Purpose.
15.05.020    Codes adopted by reference.
15.05.030    Copy on file.
15.05.040    Administrative provisions.
15.05.060    Amendments to International Building Code.
15.05.070    Amendments to International Residential Code.
15.05.080    Amendments to International Fire Code.
15.05.090    Amendments to International Property Maintenance Code.

15.05.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the codes and regulations adopted in this title is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of all buildings and structures within the City of Lakewood. It is not the purpose or intent to create or designate any particular class or group of persons to be especially protected or benefited, nor is it intended to create any special relationship with any individual. [Ord. 641 § 1, 2016.]

15.05.020 Codes adopted by reference.
The following codes, as herein adopted and further amended, shall be collectively known as the Lakewood Building Code.
A. The 2015 Edition of the International Building Code (IBC), including Appendix Chapters E, G, J and I, published by the International Code Council and amended by the Washington State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-50 WAC, is hereby adopted by reference and as subsequently amended by this chapter.
B. The 2015 Edition of the International Residential Code (IRC) excluding Sections R103, R104, R105, R106, R107, R108, R109, R110, R111, R112, R113, R114, but including Appendices F, Q and V, as published by the International Code Council and as adopted and amended by the Washington State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-51 WAC, is hereby adopted by reference and as subsequently amended by this chapter.
C. The 2015 Edition of the International Mechanical Code (IMC) published by the International Code Council and amended by the Washington State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-52 WAC; including the 2015 International Fuel Gas Code, the 2011 Edition of NFPA 58 and the 2012 Edition of ANSI Z223.1/NFPA 54 as amended by the Washington State Building Code Council, are hereby adopted by reference and as subsequently amended by this chapter.
D. The 2015 Edition of the International Fire Code (IFC), including Appendix Chapters B, C, D (Sections 105 and 106), E, F and G, published by the International Code Council and amended by the Washington State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-54A WAC, is hereby adopted by reference and as subsequently amended by this chapter.
E. The 2015 Edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code, including Appendices A, B and I, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials and amended by the Washington State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-56 WAC, is hereby adopted by reference and as subsequently amended by this chapter.
F. The 2015 Edition of the International Energy Conservation Code, as amended by the Washington State Building Code Council in Chapters 51-11C and 51-11R WAC and known as the Washington State Energy Code, is hereby adopted.
G. The 2015 Edition of the International Existing Buildings Code, published by the International Code Council and amended by the Washington State Building Code Council in Chapter 51-50 WAC, is hereby adopted.
H. The 2015 Edition of the International Performance Code, published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted.
I. The 2015 Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted.
J. The current edition of the National Electrical Code, published by the National Fire Protection Association, as adopted in Chapter 296-46B WAC and Chapter 19.28 RCW, except that “Department” shall mean either the State Department of Labor and Industries or Tacoma Public Utilities, depending on geographic service area located within Lakewood’s city limits. [Amended during 2018 recodification; Ord. 647 § 1, 2016; Ord. 641 § 2, 2016.]

15.05.030 Copy on file.
At least one copy of each of the adopted codes identified in LMC 15.05.020 shall be on file in the Office of the City Clerk. [Ord. 641 § 3, 2016.]

15.05.040 Administrative provisions.
The administrative provisions as specified in Chapter 1 of the International Building Code as adopted and subsequently amended by this title shall be used as the general administrative provisions for the Lakewood Building Code. In case of a conflict of provisions the Building Official shall determine the applicable application. [Ord. 641 § 4, 2016.]

15.05.060 Amendments to International Building Code.
The following sections of the IBC are amended as follows:
A. Section 105.2, Work exempt from permit, item 4, is amended to read as follows:Retaining walls which are not over 4 feet (1,219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, provided the wall is set back from any adjacent property lines or structures a distance at least equal to the height of the wall and the material retained by the wall slopes 1:2 (or less) up and away from the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or II-A liquids.
B. Section 105.8 Ownership of permits, add a new section to read as follows:The ownership of a City of Lakewood permit shall inure to the property owner. The permit applicant is an agent of the owner, if not the property owner.
C. Section 107.3.4, Design professional in responsible charge, is amended by the addition of the following paragraph (remainder unaffected):The preparation of plans for any building or structure containing five or more residential dwelling units or doing design work including preparing construction contract documents and administering the construction contract for construction, erection, enlargement, alteration, or repairs of or to a building of any occupancy over 4,000 square feet in floor area, or a project that impacts life safety or structure that is contained within a building of over 4,000 square feet in floor area.
D. Section 109.4, Work commencing before permit issuance, is amended to read as follows:Any person who commences work on a building, structure, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to an investigation fee equal to the permit fee. The investigation fee may be based upon an hourly cost if determined appropriate by the building official.
E. Section 109.6, Refunds, is amended to read as follows:The building official may authorize a refund of: one hundred percent (100%) of any fee paid erroneously; up to eighty percent (80%) of the permit fee for a permit that is withdrawn, if no work has been done under the permit; and up to eighty percent (80%) of the plan review fee paid when an application is withdrawn prior to any plan review having been done. No refund shall be authorized except on written application filed by the original applicant not later than one hundred eighty days after the date of the fee payment.
F. Section 111.2, Certificate issued, is amended to read:After the building official inspects the building or structure and finds that it is in compliance with the applicable codes and regulations, the building official shall cause to be issued a Certificate of Occupancy on a form developed by the City to display the information pertinent to identify the facility and code requirements.
G. Section 113, Board of Appeals, is renamed “Appeals” and reads as follows:
113.1 Authority and Limitations
The hearing examiner system established by LMC 1.36 shall be authorized to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code. Any reference, in the adopted codes, to a board of appeals shall be read as ‘hearings examiner.’
113.2 Limitations on Authority
An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code has not been correctly interpreted, or the provisions do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The hearings examiner shall have no authority to waive requirements of this code. The examiner is not authorized to interpret or decide on administrative provisions contained in chapter 1.
113.3 Further Appeal to Superior Court
The decision by the Hearing Examiner under this Title shall be final and conclusive unless within twenty-one (21) days from the date of the decision, a party makes application to a court of competent jurisdiction for a writ of certiorari, a writ of petition or a writ of mandamus, or other applicable relief.
H. Section 114.4, Violation penalties, is amended to read as follows:Any violation of a provision of the Lakewood Building Code is a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for a term of up to ninety (90) days, by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by both.
I. Section 202, Definitions. Add a definition of “major improvement” that reads:Major improvement means all improvements to a structure (excluding normal maintenance and repair and life/safety improvements) which within a 72-month period exceeds a cumulative value of 50 percent of the current county assessed value of the structure. The value of improvements shall be as determined by the building official.
J. Section 901.7, Fire areas, is revised to read as follows:Where buildings, or portions thereof, are subject to the fire protection provisions of this chapter the use of fire walls, fire barriers or other means to divide fire area in order to not exceed the limits established for requiring a fire protection system in accordance with this chapter are prohibited.
K. Section 903.2, Where required, is amended to read as follows:Approved automatic sprinkler systems shall be provided in all newly constructed buildings and in existing buildings undergoing a Major Improvement, which exceed 5,000 square feet in fire area and houses A, B, F, M, R-1, R-2 or S occupancies. Additionally, automatic sprinkler systems shall also be provided in any of the other situations described in 903.2., as required under WAC 51-50 and/or as follows:
Exceptions:
1. F-2 and S-2 occupancies of type IA, IB, IIA, IIB, IIA, IIIA or IIIB less than 12,000 square feet in area, unless required by other provisions of the code.
2. B occupancies located on a floor other than level of exit discharge that serves other occupancies are not allowed the use of the 5,000 square foot threshold.
L. Section 903.2.7, Group M. Section 903.2.7, item 4, is revised to read:4. A Group M occupancy used for the display of upholstered furniture.
M. Section 903.2.13. A new Section 903.2.13 is added and reads as follows:Spray booths and rooms. New and existing spray booths and spray rooms shall be protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system.
N. Section 903.3.1.1.1, Exempt Locations. Section 903.3.1.1.1 is amended by deletion of items 4, 5 and 6.
O. Section 912.2, Location. Section 912.2 is amended to read as follows:With respect to hydrants, driveways, buildings and landscaping, fire department connections shall be so located that fire apparatus and hoses connected to supply the system will not obstruct access to the building(s) for other fire apparatus. Fire department connections shall not be located closer than 50 feet from the structure or 1 1/2 times the building height, whichever is greater. The location shall be approved by the fire code official.
[Ord. 647 § 2, 2016; Ord. 641 § 5, 2016.]

15.05.070 Amendments to International Residential Code.
The following sections of the International Residential Code are amended as follows:
A. Table R302.2(1), Climatic and geographical design criteria, is amended to read as follows:
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Ground snow load                  | 25 lbs. per sq. ft.   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Wind speed (gusts)                | 85 mph exposure B     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Seismic Design Category           | D1                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Subject to damage from weathering | Moderate              |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Frost line depth                  | 12 inches             |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Termite                           | Slight to moderate    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Decay                             | Slight to moderate    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Winter design temperature         | 26 degrees Fahrenheit |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Ice shield underlayment required  | No                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Flood hazards                     | Current FEMA map      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Air freezing index                | Not applicable        |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Mean annual temperature           | 50 degrees Fahrenheit |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------+
B. Section 107, Appendix V, is amended as follows:An approved automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed in new townhouses in accordance with Appendix Q.
[Ord. 647 § 3, 2016; Ord. 641 § 6, 2016.]

15.05.080 Amendments to International Fire Code.
The following sections of the International Fire Code are amended as follows:
A. Section 104.1.1, Coordination with Other Departments. A new Section 104.1.1 is added to read as follows:When requested and authorized to do so by the fire code official, the chief of police may assign such available police officers and the code compliance supervisor may assign such available code compliance officers as may be necessary to assist the community development department and/or the fire department in enforcing provisions of this code.
B. Section 104.1.2, Inspection Authority. A new Section 104.1.2 is added to read as follows:The fire code official and members of the fire prevention division have limited police powers for the purpose of enforcing the International Fire Code. Such powers shall include the ability to issue verbal and written notices of violation, to determine appropriate times within which violations shall be removed or repaired, to issue infraction and criminal citations for violations of the International Fire Code and all applicable state and local fire regulations, and to enter, as necessary, buildings and premises for the purposes of inspection as necessary to and as described within the International Fire Code.
C. Section 104.1.3, Special Limited Commission. A new Section 104.1.3 is added to read as follows:The scope of the special limited commission herein shall not grant the fire code official or any member of the fire prevention bureau any power of arrest and this special limited commission shall not grant any member, of the fire prevention division, authority to carry firearms or other weapons while conducting activities related to enforcement of the International Fire Code.
D. Section 105.6.50, Special Operation Permit. A new Section 105.6.50 is added to read as follows:The fire code official is authorized to require and issue a special operational permit for any operation determined to have the potential for presenting a hazardous condition. The operational permit will provide the ability to track and monitor the situation.
E. Section 105.7.20, Underground supply piping for automatic sprinkler system, is amended to read as follows:A construction permit is required for the installation of the portion of the underground water supply piping, public or private, supplying a water-based fire protection system. The permit shall apply to all underground piping and appurtenances downstream of the first control valve on the lateral piping or service line from the distribution main to one foot above finished floor of the facility with the fire protection system. Maintenance performed in accordance with this code is not considered to be a modification and does not require a permit.
Exception:
1. Underground piping serves a fire protection system installed in accordance with NFPA 13D.
F. Section 107.2, Testing and operation, is amended to read as follows:Equipment requiring periodic testing or operation to ensure maintenance shall be tested or operated as specified in this code and references. To ensure all fire and life safety systems are free of deficiencies and current on testing the fire code official may utilize a third party confidence testing coordination and tracking method.
G. Section 110.5, Securing Property. A new Section 110.5 is added to read as follows:The owner, occupant or other person having under his/her control any property or materials on a property damaged by fire or explosion shall, when ordered by the chief, immediately secure the property against entry or unauthorized access by the public, by boarding up all openings, fencing, barricading or utilizing other appropriate measures.
H. Section 113.3, Work commencing before permit issuance, is amended to read as follows:A person who commences any work, activity or operation regulated by this code before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to double the fees identified for such work, activity or operation as set forth in the adopted City fee schedule.
I. Section 113.6, Nonprofit Organizations. A new Section 113.6 is added to read as follows:Operational permits submitted by non-profit organizations will be charged fifty percent of fees. Non-profit organizations are organizations that have established a non-profit exemption from the Internal Revenue Service.
J. Section 113.7, Permit Re-Inspection Fee. A new Section 113.7 is added to read as follows:All initial fees include two field inspections. Inspections required in excess of two may incur additional fees. Re-inspections fees must be paid prior to scheduling an inspection.
K. Section 202, General Definitions, is amended as follows:
The term “false alarm” is revised to read as follows:A fire alarm causing emergency response by the fire department, which was initiated by one of the following:
1. A fire alarm system malfunction.
2. Improper maintenance of a fire alarm or an automatic fire suppression system.
3. Improper use or misuse of a fire alarm system or an automatic fire suppression system.
4. Damage to a fire alarm system or automatic fire suppression system due to carelessness while performing other procedures in the building.
5. The initiation of a fire alarm system during construction, painting, or other procedure in which care should have been taken to protect initiating devices from sending a false signal.
The term “fire apparatus access road” is renamed “emergency vehicle access.”
L. Section 319, False Alarms. Add a new section to read:False alarms causing response by emergency response shall be managed in accordance with 319.1 and 319.2.
M. 
319.1 False Alarm Complaints.
False alarm complaints shall be filed with the Fire Prevention Division by either the responding fire companies or by the Fire Communication Center.
N. 
319.2 Notification and invoicing
Upon receiving and verifying the validity of a false alarm complaint, the fire code official will notify the owner or manager of the premises to take corrective measures to eliminate problems causing the false alarms. The notice will state that future false alarms at the referenced address occurring within twelve months of the original complaint, will result in an invoice for costs in accordance with the city’s master fee schedule.
O. Section 503, Fire Apparatus Access Roads, as published in the IFC (unamended by WAC), is adopted and is renamed “Emergency Vehicle (EV) Access” and is amended as follows:
P. Section 503.2.1, Width, is renamed “503.2.1, Dimensions” and amended to read as follows:EV access servicing not more than two dwelling units shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet wide. EV access for all other projects shall not be less than 24 feet with no parking, twenty-eight (28) feet with parking on one side and thirty-two (32) feet with parking on both sides. Unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet 6 inches shall be provided. With approval of the City and Fire Marshal a reduced vertical clearance may be approved provided such reduction does not impair EV Access and approved signs are installed and maintained.
Q. Section 503.2.3, Surface, is amended to read as follows:EV access shall be designed and maintained to support the imposed loads of fire apparatus and shall be paved with asphalt or concrete so as to provide all-weather driving capabilities. Exception: access designated “Emergency Vehicles Only” may be designed by a licensed engineer and can be alternative surfacing, as approved by the City engineer.
R. Section 503.2.4, Turning radii, is amended to read as follows:A minimum outside turning radius of forty-five (45) feet shall be provided for all EV Access.
S. Section 503.2.5, Dead ends, is amended to read as follows:Dead-end emergency access roads in excess of 150 feet in length shall be provided with an approved area for turning around emergency vehicles. Dead end turn around specifications shall comply with sections 503.2.5.1 through 503.2.5.5.
T. 
503.2.5.1 Commercial.
Commercial/industrial projects may utilize a roundabout or hammerhead design.
U. Reserved. 
V. Reserved. 
W. 
503.2.5.4 Additions or alterations.
Alterations or tenant improvements, on a dead end access road or interior dead end access drive aisle, that increase the number of uses to the site shall construct an EV turnaround.
X. 
503.2.5.5 Turn around design.
Hammerhead turnarounds and cul-de-sac design shall comply with the latest edition of the City of Lakewood Engineering Standards Manual.
Y. Section 503.2.6, Bridges and elevated surfaces, is not adopted.
Z. 
503.2.7 Grade.
The maximum grade (vertical profile grade) of an EV access shall be fifteen (15) percent. All sections of EV accesses with grades over twelve (12) percent shall be paved with 0.17 feet compacted asphalt concrete or its cement concrete equivalent.
AA. Section 503.3, Marking, is amended to read as follows:Approved striping or signs shall be provided and maintained for fire apparatus roads to identify such roads and prohibit the obstruction thereof. Signs and striping shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and be replaced or repaired when necessary to provide adequate visibility.
1. Striping. Painted lines of red traffic paint shall mark fire apparatus access six (6) inches in width to show the boundaries of the lane. The words “NO PARKING FIRE LANE” shall appear in four (4) inches of white letters at 25 feet intervals on the red border markings along both sides of the fire lanes. Where a curb is available, the striping shall be on the vertical face of the curb.
2. Signs. Signs shall read “NO PARKING FIRE LANE” and shall be twelve (12) inches wide and eighteen (18) inches high. The signs shall have letters and background of contrasting colors, readily legible from a fifty (50) foot distance. Signs shall be permanently affixed to a stationary post and bottom of the sign shall be six feet, six inches (6’6”) above finished grade. Signs shall be spaced not more than fifty (50) feet apart. Signs may be installed on permanent buildings or walls or as approved by the code official.
BB. Section 503.6, Security gates, is amended to read as follows:The installation of security gates across EV access ways shall be approved by the fire code official and meet the requirements in 503.6.1 through 503.6.3.
CC. 
503.6.1 Residential development access.
Gates which serve ten (10) or more dwelling units shall have an Opticom activation system or an equivalent and compatible system that is approved by the fire chief.
DD. 
503.6.2 Knox key access.
Gates shall have rapid-entry key capabilities compatible with the local fire district per IFC, Section 506.
EE. 
503.6.3 Automated gate.
All electrically-activated gates shall have default capabilities to the unlocked position.
FF. Section 503.7, Modifications. Add a new Section 503.7, Modifications, to read as follows:Where site conditions do not allow full compliance, the fire code official may modify emergency vehicle access requirements as necessary to ensure adequate accessibility for emergency responders.
GG. Section 505.1, Address identification, is amended to read as follows:Building address identification shall comply with sections 505.1.1 and 505.1.2.
HH. 
505.1.1 Commercial.
New and existing commercial buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed high on the building to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of twelve (12) inches high. Individual unit/suite or space numbers or letters shall be four (4) inches in size and contrasting with the background and visible from the approach side or angle.
II. 
505.1.2 Residential.
New and existing residential structures shall have approved address numbers placed in the position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be a minimum of four (4) inches high with a minimum stroke of one half (0.5) inch for buildings that are under fifty (50) feet of the street, six (6) inches high with a minimum stroke of one half (0.5) inch for buildings that are over fifty (50) feet of the street. Where access is by means of a private road or driveway and the building cannot be viewed from a public way, a monument, pole or other sign shall be used to identify the structure.
JJ. Section 507.3.1, Residential Fire Flow Limitations. A new section is added to read as follows:Residential additions that add more than 50% of the original square footage, which fail to meet required fire flow and/or hydrant distances shall be required to install a fire sprinkler system complying with Section 903.3.1.3.
KK. Section 507.5.1, Where required, is amended to read as follows:Any facility or building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction shall be required to provide a hydrant(s), where required by the fire code official, in accordance with appendix C.
Exceptions:
A. 1. For Group R-3 and Group U occupancies, the distance requirements shall be 350 feet.
2. For Group R-1 and R-2 occupancies, no point of the building shall exceed a 500-foot hose lay distance using a fire department access route between the hydrant and building.
3. For buildings equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, the distance requirement shall be 500 feet.
LL. Section 507.5.1.2 is added to read as follows:
507.5.1.2 Hydrant for fire department connection.
A fire hydrant shall be installed no more than 100 feet from any fire department connection.
MM. Section 507.5.7 is added to read as follows:
Section 507.5.7 Hydrant setback.
All fire hydrants shall be installed at least two (2) feet, but not more than nine (9) feet, from the curb face of a paved street or edge of a designated approved fire access roadway.
All fire hydrants placed on private property shall be adequately protected by either curb stops or concrete post or other approved methods. Such stops shall be the responsibility of the landowner on which the fire hydrant is installed.
NN. Section 507.5.9 is added to read as follows:
Section 507.5.9 Hydrant marking.
An approved blue, two (2) sided reflector shall be utilized to identify each hydrant location. The reflector shall be affixed to the centerline of each roadway or fire access lane.
OO. Section 507.5.10 is added to read as follows:
Section 507.5.10 Hydrant distance to building.
Fire hydrants shall not be closer than fifty (50) feet to a structure or one and one half (1 1/2) times the height of the structure, whichever is greater.
PP. Section 901.7, Systems out of service, is renamed “Fire watch personnel” and amended to read as follows:The Fire Chief or his or her designee, shall determine when Fire Department personnel must conduct a fire watch due to code requirements, excessive occupant load, the unusual nature of the event, the use of pyrotechnics or fireworks, the existence of hazardous condition, the inoperability of the fire protection system, or other conditions affecting the safety at the event or at the property. The person responsible for the facility shall pay a fee per the fee schedule for associated costs. If more than one person is required for the fire watch, the person responsible for the facility shall pay a fee per the fee schedule. The Fire Chief or designee may notify the responsible person of the period of the fire watch and the resulting fee prior to the event.
QQ. Section 1103.8.1, Where required, is amended with the addition of the following sentence:The use of listed exceptions shall not apply to Group R-2 occupancies.
RR. LMC 15.05.060(E) through (K) inclusive shall be considered to also amend collocated references in the International Fire Code. [Ord. 648 § 8, 2016; Ord. 641 § 7, 2016.]

15.05.090 Amendments to International Property Maintenance Code.
The International Property Maintenance Code is amended as follows:
A. All references in the IPMC to “code official” are amended to read as “public officer.”
B. Section 101.2, Scope, is amended to read as follows:
101.2 Scope and Purpose
Pursuant to chapter 35.80 of the Revised Code of Washington (RCW), the City Council finds that there are within the City of Lakewood, dwellings which are unfit for human habitation and buildings, structures, and premises or portions thereof which are unfit for other uses due to dilapidation, disrepair, structural defects, unpermitted and substandard construction or modification, filth and other conditions attracting insects or vermin or likely to spread disease, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities, or other similar conditions and violations of various building, health, and safety regulations, and/or which are vacant, unsecured, and abandoned or apparently abandoned.
Such dwellings, buildings, structures, and premises are dangerous to occupants, threaten the public health, safety, and welfare, attract and harbor vagrants and criminals, offend public values, lower the value of neighboring properties, contribute to neighborhood or community deterioration, and hamper community and economic development.
When the owners or other persons in possession or control of such properties are unwilling or unable to correct such conditions in a proper and timely manner, it is in the interest of the community for the City to intervene and correct, repair, or remove such buildings, structures, and conditions and to pursue all legal means to recover from such persons and/or properties the costs of doing so, including the costs of staff salaries and benefits, materials, contractors, and all other legally recoverable costs and expenses.
C. Section 104.1, General, is amended to read as follows:
104.1 Authority of Public Officer
The Public Officer is hereby authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this Chapter. These powers shall include the following in addition to others granted in this Chapter: (a)(i) To determine which dwellings are unfit for human habitation; (ii) to determine which buildings, structures, or premises are unfit for other use; (b) to administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses, and receive evidence; and (c) to investigate the dwelling and other property conditions and to enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations when the Public Officer has reasonable ground for believing they are unfit for human habitation, or for other use, PROVIDED, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession, and to obtain an order for this purpose after submitting evidence in support of an application which is adequate to justify such an order from a court of competent jurisdiction in the event entry is denied or resisted; PROVIDED FURTHER that the Public Officer may recognize and give appropriate effect to special and extenuating circumstances which, in order to do substantial justice, warrant the exercise of discretion to adjust the timeframes, standards and other provisions of this chapter. Examples of circumstances which may warrant such exercise of discretion include, without limitation, medical illness or disability affecting a property owner’s ability to respond to orders or appear at hearings and bona fide insurance coverage disputes which create a definite risk that enforcement of this chapter would unfairly result in a substantial economic loss to the property owner.
D. Section 107, Notices and Orders, is renamed “Section 107, Procedures.”
E. Section 107.1, Notice to person responsible, is replaced as follows:
107.1 Inspection and Complaint
If, after a preliminary investigation of any dwelling, building, structure, or premises, the Public Officer finds that it is dangerous or unfit for human habitation or other use, he shall cause to be served either personally or by certified mail, with return receipt requested, upon all persons having any interest therein, as shown upon the records of the Pierce County Auditor, and shall post in a conspicuous place on such property, a complaint stating in what respects such dwelling, building, structure, or premises is unfit for human habitation or other use. If the whereabouts of any of such persons is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the Public Officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the Public Officer makes an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon such persons may be made either by personal service or by mailing a copy of the complaint and order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each such person at the address of the building involved in the proceedings, and mailing a copy of the complaint and order by first class mail to any address of each such person in the records of the Pierce County Treasurer-Assessor or Auditor. Such complaint shall contain a notice that a hearing will be held before the Public Officer, at a place therein fixed, not less than ten days nor more than thirty days after the serving of the complaint; and that all parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint, to appear in person, or otherwise, and to give testimony at the time and place in the complaint. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the Public Officer. A copy of such complaint shall also be filed with the Pierce County Auditor and such filing of the complaint or order shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law.
F. Section 107.2, Method of service, is replaced as follows:
107.2 Findings and Order.
A. If, after the required hearing, the Public Officer determines that the dwelling is dangerous or unfit for human habitation, or building or structure or premises is unfit for other appropriate use, he/she shall state in writing his/her findings of fact in support of such determination, and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owners and parties in interest thereof, as provided in this section, and shall post in a conspicuous place on the property, an order that (i) requires the owners and parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, structure, or premises to render it fit for human habitation, or for other appropriate use, or to vacate and close the dwelling, building, structure, or premises, if such course of action is deemed proper on the basis of the standards set forth in this section; or (ii) requires the owners and parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling, building, structure, or premises, if this course of action is deemed proper on the basis of those standards. If no appeal is filed, a copy of such order shall be filed with the Pierce County Auditor.
B. In ordering the required course of action to be taken by the owner to abate the unfit or dangerous structure, the Public Officer may order the structure or a portion thereof demolished and not repaired under the following circumstances:
i. The structure is patently illegal with regard to building, zoning, or other regulations;
ii. The estimated cost to repair the structure or portion thereof is more than 50% of the value of the structure or portion thereof; or,
iii. The estimated cost to repair the structure or portion thereof is less than 50% of the value and repairing and/or securing the structure from entry would, nevertheless, cause or allow the structure to remain a hazard or public nuisance.
The value of the structure shall be as determined by the Pierce County Assessor-Treasurer. In estimating the cost of repairing the structure, the Public Officer may rely upon such cost estimating publication or method the Building Official deems appropriate.
G. Section 110.1, General, is amended by the addition of the following paragraph:In enforcement of this section, the Public Officer may have the structure demolished, even if the order does not require demolition, if the estimated cost to repair the structure or portion thereof is less than 50% of the value and the structure is abandoned or the owner is unresponsive, and repairing and/or securing the structure from entry would, nevertheless, cause or allow the structure to remain a hazard or public nuisance, continue a non-conforming use, or otherwise be an unreasonable use of public funds.
H. Section 111, Means of Appeal, is deleted and replaced as follows:
111 Appeals.
Within thirty days from the date of service upon the owner and posting of the decision issued by the Public Officer, the owner or any party in interest may file an appeal with the City Clerk for a hearing before the Hearing Examiner. The rules for hearings before the Hearing Examiner shall be those specified in Chapter 1.36 LMC. In addition to the provisions of Chapter 1.36 LMC, all matters under this Chapter shall be resolved by the Hearing Examiner within sixty days from the date of filing therewith and a transcript of the findings of fact of the Examiner shall be made available to the owner or other party in interest upon demand. The findings and orders of the Hearing Examiner shall be reported in the same manner and shall bear the same legal consequences as if issued by the Public Officer.
Absent an injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of the Hearing Examiner shall be final thirty days after issuance.
I. Section 112.4, Failure to comply, is deleted and replaced as follows:Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
J. A new section titled 113 Enforcement of Order, is added.
K. Section 113.1, Enforcement of order, is added and reads as follows:If the owners or parties in interest, following exhaustion of his or her rights to appeal, fails to comply with the final order to repair, alter, improve, vacate, close, remove, or demolish the dwelling, building, structure, or premises, the Public Officer may direct or cause such dwelling, building, structure, or premises to be repaired, altered, improved, vacated and closed, removed, or demolished.
In the enforcement of this section, the Public Officer is authorized to enter the structure and/or premises for inspection, testing, sampling, or other purposes preparatory to and in the conduct of the repairs, demolition, or other actions, to hire contractors as necessary to perform the work, and to spend public funds to complete the work.
L. Section 113.2, Sale or disposal of materials, is added and reads as follows:Prior to removing or demolishing the dwelling, building, structure, or premises, the Public Officer shall, if reasonably possible, attempt to sell the materials and/or contents of the dwelling, building, structure, or premises, and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition and, if there be any balance remaining, it shall be paid to the parties entitled thereto, as determined by the Public Officer, after deducting the costs incident thereto.
M. Section 113.3, Recovery of expenses, is added and reads as follows:The amount of the cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements; or vacating and closing; or removal or demolition by the Public Officer, shall be assessed against the real property upon which such cost was incurred unless such amount is previously paid. Pursuant to RCW 35.80.030(1)(h), the amount of such costs shall constitute a lien against the property of equal rank with state, county, and municipal taxes.
For purposes of this section, the cost of vacating and closing shall include (i) the amount of relocation assistance payments that a property owner has not repaid to the City of Lakewood or other local government entity that has advanced relocation assistance payments to tenants under RCW 59.18.085; (ii) all penalties and interest that accrue as a result of the failure of the property owner to timely repay the amount of these relocation assistance payments under RCW 59.18.085; and (iii) all other reasonable expenses, including but not limited to, the costs of staff time, materials, incidentals, mailing, publishing, and recording notices. Upon certification to him, by the Public Officer, of the assessment amount being due and owing, the County Assessor/Treasurer shall enter the amount of such assessment upon the tax rolls against the property for the current year and the same shall become a part of the general taxes for that year to be collected at the same time and with interest at such rates and in such manner as provided for in RCW 84.56.020 for delinquent taxes, and when collected to be deposited to the credit of the general fund of the City.
[Ord. 641 § 8, 2016.]

Chapter 15.25 ELECTRICAL CODE*

Sections:
15.25.010    Adoption of National Electrical Code.
15.25.020    Copy on file.
15.25.040    Copy of RCW on file.
* Prior legislation note: Ord. 347 repealed provisions concerning the electrical code that were formerly in Chapter 15.36, based on the provisions of Ords. 29 and 176.

15.25.010 Adoption of National Electrical Code.
The 2008 Edition of the National Electrical Code (NFPA 70 – 2002) and any subsequent amended versions adopted by the Department of Labor Industries, including Annex A, B, and C, but excluding Article 80; the 1999 edition of Centrifugal Fire Pumps (NFPA 20 – 1999); the 2002 Edition of Emergency and Standby Power Systems (NFPA 110 – 2002); Commercial Building Telecommunications Cabling Standard (ANSI/TIA/EIA 568-B.1-May 2001 including Annex 1 through 5); Commercial Building Standard for Telecommunications Pathway and Spaces (ANSI/TIA/EIA 569-A-December 2001 including Annex 1 through 4); Commercial Building Grounding and Bonding Requirements for Telecommunications (ANSI/TIA/EIA 607 – 1994); Residential Telecommunications Cable Standard (ANSI/TIA/EIA 570-A-1999); and the National Electrical Safety Code (NESC C2-2002 excluding Appendixes A and B) are hereby adopted by reference as part of this chapter.
The requirements of this chapter will be observed where there is any conflict between this chapter and the National Electrical Code (NFPA 70), Centrifugal Fire Pumps (NFPA 20), the Emergency and Standby Power Systems (NFPA 110), ANSI/TIA/EIA 568-A, ANSI/TIA/EIA 569-A, ANSI/TIA/EIA 607, ANSI/TIA/EIA 570, or the NESC C2-2002.
The National Electrical Code will be followed where there is any conflict between Centrifugal Fire Pumps (NFPA 20), Emergency and Standby Power Systems (NFPA 110), ANSI/TIA/EIA 568-A, ANSI/TIA/EIA 569-A, ANSI/TIA/EIA 607, ANSI/TIA/EIA 570, or the NESC C2-2002 and the National Electrical Code (NFPA 70). [Ord. 516 § 1, 2010; Ord. 450 § 8, 2007; Ord. 347 § 11, 2004.]

15.25.020 Copy on file.
At least one copy of the edition of the National Electrical Code and Chapter 296-46 WAC identified in LMC 15.25.010 shall be on file in the Office of the City Clerk. [Ord. 347 § 11, 2004.]

15.25.040 Copy of RCW on file.
At least one copy of the sections of Chapter 19.28 RCW set forth in LMC 15.05.020 shall be on file with the Office of the City Clerk. [Ord. 347 § 11, 2004.]

Title 16 RESERVED

Title 17 SUBDIVISIONS

Chapters:
17.02        General Provisions
17.04        Legal Lots
17.06        Preliminary Plat Procedure – General
17.10        Preliminary Plat Procedure – Filing Procedure
17.14        Preliminary Plat Procedure – Review Procedure
17.16        Final Plats – Review Procedure
17.18        Improvements
17.22        Short Subdivisions
17.26        Private Street Plats
17.30        Binding Site Plan
17.34        Residential Condominium Binding Site Plan Review Process
17.38        Boundary Line Adjustments
17.42        Miscellaneous, Review, Penalties and Severability

Chapter 17.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:
17.02.010    City of Lakewood subdivision regulations.
17.02.015    Authority.
17.02.020    Purpose.
17.02.025    Applicability.
17.02.030    Division of land by streets or rights-of-way.
17.02.035    Definitions.
17.02.040    Subdivisions in flood areas.
17.02.045    Subdivisions adjacent to state highways.

17.02.010 City of Lakewood subdivision regulations.
This title shall be known as the City of Lakewood subdivision regulations, hereafter referred to as “this title.” [Ord. 591 § 1, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.02.015 Authority.
This title is adopted pursuant to Chapter 58.17 RCW. [Ord. 591 § 2, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.02.020 Purpose.
The intent of this title is to provide criteria, regulations and standards to govern the subdividing of land within the City and to:
A. Promote the public health, safety and general welfare in accordance with standards established by the state and the City;
B. To implement the comprehensive plan;
C. Promote effective use of land by preventing the overcrowding or scattered development which would injure health, safety or the general welfare due to the lack of water supplies, sanitary sewer, drainage, transportation, parks and recreation areas, or other public services, or excessive expenditure of public funds for such services;
D. Avoid congestion and promote safe and convenient travel by the public on streets and highways through the coordination of streets within a subdivision with existing and planned streets;
E. Provide for adequate light and air;
F. Provide for proper ingress and egress;
G. Provide for the housing and commercial needs of the community;
H. Provide uniform monumenting of land divisions and conveyance of accurate legal descriptions;
I. Protect environmentally sensitive areas;
J. Encourage the conservation of nonrenewable energy resources; and
K. Provide for adequate roadway and utility infrastructure with provisions for on-going maintenance and operations costs. [Ord. 591 § 3, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.02.025 Applicability.
Every subdivision shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 58.17 RCW, this title and all future amendments or applicable federal, state or local laws. After final plat, short plat, or binding site plan approval, any subsequent division of platted or short platted lots, parcels, tracts, sites or divisions shall be allowed only if the procedures of this title are first followed, and these requirements shall be applicable to all plats approved prior to the effective date of this title. The provisions of this title shall not apply to the following:
A. Cemeteries and other burial plots while used for that purpose.
B. Divisions of land into lots or tracts each of which is one-thirty-second of a section of land, or larger, or 20 acres or larger if the land is not capable of description as a fraction of a section of land; provided, the division meets the minimum lot size zoning requirements for the area involved and provided further, that for the purpose of computing the size of any lot under this item which borders on a street or public way, the lot size shall be expanded to include that area which would be bounded by the center line of the street or public way and the side lot lines of the lot running perpendicular to such center line.
C. Divisions made by testamentary provisions or the laws of descent; provided, that each lot shall meet all applicable minimum lot size requirements.
D. The transfer of contiguous unplatted lots if:
    1. The lots were created in compliance with all applicable state and City subdivision regulations in effect at the time of the creation of said lots; or
    2. The lots transferred and remaining lots are improved with dwellings; provided, that transfers pursuant to subsection (D)(1) or (D)(2) of this section shall not be effective until the proponent is issued a certificate of compliance from the Community Development Department. A certificate shall be issued when the owner or applicant shows that the lot conforms to the criteria above.
E. A division which is made by subjecting a portion of a parcel or tract of land to Chapter 64.32 RCW, the Horizontal Property Regimes Act (Condominiums), or Chapter 64.34 RCW (the Condominium Act) if the City has approved a binding site plan for all of such land.
F. A division for the purpose of leasing land for facilities providing personal wireless services while used for that purpose. “Personal wireless services” means any federally licensed personal wireless service. “Facilities” means unstaffed facilities that are used for the transmission or reception, or both, of wireless communication services including, but not necessarily limited to, antenna arrays, transmission cables, equipment shelters, and support structures. [Ord. 591 § 4, 2015; Ord. 500 § 2, 2009; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.02.030 Division of land by streets or rights-of-way.
The City declares that the following shall not, of themselves, result in the division of a parcel:
A. A state or federal road or highway; or
B. A City street that has been adopted as part of the City street system; or
C. A City street right-of-way that has been acquired or accepted by the City but is an unopened City street as defined in Section 2.00 of the City Site Development Regulations, or as amended. [Ord. 591 § 5, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.02.035 Definitions.
As used in this title, unless the context or subject matter clearly requires otherwise, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings:
Binding Site Plan. A “binding site plan” is an alternative method for subdividing land where the property interests created continue to collectively function as one site with regard to elements such as access, circulation, open space, landscaping, drainage, maintenance, or parking. A binding site plan is used primarily in conjunction with commercial and industrial developments and the establishment of residential condominium projects. A binding site plan includes a drawing to a scale as specified by the Community Development Department. The site plan shall:
    1. Identify and show the area and location of all streets, improvements, utilities, open space;
    2. Contain inscriptions or attachments setting forth such appropriate limitations and conditions for the use of the land as are established by the City Hearing Examiner or other appropriate City Department or government body having authority to approve the site plan;
    3. Contain provisions requiring that all development occurring within the proposal’s boundaries be in conformity with the site plan;
    4. Delineate proposed lots or units intended to be created as discrete ownership interests subject to sale or transfer. If appropriate, such delineation shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 64.34 RCW (the Condominium Act).
“Block” means a group of lots, tracts or parcels within well defined and fixed boundaries, often surrounded by roadways.
“City Engineer” shall be the person appointed by the City Manager as the City Engineering Manager.
“Council” means the City Council.
“County Assessor-Treasurer” shall be as defined in the Pierce County Charter.
“County Auditor” shall be as defined in the Pierce County Charter.
“Dedication” means the deliberate appropriation of land by an owner for any general or public uses, reserving no other rights than those compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the property has been devoted. Dedications may be accomplished by showing the dedication on a final plat, short plat or binding site plan presented to the City for final approval and recordation. Dedications may also be accomplished via transfer by separate deed. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, title to the dedicated land shall vest in the appropriate governmental unit.
“Developer” shall mean the person, party, firm or corporation who applies for approval of a subdivision, short plat or binding site plan.
“Examiner” means the land use Hearing Examiner who is herein authorized to approve subdivisions, and hear appeals on short subdivisions and binding site plans.
“Final plat” means the final drawing of the subdivision and dedication drawn to a scale not smaller than one inch equals 100 feet unless approval of another scale is given by the Community Development Director, on standard 18-inch-by-24-inch sheet size, prepared for filing for record with the County Auditor and containing all elements and requirements set forth in state law and in this title.
“Geological hazard” means any hazard caused by natural or artificial causes which may damage persons or property and which would include but not be limited to slides, slippage or instability of earth, rock and soil. Geological hazards are generally addressed in the City’s critical areas and resource lands regulations (LMC Title 14).
“Improvement” shall mean any thing or structure constructed for the benefit of all or some residents of the subdivision or the general public such as but not limited to streets, alleys, storm drainage systems and ditches, sanitary sewer pipes or main lines, water lines, services, and mains, and storm drainage containment facilities.
“Legal lot of record” means a legally created lot. A person may establish that a lot has been legally created, by providing one of the following:
    1. A copy of a recorded formal plat, short plat, binding site plan, or subdivision approved by Pierce County or the City of Lakewood pursuant to Chapter 58.16 or 58.17 RCW separately describing the lot.
    2. A copy of the recorded boundary line adjustment or lot combination approved by Pierce County or the City of Lakewood separately describing the lot.
    3. Documentation that the creation of the lot was exempt from the provisions of the Pierce County or City of Lakewood subdivision regulations.
    4. A recorded deed, contract of sale, mortgage, survey, or tax segregation executed prior to August 13, 1974, that separately describes the lot.
The most recent recorded action or instrument establishing the boundary of a lot shall control. Any point within the interior of a lot shall be considered to be within one, and only one, legal lot of record.
“Lot” means a recognized unit of property with a written or platted legal description that addresses permissions or constraints upon its development. A “legal lot of record” is a lot that has been legally created as demonstrated by compliance with LMC 18A.50.115(A). Alternatively, a legal lot of record may be established through the certificate of land division compliance provisions of this title (LMC 17.04.030). A “parcel” is an identification of land for taxation purposes. A parcel may or may not be a legal lot of record.
“Model home,” for the purpose of this code, shall be defined as a dwelling in accordance with the City Zoning Code.
“Original tract” means a unit of land which the applicant holds under single or unified ownership, or in which the applicant holds controlling ownership and the configuration of which may be determined by the fact that all land abutting said tract is separately owned by others, not including the applicant or applicants; provided, that where a husband and wife own contiguous lots in separate or community ownership, said contiguous lots shall constitute the original tract.
“Planning Agency” means the City Community Development Department together with the Planning Commission.
“Planning Commission” means that body as defined in Chapter 35A.63 RCW as designated by the Council in Chapter 2.90 LMC to perform a planning function.
“Plat” means a map or representation of a subdivision, showing thereon the division of a tract or parcel of land into lots, blocks, streets and alleys or other divisions and dedications.
“Preliminary plat” means a neat and approximate drawing of a proposed subdivision showing the general layout of streets and alleys, lots, blocks and restrictive covenants to be applicable to the subdivision which shall furnish a basis for the approval or disapproval of the general layout of a subdivision.
“Reserved street area” means a defined area of land within the short plat or subdivision which is required by the City Engineering Manager to be reserved for a future street, and said area shall be dedicated to the City at the time of approval, but the street need not be constructed by the applicant or developer until such time as stated in the ordinance. Setbacks shall be established as if the reserved street area were dedicated.
“Short plat” means the map or representation of a short subdivision.
“Short subdivision” means any division or redivision of land into nine or fewer lots, tracts, parcels, sites or subdivisions for the purpose of sale, lease or transfer of ownership.
“Subdivision” means any division or redivision of land into 10 or more lots, tracts, parcels, sites or division for the purpose of sale, lease, or transfer of ownership except as provided in the definition of “legal lot of record” in this section. [Ord. 591 § 6, 2015; Ord. 500 § 3, 2009; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.02.040 Subdivisions in flood areas.
The City shall consider the physical characteristics of any proposed subdivision site and may disapprove a proposed plat or short plat because of flood, inundation, or wetland conditions. Construction of protective improvements may be required as a condition of approval, and such improvements shall be noted on the final plat.
No plat shall be approved for the subdivision of any land situated in a flood control zone as provided in Chapter 86.16 RCW without the prior written approval of the Department of Ecology of the state of Washington. [Ord. 591 § 7, 2015.]

17.02.045 Subdivisions adjacent to state highways.
Pursuant to RCW 58.17.155, whenever the City receives an application for the approval of a plat or short plat that is located adjacent to the right-of-way of a state highway, the Community Development Department shall give written notice of the application, including a legal description of the subdivision or short subdivision and a location map, to the Washington State Department of Transportation. The Department of Transportation shall, within 14 days after receiving the notice, submit to the responsible administrator who furnished the notice a statement with any information that the Department of Transportation deems to be relevant about the effect of the proposed short subdivision upon the legal access to the state highway, the traffic carrying capacity of the state highway and the safety of the users of the state highway. [Ord. 591 § 8, 2015.]

Chapter 17.04 LEGAL LOTS

Sections:
17.04.010    Purpose and intent.
17.04.020    Definition.
17.04.030    Certificate of land division compliance.
17.04.040    Application.
17.04.050    Review and processing procedures.
17.04.060    Notice of violation.
17.04.070    Nonbuildable lots.

17.04.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to advance the purposes and intent of Chapter 58.17 RCW; namely, to “regulate the subdivision of land and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare in accordance with standards established by the state to prevent the overcrowding of land; to lessen congestion in the streets and highways; to promote effective use of land; to promote safe and convenient travel by the public on streets and highways; to provide for adequate light and air; to facilitate adequate provision for water, sewerage, parks and recreation areas, sites for schools and school grounds and other public requirements; to provide for proper ingress and egress; to provide for the expeditious review and approval of proposed subdivisions which conform to zoning standards and local plans and policies; to adequately provide for the housing and commercial needs of the citizens of the state; and to require uniform monumenting of land subdivisions and conveyancing by accurate legal description.
This chapter seeks to ensure that the subdivision and development of land is accomplished in a thoughtful and orderly manner. This section seeks to balance the ability to develop private property with the public interest in ensuring that any such development does not adversely affect the community, the environment, or surrounding land uses. [Ord. 591 § 10, 2015.]

17.04.020 Definition.
A legal lot is a lot with specific fixed boundaries which was created consistent with applicable state law and which remains consistent with applicable state law. LMC 18A.50.115(A) sets forth requirements to establish a legal lot of record. To establish that a lot has been legally created, an applicant shall provide one of the following:
A. A copy of a recorded formal plat, short plat, binding site plan, or subdivision approved by Pierce County or the City of Lakewood pursuant to Chapter 58.16 or 58.17 RCW separately describing the lot.
B. A copy of the recorded boundary line adjustment or lot combination approved by Pierce County or the City of Lakewood separately describing the lot. This does not include actions taken by the County Assessor’s Office for tax purposes only.
C. Documentation that the creation of the lot was exempt from the provisions of the Pierce County or City of Lakewood subdivision regulations.
D. A deed, contract of sale, mortgage, recorded survey, or tax segregation executed prior to August 13, 1974, that separately describes the lot. [Ord. 591 § 11, 2015.]

17.04.030 Certificate of land division compliance.
In the event that an asserted lot was not created pursuant to a formal plat action, or where there is a question of a lot’s legality, a property owner may apply for a certificate of land division compliance.
Although a certificate of compliance certifies the legality of the parcel, it neither ensures that it is a buildable parcel, nor entitles the parcel owner to a construction permit or other development permits or approvals. To obtain a construction permit or other land use approval for the parcel, the owner must complete the appropriate application process and meet all existing regulations.
If the City determines that the parcel was created in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 58.17 RCW and local ordinances at the time of its creation, a certificate of compliance may be issued. If the parcel was not created in compliance with those provisions, a conditional certificate of compliance or a notice of violation may be issued. A notice of violation is a recorded document notifying the owner and subsequent owners that the parcel was created in violation of Chapter 58.17 RCW and local ordinances. A landowner, upon receipt of the City’s intent to file a notice of violation may apply for a conditional certificate of compliance. The conditions which must be satisfied before a property is declared to be a legal lot, or before issuance of any permit or other approval, will typically be the same as those that would have been applied if the parcel had been legally created using the land division process. The City will not record the notice of violation if a conditional certificate is issued. [Ord. 591 § 12, 2015.]

17.04.040 Application.
Application for a certificate of compliance shall be made to the Community Development Department on forms provided by the Department, accompanied by the required filing fee. An application for a certificate of compliance shall be accompanied by the following:
A. One copy of grant deeds or other conveyance documents establishing the ownership of the property on the date of its creation;
B. One copy of the grant deed(s) or other conveyance documents showing the current owner of the parcel;
C. The assessor’s parcel number for the property;
D. Legal description of the parcels;
E. Current preliminary title report(s) for the subject property, not more than six months old, issued by a title company;
F. One copy of any plat map(s) which depict the property involved in the request. [Ord. 591 § 13, 2015.]

17.04.050 Review and processing procedures.
The Community Development Director shall review the application and shall issue a certificate of compliance, conditional certificate of compliance, or notice of violation. The determination shall be based on the following criteria:
A. A certificate of compliance shall be issued for a parcel created prior to August 13, 1974, which resulted from a division of land in which fewer than five parcels were created; or
B. A certificate of compliance shall be issued for any lot created as part of a recorded formal plat, short plat, binding site plan, or subdivision approved by Pierce County or the City of Lakewood pursuant to Chapter 58.16 or 58.17 RCW; or
C. A certificate of compliance shall be issued for any lot created as the result of a recorded boundary line adjustment or lot combination approved by Pierce County or the City of Lakewood; or
D. A certificate of compliance may be issued where documentation is provided showing that the creation of the lot was exempt from the provisions of the Pierce County or City of Lakewood subdivision regulations.
E. A conditional certificate of compliance shall be issued for any parcel which does not, or at the time of creation did not, comply with the provisions of state law and local ordinances regulating the division of land. A conditional certificate of compliance may include conditions as follows:
    1. If the current owner was not the owner at the time of the initial land division, the conditional certificate of compliance shall impose conditions which would have been applicable to a division of land on the date the current owner acquired the property; or
    2. If the current owner was the owner at the time of the initial land division, the conditional certificate of compliance shall impose conditions which would be applicable to a current division of land. [Ord. 591 § 14, 2015.]

17.04.060 Notice of violation.
A. If the Community Development Director has knowledge that real property has been divided in violation of the provisions of this title or Chapter 58.17 RCW, a notice of intention to record a notice of violation shall be mailed by certified mail with return receipt to the current owner of record of the property. The notice shall describe the property in detail, name the owner(s), describe the violation with an explanation as to why the property is not lawful, and state that the owner will be given an opportunity to present evidence to the contrary. The notice shall specify the date, time, and place for a meeting at which the owner may present evidence to the Community Development Director why a notice of violation should not be recorded. The meeting shall take place no sooner than 30 days and no later than 60 days from the date of mailing. The owner shall have 15 days to indicate whether or not he or she has any objections to the notice and would like to avail him or herself of the opportunity to meet with the Community Development Director.
B. An owner may apply for a conditional certificate of compliance per LMC 17.04.030. If, however, after the owner has presented evidence, the Community Development Director determines that the property has in fact been illegally divided, the City Clerk shall record the notice of violation with the County Recorder. If, within 15 days of receipt of the notice, the owner of the real property fails to inform the City of his or her objection to the notice of violation, the City Clerk shall record the notice of violation with the County Auditor. The notice of violation, when recorded, shall be deemed to be constructive notice of the violation to all successors in interest in the subject property. Pursuant to LMC 18A.50.115 and RCW 58.17.210, development shall be permitted only on a legally created lot.
C. If, after the owner has presented evidence, it is determined that there has been no violation, the City shall issue a certificate of compliance or a conditional certificate of compliance, and shall mail a clearance letter by certified mail with return receipt to the then current owner and shall record the clearance statement or certificate of compliance with the County Auditor.
D. A determination that a violation has been sustained is appealable to the City’s Hearing Examiner in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.36 LMC.
E. In the event that a notice of violation is sustained, the following courses of action are possible:
    1. A preliminary plat or short plat application may be filed. If approved, legal lots would be created upon recordation of the final plat or final short plat.
    2. A conditional certificate of compliance could be issued noting appropriate requirements to be fulfilled pursuant to LMC 17.04.050(E). Upon fulfillment of the conditions, a clearance statement and/or certificate of compliance shall be issued by the City and recorded with the County Assessor. The property shall thereafter be considered a legal lot of record. If a conditional certificate of compliance is issued, the Community Development Director shall, at a minimum, provide a scaled graphic depiction and accurate legal description to utility companies, service providers, and other agencies with jurisdiction over, or interest in, the subject property.
    3. If the property does not conform to City zoning requirements or is otherwise found to be a public nuisance or code violation which cannot be appropriately mitigated, the notice of violation shall be sustained and the City shall pursue appropriate legal action to remedy the violation and eliminate the separate lot. [Ord. 591 § 15, 2015.]

17.04.070 Nonbuildable lots.
There may be situations where a legal lot of record may be deemed unbuildable because of size, dimension, topography, lack of access, environmental constraint or other factors. When anticipated, information regarding limitations and constraints may be required to be noted on the certificate of compliance, or the City may issue some other appropriate form of notice. [Ord. 591 § 16, 2015.]

Chapter 17.06 PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCEDURE – GENERAL

Sections:
17.06.010    Explanation of preliminary plat and final plat approval.
17.06.020    Plans required.
17.06.030    Recommendations on street, drainage, utility and fire systems.

17.06.010 Explanation of preliminary plat and final plat approval.
The City of Lakewood utilizes a two-part review procedure for subdivision projects. The first part – the preliminary plat – is used to communicate the scope and specific details of the proposed subdivision. Environmental review under SEPA is performed at this stage. Specific requirements for the implementation of the subdivision are crafted in response to review comments by responsible agencies and the environmental review.
A preliminary plat application is acted upon by the City’s Hearing Examiner. The Hearing Examiner’s decision is the primary discretionary action by the City on the subdivision proposal. After final conclusion with regard to the preliminary plat, the developer is required to install subdivision improvements and utilities, and take other actions as required by the conditions of approval of the preliminary plat in order to implement the subdivision.
Upon completion of required infrastructure improvements and satisfaction of the requirements of the preliminary plat approval, the applicant shall file a final map following the procedures in Chapter 17.16 LMC. The proposed final plat map is reviewed by the Community Development Director and City Engineer for conformance with the terms of the preliminary plat approval. The City Council shall thereafter review the final plat as indicated in LMC 17.16.040.
Upon review and approval by the City Council, the final map shall be signed by all responsible agencies and shall be duly recorded with Pierce County. Legal lots are created upon recordation of the final plat map. [Ord. 591 § 18, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.06.020 Plans required.
Whenever it is essential for purposes of evaluating environmental or other concerns, the City Community Development Director or City Engineer may require the developer to submit certain specific concept drawings or studies (e.g., traffic impact analysis) prior to preliminary plat approval. [Ord. 591 § 19, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.06.030 Recommendations on street, drainage, utility and fire systems.
The City Engineer, the County Health Officer, utility providers, and the Fire Chief shall review and communicate to the Hearing Examiner their respective recommendations as to the adequacy of the proposed street system, storm drainage, sewage disposal, water supply and other utility systems, and fire protection services for the subdivision. The recommendations of the City Engineer, the County Health Officer and the Fire Chief shall become part of the record and shall be included with the Hearing Examiner’s decision. [Ord. 591 § 20, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

Chapter 17.10 PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCEDURE – FILING PROCEDURE

Sections:
17.10.010    Fees.
17.10.020    Filing.
17.10.025    Preliminary plat.
17.10.030    Staff procedure.
17.10.040    Notice to agencies.
17.10.050    Determination of completeness.
17.10.060    Public notice.

17.10.010 Fees.
All application fees are set by separate resolution. [Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.10.020 Filing.
A preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision or dedication of land located in the City shall be submitted to the City Community Development Department, and shall include a completed application, application fee, seven paper copies, one 11-inch-by-17-inch paper copy, and one reproducible electronic copy of the proposed preliminary plat, a list of adjacent landowners as specified herein, and a completed environmental checklist. For purposes of RCW 58.17.033, a complete application for preliminary plat approval must contain the information and documents required by LMC 17.10.025. [Ord. 591 § 21, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.10.025 Preliminary plat.
A. Application Submittal. Any property owner wishing to subdivide land into 10 or more lots, tracts, sites or divisions, the applicant shall file with the City Community Development Department one eight-and-one-half-inch-by-11-inch clear plastic reduction, one 11-inch-by-17-inch reduced paper copy, and seven legible paper copies of the preliminary plat map on sheets 18 inches by 24 inches in size. Preliminary plat maps shall include, or be accompanied by, the following:
    1. A completed general application form and environmental checklist. Said form and checklist to be obtained from the Community Development Department.
    2. The filing fee required pursuant to the City ordinance adopting building and development related permit fees schedule, and in accordance with the fee schedule available from the Community Development Department.
    3. Names and addresses of all property owners within 300 feet of the subject property, available from the County Assessor’s Office. This requirement may be waived if the City provides the list of adjacent landowners.
    4. A vicinity map extending at least 800 feet in each direction from the proposed subdivision, or further if necessary to assist in locating the subdivision. The vicinity map shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 800 feet. The vicinity map shall show the following:
        a. Street layout in the subdivision;
        b. Existing and tentatively approved street layout within 800 feet of the subdivision;
        c. Zoning designations within, and adjacent to, the subdivision;
        d. All property lines within 800 feet of the subdivision;
        e. Streams or watercourses, and public facilities such as schools and parks;
        f. All 100-year floodplain and designated shoreline boundaries in, and within 800 feet of, the proposed subdivision;
        g. Any other pertinent information that will assist in locating the proposed subdivision.
    5. A title block in the lower right corner of the preliminary plat map, showing:
        a. The proposed name of the subdivision;
        b. The scale of the drawing;
        c. The date of the drawing;
        d. The name and address of the engineer, surveyor or other individual responsible for laying out the subdivision.
    6. A detailed plan of the proposed subdivision drawn to the scale of one inch equals 50 feet. The detailed plan shall clearly show the following information:
        a. North arrow;
        b. The location, names and right-of-way widths of all existing and proposed streets and driveways within 250 feet of the boundaries of the proposed subdivision;
        c. The location, names and right-of-way widths of all proposed streets and their proposed paved width;
        d. Lot layout with lot line dimensions, the area in square feet contained in each lot;
        e. The location and use of all existing buildings within the proposed subdivision, indicating which buildings are to remain and which are to be removed;
        f. The use and approximate location of all buildings within 150 feet of the boundaries of the proposed subdivision;
        g. The location, size and use of all contemplated and existing public areas within the proposed subdivision, and a description of the adaptability of the area for uses contemplated;
        h. The location, size and kind of public utilities in and adjacent to the proposed subdivision, indicating those utilities which will provide service to the proposed development and their planned location within the subdivision to include any existing easements;
        i. Location and disposition of any wells, creeks, drainage courses, drainageways, septic tanks, drainfields, 100-year floodplain boundaries and easements in or within 200 feet of the proposed subdivision;
        j. Topography and five-foot contours certified by the engineer or surveyor within the proposed subdivision; or, as an alternative in the case of a partition of one acre or less, elevations at each existing and proposed property corner. One-foot or two-foot contours may be required, at the Community Development Director’s discretion;
        k. Topography and at least 10-foot contours outside, but within 200 feet of, the proposed subdivision. The base for such information shall be the National Geodetic Survey (USGS), or other survey approved by the Community Development Director;
        l. The location of all significant trees (as defined in the Lakewood Zoning Code) within the proposed subdivision, and for 150 feet beyond the terminus of all dead-end streets. (Individual trees in a stand of five trees or more need not be shown, but the area covered by the stand dripline shall be shown.) For trees outside the subdivision boundaries, the location of said trees may be based on aerial photographs or other methods acceptable to the Community Development Director, and which do not require the applicant to trespass on adjacent property;
        m. For all 100-year floodplain boundaries shown on the vicinity map, the elevation of the 100-year flood at the point immediately upstream from the subdivision, and the direction and distance to said point;
        n. The location of identified hazards or development limitation areas identified by the City of Lakewood critical areas map;
        o. The location of any state shorelines and associated wetlands within the subdivision, as defined by state law and the City of Lakewood Shoreline Master Program.
    7. Profiles of all proposed streets within the proposed subdivision, showing grades to which the streets will be built, and the existing groundline of the proposed streets including the probable future extensions of any stub (dead-end) streets for a maximum distance of 150 feet beyond the proposed subdivision boundaries. As an alternative, the preliminary plat map may show topography in two-foot contours within 50 feet of each side of the centerline of all probable future extensions of any stub (dead-end) streets for a distance of 150 feet beyond the boundaries of the proposed subdivision. The contour information shall be certified by a registered engineer or surveyor.
    8. Slope analysis indicating areas where existing grades within the subdivision exceed 15 percent, 25 percent and 40 percent. The percentage and area in square feet of the subdivision with slopes of zero to 15 percent, 15 to 25 percent, 25 to 40 percent and 40 percent and above categories.
    9. Such additional information as the Community Development Director deems necessary. [Ord. 591 § 22, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.10.030 Staff procedure.
If the preliminary plat, as filed, is consistent with the City’s comprehensive plan, and is in conformance with all of the City’s land use codes and is otherwise acceptable in form and substance, the Community Development Department shall receive the application and shall promptly forward copies of the preliminary plat to appropriate governmental agencies for their review.
If the application is not consistent with the comprehensive plan land use designation, the application shall be returned to the applicant, and shall not be accepted unless the comprehensive plan land use designation is amended to be consistent with the proposed subdivision. [Ord. 591 § 23, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.10.040 Notice to agencies.
A. Notice of Filing. Notice of the filing of a preliminary plat shall be given to the state, municipalities, public utilities and school districts in the following cases and manner:
    1. When a proposed subdivision contemplates the use of any public utilities, notice shall be given to the public utilities’ governing body.
    2. When a proposed subdivision which is to be located adjacent to the right-of-way of a state highway, notice shall be given to the State Department of Highways or its successor.
    3. Notice shall be given to the school district within which the subdivision is proposed.
    4. When the proposed subdivision lies within a designated flood control zone pursuant to RCW Title 86, notification shall be given to the Department of Ecology of the state of Washington, or its successor.
    5. When a subdivision is located within the jurisdiction of the Shoreline Management Act, notification shall be given to the Department of Ecology of the state of Washington, or its successor.
Notice of filing as above required shall be accomplished by the Community Development Director or his authorized designees notifying the proper agencies by letter of the proposed subdivision filing, which letter shall include its legal description, a small map showing location, subdivision acreage, number of home or building lots. The City may require that any review fees payable to outside agencies be made directly with that agency prior to submittal of the preliminary plat application. The initial review by the departments/agencies of the proposed plat shall be completed within 15 calendar days, unless, upon the request of the Community Development Department, the applicant consents to an extension of such time period. Each department or official shall either recommend approval, disapproval, or revision of the preliminary plat within the 15-day initial review period.
The reviewing departments shall have a 14-day review period to consider any revised plans. At the conclusion of the review period, the reviewing department directors or authorized representatives shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the preliminary plat.
B. The City shall provide a notice of public hearing to all agencies commenting on a project and to the Washington State Departments of Transportation and Ecology when notice is required to be given to such agencies because of a project’s location near flood hazard areas or state highways. Said notice shall be mailed or delivered at least 14 days before the date for the initial hearing. [Ord. 591 § 24, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.10.050 Determination of completeness.
Within 28 days of receiving an application for preliminary plat approval containing all information required by LMC 17.10.020, the Community Development Department shall issue a determination of completeness or incompleteness as required by RCW 36.70B.070. The Community Development Department is responsible for complying with all other requirements of RCW 36.70B.070; provided, that any applicable time limitations for processing an application, including time limits set forth in Chapter 36.70B or 58.17 RCW, LMC Title 18A, or this title, shall be tolled while the applicant responds to requests for revision or additional information within the time frames set forth in this section. [Ord. 591 § 25, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.10.060 Public notice.
Upon receipt of a complete application, a notice of application shall be given as required by Chapter 36.70B RCW and LMC 18A.02.670. Public notice is also required as part of the environmental review process under SEPA. SEPA notices shall be issued as required by WAC 197-11-340, and may be combined with the notice of application as provided for in WAC 197-11-355.
A notice of public hearing shall be issued prior to the public hearing as required by RCW 58.17.090 and LMC 18A.02.700. Notice shall be mailed, posted and first published not less than 15 nor more than 30 days prior to the public hearing requiring the notice. [Ord. 591 § 26, 2015.]

Chapter 17.14 PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCEDURE – REVIEW PROCEDURE

Sections:
17.14.010    Review process.
17.14.020    Review of preliminary plat.
17.14.030    Required written findings and determinations.
17.14.040    Time limitations.
17.14.060    Appeal of Examiner’s decision.

17.14.010 Review process.
Preliminary plat applications shall be reviewed as a Process III hearing action as outlined in LMC 18A.02.502 and 18A.02.550. Preliminary plat applications are subject to a hearing before the City’s Hearing Examiner. The Hearing Examiner’s decision on a preliminary plat application is considered final and conclusive.
If a comprehensive plan or zoning ordinance amendment is required for a subdivision project, the amendment shall be processed and approved prior to processing of the subdivision application. Site specific comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance amendments shall be reviewed as a Process IV hearing action as outlined in LMC 18A.02.502 and 18A.02.560. Amendment applications are subject to a hearing before the Planning Advisory Board and final approval by the City Council. [Ord. 591 § 27, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.14.020 Review of preliminary plat.
A. Upon receipt of a complete preliminary plat application, the Community Development Department shall begin its review of the application consistent with Chapter 36.70B RCW, and relevant provisions of the Lakewood Municipal Code. The Department shall transmit a copy of the plat map, easements, and application materials to relevant City departments, utilities providing services to the subdivision, and any other government agencies with jurisdiction as required by LMC 17.10.040. At a minimum, the Department shall transmit the application to the City Engineer, the Building Official, Lakewood Water District, Pierce County Sewer Utility, West Pierce Fire and Rescue, the appropriate electric utility provider, the Pierce County Assessor’s Office, and the Tacoma-Pierce County Health Department. The Community Development Director shall also transmit a copy of the application to other agencies with an interest in the project including, but not limited to, Washington State Department of Transportation, Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Washington State Department of Ecology, Joint Base Lewis McChord, and Camp Murray. The Community Development Department shall also issue a notice of application pursuant to LMC 18A.02.600 et seq. and shall commence environmental review under SEPA. Responsible agencies shall provide comments as provided in LMC 17.10.040.
B. The Hearing Examiner shall review all proposed preliminary plats and shall take such action thereon as to assure conformance of the proposed subdivision to the general purposes of the comprehensive plan and to planning standards and specifications as adopted by the City.
C. The decision by the Examiner is a final and conclusive decision. The Examiner’s written decision on the preliminary plat shall include findings and conclusions, based on the record, to support the decision. Each final decision of the Examiner shall be rendered within 10 working days following the conclusion of all testimony and hearings unless a longer period is mutually agreed to by the applicant and the Examiner. [Ord. 591 § 28, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.14.030 Required written findings and determinations.
The Examiner shall inquire into the public use and interest proposed to be served by the establishment of the subdivision and dedication.
A proposed subdivision and dedication shall not be approved unless the Examiner makes written findings that:
A. Appropriate provisions are made for the public health, safety, and general welfare, for open spaces, drainage ways, streets, alleys, other public ways, transit stops, potable water supplies, sanitary wastes, parks and recreation, playgrounds, schools and school grounds and all other relevant facts, including sidewalks and other planning features that assure safe walking conditions for students who walk to and from school; and
B. The public use and interest will be served by the platting of such subdivision and dedication. If the Examiner finds that the proposed subdivision and dedication make such appropriate provisions and that the public use and interest will be served, then the Examiner shall approve the proposed subdivision and dedication. [Ord. 591 § 29, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.14.040 Time limitations.
A. In General. A final plat meeting all of the requirements of law shall be submitted to the City within 10 years of the date of preliminary plat approval if the project is not subject to requirements adopted under Chapter 90.58 RCW (Shoreline Management Act) and the date of preliminary plat approval is on or before December 31, 2007, within seven years of the date of preliminary plat approval if the date of preliminary plat approval is on or before December 31, 2014, and within five years of the date of preliminary plat approval if the date of preliminary plat approval is on or after January 1, 2015. The approval of a preliminary plat shall be automatically null and void if final plat approval is not obtained within the time limitations specified herein.
In addition, pursuant to RCW 58.17.170 (3)(b), a subdivision shall be governed by the terms of approval of the final plat, and the statutes, ordinances, and regulations in effect at the time of approval under RCW 58.17.150 (1) and (3) for a period of 10 years after final plat approval if the project is not subject to requirements adopted under Chapter 90.58 RCW (Shoreline Management Act) and the date of final plat approval is on or before December 31, 2007, unless the City Council finds that a change in conditions creates a serious threat to the public health or safety in the subdivision. Otherwise, any lots in a final plat filed for record shall be a valid land use notwithstanding any change in zoning laws for a period of seven years from the date of filing if the date of filing is on or before December 31, 2014, and for a period of five years from the date of filing if the date of filing is on or after January 1, 2015 (RCW 58.17.170).
B. Extension Procedure. 
    1. Time for Filing. A written application for any extension of time under the provisions of this section shall be filed with the Community Development Department at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the existing period of approval currently applicable. The applicable time period shall be tolled from the date of filing the application for extension until the date of the final decision by the City. Each application shall be accompanied by payment of a filing fee in an amount established by separate resolution.
    2. Additional Extensions – Changed Conditions. Upon filing of an application for extension, a copy shall be sent to each party of record together with governmental departments or agencies as were involved in the process of preliminary plat approval. By letter, the Examiner shall request that written comments, if any, be delivered to the Examiner’s office within 10 working days of the date of the Examiner’s letter. If any comment requests the alteration or expansion of conditions of approval, the applicant shall be provided with a copy of such proposal and a period of 10 working days in which to file objections, if any, or a request for formal hearing. In the absence of such objection, the Examiner may conclude that the proposed change in conditions is acceptable to the applicant and proceed to a decision in accordance with procedures set forth in this section.
    3. Hearing Examiner – Hearing. If, in the opinion of the Examiner, substantial issues have been raised concerning the application for extension, the Examiner may schedule a public hearing. In the case of a request for extensions of time beyond the initial one-year period, if a proposal is made to alter or expand the conditions of approval, a public hearing shall be held upon written request by the applicant or any party of record upon a determination by the Hearing Examiner that there are substantial issues which necessitate a public hearing.
    4. Hearing Examiner Decision. 
        a. With Hearing. If a public hearing is held under the provisions of subsection (B)(3) of this section, the Examiner shall issue a decision together with findings and conclusions in support thereof within 10 working days of the date of the hearing.
        b. Without Hearing. If no public hearing is held, the Examiner shall issue his decision within 10 working days of the date upon which written comments were to be filed with the Examiner.
        c. Hearing Examiner Decision. The decision of the Examiner to grant or deny extensions of time shall be final.
C. Stages. If the developer desires to develop said subdivision in stages, each stage or division must be approved within the time limits specified herein. [Ord. 591 § 30, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.14.060 Appeal of Examiner’s decision.
The decision of the Hearing Examiner is final and conclusive, subject only to judicial appeal. [Ord. 591 § 31, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

Chapter 17.16 FINAL PLATS – REVIEW PROCEDURE

Sections:
17.16.010    Requirement for each plat filed for record.
17.16.020    Certificate giving description, statement of owners, and dedication requirements.
17.16.030    Review of final plats.
17.16.040    Council review of final plats.

17.16.010 Requirement for each plat filed for record.
Each and every plat filed for record pursuant to RCW 58.17.160 shall:
A. Contain a legal description of the plat which shall match the description on the title insurance report.
B. Contain a dedication statement for all streets, easements, open space, tracts, or other parcels to be dedicated to the public or other specifically noted entities or organizations.
C. Be acknowledged by the person filing the plat before the County Auditor or any other officer who is authorized by law to take acknowledgment of deeds, and certificate of said acknowledgment shall be enclosed or annexed to such plat and recorded therewith.
D. Contain certification from the Assessor-Treasurer that all taxes and delinquent assessments for which the property may be liable as of the date of certification have been duly paid, satisfied or discharged.
E. Contain a statement of approval from the City Engineering Manager as to the construction of all streets and associated storm drainage systems for public streets. Streets not dedicated to the public shall be clearly denoted on the face of the plat and the plat shall contain a provision for maintenance of the private streets by the individual lot owners.
F. Contain a certification from the sewerage provider as to the means of sewage disposal for the lots if required.
G. Contain a certification from the County Health Department as to the means of sewage disposal and water availability if required.
H. The final plat shall follow the format as shown on the City Formal Plat Standards as now enacted or hereafter amended. All survey work shall be performed in compliance with RCW 58.24.040.
I. Be submitted to the City Community Development Department along with the following:
    1. Twelve paper prints.
    2. Two copies of a title report, prepared not more than 30 days prior to the date of written approval by the Director of the Community Development Department, from a title insurance company containing the complete and correct legal description of the plat, listing all easements of record which affect the property and confirming that the title of the lands as described and shown on said plat is in the name of the owners signing the dedication.
    3. Final plat land use breakdown sheet.
    4. One copy of the plat boundary, individual lots and street centerline computer closures for the plat. [Ord. 591 § 38, 2015.]

17.16.020 Certificate giving description, statement of owners, and dedication requirements.
Every formal subdivision, short subdivision or binding site plan filed for record must contain a certificate giving a full and correct description of the lands divided as they appear on the plat drawing, including a statement that the subdivision of property has been made with the free consent and in accordance with the desires of the owner(s) or contractor purchasers. If the subdivision of property includes a dedication, the certification shall also contain the dedication of all streets and other areas to the public, and individual or individuals, religious society or societies or to any corporation, public or private, as shown on the plat document and a waiver of all claims for damages against any governmental authority which may be occasioned to the adjacent land by the established construction, drainage and maintenance of said street. Said certificate shall be signed and acknowledged before a notary public by all parties having any interest in the lands subdivided.
Any dedication, donation or grant as shown on the face of the plat shall be considered for all intents and purposes, as a quit-claim deed to the said donee or donees and/or grantees for his, her or their use for the purpose intended by the donors or grantors as aforesaid. [Ord. 591 § 39, 2015.]

17.16.030 Review of final plats.
The City Community Development Director or authorized designee shall review applications for the proposed final plat and be satisfied that the following conditions exist:
A. The final plat meets all standards established by state law and this title relating to final plats;
B. The proposed final plat bears the certificates and statements of approval required by this title and state law;
C. A title insurance report furnished by the subdivider confirms the title of the land in the proposed subdivision is vested in the name of the owners whose signatures appear on the plat’s certificate;
D. The facilities and improvements required to be provided by the developer have been completed or, alternatively, that the developer has provided a performance bond, or cash deposit in lieu thereof, or other security commonly used by banking and lending institutions; provided further that the bond, cash deposit, or other security, as hereinabove required, shall be filed with the City Engineer and shall be in a form acceptable to the City Attorney and in an amount and with sureties commensurate with improvements remaining to be completed and securing to the City the construction and installation of the improvements within a fixed time.
E. That all conditions of the preliminary plat approval have been satisfied and that all platting fees have been paid. [Ord. 591 § 40, 2015.]

17.16.040 Council review of final plats.
The City Council shall review final plats in accordance with Chapter 58.17 RCW. Council review of a final plat is strictly limited to the questions of whether the final plat is consistent with the findings, conclusions and conditions specified for the preliminary plat. Environmental considerations and satisfaction of review criteria specified by LMC 17.14.030 and RCW 58.17.110 which are not relevant to the findings, conclusions or decision for the preliminary plat cannot be raised during the review of a final plat but must be raised at the time for reviewing the preliminary plat or they are waived. When the Community Development Director finds that the subdivision meets the following criteria, he or she shall recommend approval of the proposed final plat if:
A. The plat conforms to all terms of preliminary plat approval;
B. The bond, if there is one, by its essential terms assures completion of improvements;
C. The plat meets the requirements of state law and this title in effect at the time of preliminary plat approval.
After the City Council approves the plat, the Community Development Department shall forward the original to the County Auditor for filing, who shall, after recording, forward two reproducible copies thereof to the City Engineer and one paper copy to the County Assessor-Treasurer. [Ord. 591 § 41, 2015.]

Chapter 17.18 IMPROVEMENTS

Sections:
17.18.005    Conditions of approval and construction of subdivision infrastructure.
17.18.010    Dedications.
17.18.020    Improvements required.
17.18.030    Names and numbers of subdivisions, streets, blocks and lots.
17.18.040    Control monuments.
17.18.050    Bonds – Construction and guarantee.

17.18.005 Conditions of approval and construction of subdivision infrastructure.
The creation of new lots and building sites requires that certain infrastructure be provided to serve the planned development. In addition, provisions must be made for maintenance of common infrastructure and implementation of development controls. It is the responsibility of the subdivision developer to install the infrastructure to serve the subdivided land. Infrastructure will normally include roadways to serve the lots of the subdivision, utilities (including electricity, gas, water and sanitary sewage disposal), storm water management, and fire protection. Additional improvements may be required to mitigate environmental or other impacts of a subdivision. Prior to the approval and recordation of the final map, the City will require that all of the conditions of approval for the preliminary plat be satisfied. [Ord. 591 § 42, 2015.]

17.18.010 Dedications.
A. General. Dedication of land for road right-of-way and other purposes may be required. All dedications shall be clearly and precisely indicated on the face of the plat as approved by the City. Improvements and easements to maintain such improvements may be required to be dedicated.
B. Access to Public Waters. Plats of subdivisions containing land subject to the provisions of the Shoreline Management Act shall contain dedications of public access to, around or beside the regulated water body consistent with the City’s Shoreline Master Program, unless the Examiner determines the public use and interest will not be served thereby. Such dedications shall be of a size and nature as determined by the Examiner and shall be established when the preliminary plat is approved. Such dedications may be required only when in compliance with all standards governing regulatory takings.
C. Constructed to City Standards. All streets, bridges, drains, culverts and related structures and facilities which are dedicated shall be designed and constructed in accordance with current standards promulgated by the Engineering Manager and in effect at the time of construction. [Ord. 591 § 43, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.18.020 Improvements required.
A. Permits Required. All subdivision improvements shall be constructed in accordance with an approved site development permit.
Prior to the construction of an improvement, the developer shall submit to the City Engineer, an application for a site development permit including copies of the plan, profiles and specifications for said streets, drainage, utilities and other proposed improvements to be constructed in the proposed subdivision. Plans and profiles shall be drawn upon standard 22-inch-by-36-inch profile sheets or such other sheets as may be acceptable to the City Engineer. Prior to construction, the construction plans for any dedicated improvement must be approved by the City Engineer and construction plans for other improvements may be required to be approved. A site development permit or other appropriate permission shall be secured prior to commencement of construction.
B. Flood or Geological Hazard. If any portion of the land within the boundaries of a formal plat or short plat is subject to flood hazard, inundation, geological hazard, mud slides or avalanches, as such conditions may be, but need not be, indicated in the most recent national flood insurance program, flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) for Pierce County, Washington, or other authoritative data, and the probable use of the property will require structures thereon or nearby, the Hearing Examiner or departmental reviewer may disapprove the subdivision so affected, or require protective improvements to be constructed as approved by the City, as a condition precedent to final approval and recordation of the subdivision, short subdivision or binding site plan map. If any portion of a lot or parcel of a subdivision is subject to flood hazard, inundation, geological hazard, mud slides or avalanches, such fact and portion shall be clearly shown on the final map or parcel map by a prominent note on each sheet of such map whereon any portion is shown. No subdivision, short subdivision or binding site plan shall be approved by the Examiner or departmental reviewer which is situated wholly or partially within a flood control zone as provided in Chapter 86.16 RCW without the prior written approval of the Department of Ecology.
C. Storm Drainage Containment. The City shall, as a condition of approval of any division of land, whether formal subdivision or short subdivision or binding site plan, require the developer to construct storm drainage facilities in conformance with the City’s surface water design standards.
D. Fire Protection. The developer shall, at the developer’s expense, provide water sources or facilities as required by law. Subdivisions shall provide fire hydrants (or other adequate means) with adequate capacity and spacing to provide for fire protection.
E. Sanitary Sewer Pipe Installations. The City may condition the approval of any plat upon the developer’s installation of sanitary sewer connections and pipes properly constructed according to City standards. [Ord. 591 § 44, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.18.030 Names and numbers of subdivisions, streets, blocks and lots.
A. General. In order to promote an orderly and coherent street and property location system, street names and numbers in subdivisions, short subdivisions and binding site plans shall be assigned in accordance with the procedures and guidelines established herein.
B. Subdivision Names and Numbers. Subdivision names shall be chosen by the applicant subject to approval by the Community Development Department. The Community Development Department shall approve the proposed name if it is reasonably distinguishable from previously established subdivision names. The legal identification of short plats and binding site plans, if any, shall be designated by number and assigned by the County Auditor at the time of recording.
C. Street Names and Numbers. All public and private streets established by subdivision, short subdivision or binding site plan shall have street names or numbers assigned and clearly shown on the plats prior to approval and recording. Street names and numbers shall be assigned by the Community Development Director. Private streets shall be clearly labeled on the face of the plat.
D. Blocks and Lots. Blocks and lots established for purposes of legal description of subdivided property shall be named and numbered in accordance with procedures and guidelines established by the City Engineer.
E. Addresses in new subdivisions shall be assigned by the Building Official pursuant to Section 501 of the International Building Code. [Ord. 591 § 45, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.18.040 Control monuments.
Except for subdivisions excluded under the provisions of RCW 58.17.040, as now or hereafter amended, and this title, permanent control monuments shall be established at each and every controlling corner on the boundaries of the parcel of land being subdivided. The Engineering Manager shall determine the number and location of permanent control monuments within the plat, if any. All control monuments shall be tied to the State Coordinate System. [Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.18.050 Bonds – Construction and guarantee.
The City, in lieu of actual construction of any improvement by the developer of any formal subdivision, short subdivision or binding site plan may accept a bond in an amount and with surety and conditions satisfactory to it or other secure methods providing for and securing to the City, the actual construction and installation of such improvements within a two year period. The City Engineer may refuse to accept a security in lieu of actual construction where redemption of the security is seen to be problematic, or where the improvements are required immediately to ensure public safety and proper functioning of the development. All improvements such as structures, streets, sewers, drainage facilities and water systems shall be designed and the construction certified by, or under the supervision of, a registered civil engineer prior to the acceptance of such improvements. Improvements must be completed prior to final building inspection approval and occupancy of any new structures within the subdivision.
The developer shall be responsible for correcting any defect in an improvement for a period of 18 months after acceptance by the City Engineer.
The City shall require a bond to guarantee that the developer will correct any defect in a dedicated improvement caused by faulty design, construction or other reason as determined by the City Engineer. Said bond shall be in an amount equal to 125 percent of the estimated cost of the City completing the improvements, as determined by the City Engineer, and shall extend for a period of 18 months after City acceptance of said improvement. [Ord. 591 § 46, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

Chapter 17.22 SHORT SUBDIVISIONS

Sections:
17.22.010    Applicability.
17.22.020    Filing procedure and fee.
17.22.025    Determination of complete application.
17.22.030    Owner’s free consent.
17.22.035    Posting requirements.
17.22.040    Survey.
17.22.050    Departmental review.
17.22.060    Review criteria.
17.22.070    Preliminary approval.
17.22.080    Notice.
17.22.090    Appeal procedure.
17.22.095    Final short plat approval.
17.22.100    Amendments.

17.22.010 Applicability.
Every short plat and short subdivision shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.
A. Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to the following:
    1. Deed releases, for the purpose of obtaining building financing; provided, that a short plat is required if said parcel is separately sold or if all land specified by the contract is not acquired.
    2. Divisions which were surveyed in accordance with the Survey Recording Act and are recorded with the Auditor prior to August 13, 1974.
    3. Up to four model homes may be constructed on a single tract of land without short platting provided the City has approved a preliminary subdivision which includes the specific lots upon which the model homes are to be located. The subdivision shall be completed and the final map recorded prior to the sale of any of the model home units.
    4. Divisions made by court order; provided, that this exemption shall not apply to land divided pursuant to dissolution or any partition proceedings.
    5. Any division of land for use solely for the installation of electric power, telephone, water supply, sewer service or other utility facilities of a similar or related nature; provided, however, that any remaining lot or lots are consistent with applicable zoning and land use plans.
    6. Any division or divisions of land for the sole purpose of enabling the City or other public agency to acquire land, either by outright purchase or exchange, for port purposes, boat moorage or launching sites, or for park, viewpoint, recreational, educational or other public purposes; provided, however, that any remaining lot or lots are consistent with applicable zoning and land use plans.
B. The entire original tract (except adjacent platted or short platted land) shall be included within one short plat application.
C. Further Divisions. Land within a short subdivision shall not be further divided in any manner for a period of five years from the date said approved short plat is recorded with the Auditor without the filing of a final plat on the land which is proposed to be further divided, except that when the short plat contains fewer than nine parcels, the owner who filed the short plat may file an alteration within the five-year period to create a total of up to nine lots within the original short plat boundary. This requirement shall be stated on the face of the short plat. [Ord. 591 § 48, 2015; Ord. 500 § 4, 2009; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.22.020 Filing procedure and fee.
An application for a short subdivision shall include a completed application form, six full-size paper prints and six 11-inch-by-17-inch reduced copies of the proposed short plat showing all required information along with a nonrefundable application fee as set forth in separate resolution.
For purposes of RCW 58.17.033, a complete application for short plat approval must contain the information and documents required by this section.
A short plat shall meet the following standards:
A. Drawn in ink to a scale not smaller than one inch equals 100 feet or other approved scale on a sheet size of 18 inches by 24 inches.
B. The plat shall show the boundary and dimensions of the “original tract” including its Assessor’s parcel number, section, township and range, and all adjoining public or private streets and identifying names as such.
C. A vicinity map drawn to a scale of four inches equals one mile or other approved scale of sufficient detail to orient the location of the original tract.
D. Name and address of the owner of record of the “original tract,” scale of the drawing, and north directional arrow.
E. All lots shall be identified by numerical designation. The dimensions of each lot shall be shown.
F. Width and location of access to all short platted lots.
G. The location and use of all existing buildings on the original tract.
H. Space or a second 18-inch-by-24-inch plat map sheet shall be reserved for comments and appropriate City signatures.
I. Where a survey is required, the form of the plat shall be as required by the Survey Recording Act. (Chapter 50 Washington Laws of 1973, or as amended.) [Ord. 591 § 49, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.22.025 Determination of complete application.
Within 28 days of receiving an application for preliminary plat approval containing all information required by LMC 17.22.020, the Community Development Department shall issue a determination of completeness or incompleteness as required by RCW 36.70B.070. The Community Development Department is responsible for complying with all other requirements of RCW 36.70B.070. [Ord. 591 § 50, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.22.030 Owner’s free consent.
The contract purchasers shall sign a statement prescribed by the Community Development Department signifying that the plat is made with their free consent and in accordance with the desires of the owners. [Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.22.035 Posting requirements.
After acceptance of a short plat application, notice of application shall be posted in accordance with the provisions of LMC 18A.02.670. [Ord. 591 § 51, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.22.040 Survey.
Recordable surveys shall be required for all short plats and short subdivisions. All surveys shall be accomplished as required by Chapter 332-130 WAC and the Survey Recording Act (Chapter 58.09 RCW), except an additional recording will not be required for the “Survey Recording Act.”
All lot staking shall be completed by the certifying professional land surveyor prior to the recording of the short plat.
All short plat corners, including interior lot corners, shall be staked with steel rebar or metal pipe with a cap which permanently bears the land surveyor’s registration number. When the plat corner(s) or lot corner(s) falls in a body of water, over the edge of a steep slope or other inaccessible area, an offset corner will be permitted. When the boundary line of a short plat follows a meandering line, corners shall be set as directed by the City. A presubmittal meeting with City staff to discuss corner locations is recommended.
When the legal description of the short plat utilizes a partial or complete section subdivisional breakdown to establish the short plat boundaries, section subdivision survey information in accordance with the requirements of WAC 332-130-030 shall be shown on the short plat map.
All reference monuments used in the establishment of the short plat corners shall be identified, described, and noted as set or found on the short plat map. When appropriate, the short plat survey shall reference the recorded or previous survey that was the basis for the short plat survey.
When the short plat is adjacent to a constructed City street and the short plat corner(s) or its offset represents a one-sixteenth corner, quarter corner, section corner, or donation land claim corner that is not of record or is lost or obliterated, a City standard monument(s) shall be placed in the City street. In cases where a monument of record is found, the existing corner does not have to be replaced.
Whenever a short plat is adjacent to an existing City street or right-of-way, the centerline of that street shall be located on the short plat drawing. If the existing constructed City street or maintained street section falls outside of the documented right-of-way, the surveyor shall identify the existing edge of pavement and limits of the maintained street section on the short plat drawing and show its relationship to said centerline. [Ord. 591 § 52, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.22.050 Departmental review.
A. The Engineering Manager’s Office shall review a short plat for adequacy of access, storm water drainage facilities, public sewer system, survey accuracy, and feasibility for building sites.
B. The Community Development Department shall review the proposed short plat for conformance with the Land Use and Development Code (LMC Title 18A), other applicable land use laws, the comprehensive plan and the subdivision code.
C. The Tacoma-Pierce County Health Department shall review the proposed short plat for adequacy of potable water supply, and provisions for sanitary sewage disposal. The Lakewood Water District, or other water provider, shall provide information regarding the public water system. This will typically be in the form of a letter of water availability from the District.
D. The Fire Chief shall review the proposed short plat for adequacy of the fire protection water system and access for firefighting equipment.
E. The Pierce County Assessor’s Office shall review the proposed short plat with regard to map and document format, tax status, and legal description.
F. The Pierce County Sewer Utility shall review the project with regard to sanitary sewer availability, appropriate easements, and details of any sanitary sewer infrastructure and connections.
The City may require that any review fees payable to outside agencies be made directly with that agency prior to submittal of the short plat application. [Ord. 591 § 53, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.22.060 Review criteria.
A. Access. 
    1. General. The proposed short plat shall be reviewed for adequate ingress and egress to all proposed lots. Extension of streets or access rights from property line to property line of the short subdivision land may be required so that the street may be extended in the future. If there is other reasonable access available, the Engineering Manager may limit the location of direct access to City arterials or other City streets. When an adjoining landowner will be obligated to construct or maintain a future street, a note to this effect shall be stated on the face of the short plat.
    2. Street Reserved Areas. Where a City arterial may, or is being planned for a short subdivision land area, the Engineering Manager may require that a 60-foot-wide right-of-way area be reserved as a street reserved area for a future street, if all legal requirements for such a dedication are met.
    3. Private Streets. Private streets are not normally permitted, but may be allowed when the Community Development Director and City Engineer determine that the most logical development of the land requires that the lots be served by private streets or easements. Private street plats shall be reviewed per Chapter 17.26 LMC.
B. Drainage. The proposed short plat shall be reviewed for adequate drainage facilities. Requirements for any necessary facilities may be required to be written on the face of the short plat map.
C. Sewers or Septic Tanks. The proposed short plat shall be reviewed for potential sewer or septic tank adequacy. If known local conditions exist which may affect future building sites, these conditions may be required to be stated on the face of the short plat.
D. Feasibility for Building Sites. Areas which are known or suspected to be poor building sites because of geological hazard, flooding, poor drainage or swamp conditions, mud slides or avalanche, may be noted on the face of the short plat.
E. Water Supply and Fire Protection. The proposed plat shall be reviewed for potential adequacy of water supply and fire protection.
Subsections A through E of this section may be considered as criteria for which a short plat may be denied. Existing City standards shall be used during the review process. [Ord. 591 § 54, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.22.070 Preliminary approval.
A. Procedure. An application for a short plat shall be reviewed as a Process II permit type, which does not require a public hearing but does provide for public notice and comment. (See LMC 18A.02.545.) The initial decision on a short plat application is made by the Community Development Director. The Director’s decision may be appealed to the City’s Hearing Examiner.
    1. Upon receipt of a complete application for a short plat, the Community Development Department shall forward copies of the application and short plat map to the Public Works Department, the Fire Marshal, the Pierce County Assessor’s Office, the Pierce County Public Works Sewer Utility, the Lakewood Water District, any affected public utility agencies, and the Tacoma-County Health Department. The initial review by the departments/agencies of the proposed short plat shall be completed within 15 days, unless, upon the request of the Community Development Department, the applicant consents to an extension of such time period. The proposed preliminary short plat shall be considered under the subdivision regulations and zoning or other land use control ordinances in effect at the time a fully completed application for preliminary short plat approval has been submitted to the City.
    2. Each department or official shall either recommend approval, disapproval, or revision of the short plat within the 15-day initial review period. The Community Development Director shall have the final authority to approve, approve with conditions or deny a short plat application.
    3. If returned for revision, the applicant or representative shall submit six prints to the Community Development Department reflecting the required revisions within 60 days after any review comments are provided by the reviewing agencies. Should the applicant require an extension of time to satisfy the requirements that were requested during the initial 15-day review, additional time may be granted upon written request.
    4. Due to the complexity of the proposal, the applicant may desire to request the following to extend the life of the application.
        a. Request in writing from the applicant that the application for the proposed short plat be placed on hold for due cause. “Due cause” would constitute a situation that was beyond the applicant’s controls; i.e., required environmental checklist, Health Department requirement for viewing high water table on the site prior to review for waste disposal, or water availability report required by the state.
        The request shall be accompanied by an estimated time line for completion of the required additional material, studies, or review. The hold will be placed upon the application for a specified period of time.
        b. Request in writing by the applicant that a time extension would be necessary to provide the reviewing departments the necessary material, documents, and studies, as requested in the initial City review. The Community Development Department may provide a second additional extension, not to exceed 180 days. A fee may be charged for the extended time, per the fee schedule.
        c. Any applicable time limitations for processing an application, including time limits set forth in Chapter 36.70B or 58.17 RCW, LMC Title 18A, or this title, shall be tolled while the applicant responds to requests for revision or additional information within the time frames set forth in this section.
    5. The applicant is required to submit the revisions as requested, at the expiration of the allowable time line, along with six prints to the Community Development Department. The reviewing departments shall have a 14-day review period to consider the revised plans. At the conclusion of the review period, the reviewing department directors or authorized representatives shall notify the applicant whether the application is complete or what additional information is necessary (RCW 36.70B.070(4)(b)).
    6. If the project applicant does not respond to requests for project amendments or additional information within the time frames specified herein, the Community Development Department may deny the application without prejudice.
B. Required Written Findings for Short Subdivisions. The Community Development Director or designee shall inquire into the public use and interest proposed to be served by the establishment of the short subdivision and dedication.
A proposed short subdivision and dedication shall not be approved unless the Director or designee makes written findings that:
    1. Appropriate provisions are made for the public health, safety, and general welfare, for open spaces, drainage ways, streets, alleys, other public ways, transit stops, potable water supplies, time limits, sanitary wastes, parks and recreation, playgrounds, schools and school grounds and all other relevant facts, including sidewalks and other planning features that assure safe walking conditions for students who only walk to and from school; and
    2. The public use and interest will be served by the platting of such subdivision and dedication. If the Director or designee finds that the proposed short subdivision makes such appropriate provisions and that the public use and interest will be served, then the Director or designee shall approve the proposed short subdivision and dedication.
C. Notice of Return to Applicant for Cause. If a short plat is not in proper order or cannot be approved in its present form, a letter postmarked prior to the expiration of said 30-day period shall be sent to the applicant (by the disapproving department) to notify him of why approval cannot be given in its present form.
D. Effect of Approval. The Community Development Director’s initial approval shall set forth the findings required by subsection B of this section, and may include specific conditions of approval. All required improvements must be installed and a copy of the final short plat map that responds to any conditions of approval must be submitted within three years of the date of the initial approval for final review and recording. An additional one-year extension of time may be granted by the Community Development Director upon a showing of good cause beyond the control of the applicant that has delayed the ability of the applicant to complete the subdivision. The approval of a short plat shall not be a guarantee that future permits will be granted for any structures or development within said area and a notation to this effect shall be stated on the face of the short plat. Provided further that land in short subdivisions may not be further divided in any manner within a period of five years without the filing of a preliminary and final plat, except that when the short plat contains fewer than nine parcels, the owner may file a short plat alteration or new short plat application within the five-year period to create up to a total of nine lots within the original short plat boundaries. Any such alteration application shall be reviewed de novo on its own merits. [Ord. 591 § 55, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.22.080 Notice.
Prior to the sale, lease or contract to sell of any lot, parcel or tract within a short subdivision, a copy of the approved short plat shall be given to the prospective purchaser or lessee by the owner, owner’s agent, or any person, firm or corporation who closes or escrows the transaction. [Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.22.090 Appeal procedure.
Any aggrieved party with the City’s decision on a short plat, may appeal such decision to the Hearing Examiner in accordance with Chapter 1.36 LMC. Decisions not appealed are deemed final and conclusive. [Ord. 585 § 27, 2014; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.22.095 Final short plat approval.
Upon completion of any and all conditions of the preliminary short plat approval, or alternatively, the posting of an appropriate performance bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, the developer shall present to the Community Development Department one copy of the approved short plat map for final approval and recordation. The final short plat map shall contain a certificate giving a full and correct description of the lands divided as they appear on the plat drawing, including a statement that the subdivision of property has been made with the free consent and in accordance with the desires of the owner(s) or contractor purchasers. If the subdivision of property includes a dedication, the certification shall also contain the dedication of all streets and other areas to the public, and any other required dedications as required by LMC 17.16.020. Said certificate shall be signed and acknowledged before a notary public by all parties having any interest in the lands subdivided.
The Community Development Department shall arrange for all responsible agencies to sign the plat map; provided, that the applicant may secure required approval signatures on the final plat map prior to submittal to the Community Development Department.
Pursuant to RCW 58.17.140(2), a final short plat map shall be approved, disapproved, or returned to the applicant within 30 days from the date of filing thereof, unless the applicant consents to an extension of such time period.
Development of lots created in a final short plat shall be regulated by the land use controls in effect at the time that the complete preliminary short plat application was filed, for a period of two years from the date of the final short plat recordation. After two years, the lots created by the short plat shall be regulated by the land use controls then in effect. [Ord. 591 § 56, 2015.]

17.22.100 Amendments.
Amendments to short plats may be approved by the Community Development Department by approving an amendment note which states to the effect that this amended short plat supersedes “Short Plat No. ___.” The note must specify the changes and before the Community Development Department can approve the amended short plat, all City requirements and conditions stated on the original short plat, must be stated on the amended short plat.
If any City department’s or other agency’s previous approval may be affected by the amendment (as determined by the Community Development Department), said department or agency will be notified of the change and be given the opportunity to comment before the Community Development Department approves the amendment. In addition, any amendment involving public dedication must be processed as provided in RCW 58.17.212 or 58.17.215. A fee as set forth in separate resolution shall be paid the Community Development Department for the processing of an amended short plat.
The Assessor-Treasurer’s Office must again signify that the current real estate taxes are paid before the amended short plat is recorded. Upon recording, the amended short plat is deemed approved by City. [Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

Chapter 17.26 PRIVATE STREET PLATS

Sections:
17.26.010    Conditions permitting private streets.
17.26.020    Conformance with code – Exception.
17.26.030    Standards for modification of code by Department of Community Development.
17.26.040    Improvements – Right of City to enter and install – Bond.
17.26.050    Owners to maintain streets, easements and utilities – Organization required to guarantee maintenance and assessment of costs.

17.26.010 Conditions permitting private streets.
Private streets shall not normally be permitted. However, if the Department determines that the most logical development of land requires that the lots be served by private streets or easements, and that the land cannot be adequately served by streets dedicated to the public, private streets or easements may be approved upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.26.020 Conformance with code – Exception.
Plats with private streets shall conform in all ways to this title and follow the procedures outlined herein unless greater or lesser requirements are explicitly specified in this chapter or by the Department. [Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.26.030 Standards for modification of code by Department of Community Development.
In addition to other standards required by this title, the Department may require such additional standards and conditions or it may modify the standards and conditions in such a manner as is necessary to:
A. Maintain the intent and purpose of this title;
B. Assure that a degree of compatibility shall be maintained with respect to properties and existing or potential uses within the general area;
C. Preserve the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. [Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.26.040 Improvements – Right of City to enter and install – Bond.
All pavements, sanitary sewers, water mains, culverts, grading, planting, fencing and any other improvements which are made a part of the approval of the plat shall be completed at the expense of the plattor prior to the recording of the plat; provided, that in the event the plattor shall be unable to install the improvements prior to the time of the recording of the plat, the plat may be recorded without such improvements being installed provided the following conditions are complied with:
A. The plattor shall grant to the City by proper instrument duly recorded the right to enter upon the property to be platted and install the improvements;
B. The plattor shall furnish to the City a good and sufficient performance bond to cover the cost of installing the improvements. This bond shall provide that the plattor agrees to faithfully perform the conditions thereof, which conditions shall include an agreement to construct and install all the improvements within the time specified by this title, and further that upon the failure of the plattor to do so, such bond shall be forfeited in favor of the City or in the alternative to the above required bond, the Director may accept other secure methods providing for and securing to the City the actual construction and installation of such improvements within a one-year period and on the terms identical to the herein described bond. [Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.26.050 Owners to maintain streets, easements and utilities – Organization required to guarantee maintenance and assessment of costs.
All private streets, easements, community utilities and properties shall be maintained by the owners of property served by them and kept in good repair at all times. In order to insure the continued good repair, it must be demonstrated to the Department prior to the recording of the plat that:
A. There is a workable organization to guarantee maintenance with a committee or group to administer the organizational functions; and
B. There is a means for assessing maintenance costs equitably to property owners served by the private streets, easements, community utilities and properties. [Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

Chapter 17.30 BINDING SITE PLAN

Sections:
17.30.010    Purpose.
17.30.020    Applicability.
17.30.030    Complete application.
17.30.040    Determination of complete application.
17.30.045    Review and approval.
17.30.050    Recording and binding effect.
17.30.060    Amendment, modifications and vacations.
17.30.070    Administrative rules.

17.30.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to create an alternative method for dividing commercially and industrially zoned property, as authorized by RCW 58.17.035. On sites which are fully developed, the binding site plan merely creates or alters interior lot lines. In all cases the binding site plan ensures, through written agreements among all lot owners, that the collective lots continue to function as one site concerning but not limited to: lot access; interior circulation; open space; landscaping and drainage; facility maintenance; and coordinated parking. [Ord. 591 § 58, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.30.020 Applicability.
A. Any person seeking the use of a binding site plan to divide the person’s property for the purpose of sale, lease or transfer of ownership of commercially or industrially zoned property is required to apply for, complete and have approved a binding site plan prior to any property division, as provided in Chapter 58.17 RCW and as required by this chapter.
B. The site which is subject to the binding site plan shall consist of one or more contiguous lots legally created.
C. The site which is subject to the binding site plan may be reviewed independently for fully developed sites; or, concurrently with a commercial site development permit application for undeveloped land; or in conjunction with a valid commercial site development permit.
D. The binding site plan process merely creates or alters lot lines and does not authorize substantial improvements or changes to the property or the uses thereon. Improvements shall be authorized through separate zoning and building permit processes. New improvements shall be incorporated into the binding site plan as appropriate. [Ord. 591 § 59, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.30.030 Complete application.
A proposed binding site plan shall be considered under the zoning and other land use control ordinances in effect on the land at the time a fully completed application is filed with the Department. A complete application for binding site plan approval shall consist of:
A. A completed application form provided by the Department, signed by all property owners or their authorized agents, with supporting documents as required below and which contains sufficient information to determine compliance with adopted rules and regulations including but not limited to Chapter 43.21C RCW, SEPA, as implemented by Chapter 197-11 WAC; surface water management; roads standards; fire code; City environmental procedures; zoning; shoreline management; administrative rules adopted to implement any such code or ordinance provision; Tacoma-Pierce County Health Department rules and regulations; and City approved utility comprehensive plans;
B. Six full-size and six 11-inch-by-17-inch reductions of an approved commercial site development permit, or a proposed site plan prepared by a professional land surveyor, licensed in the state of Washington, in a form prescribed by the Director. At a minimum, the proposed site plan shall include:
    1. The location and size of all proposed units or lots;
    2. Proposed and existing structures including elevations and floor plans as known (plans which show building envelopes rather than footprints must address post-construction treatment of unoccupied areas of the building envelopes);
    3. All proposed or existing uses;
    4. The location of proposed or existing open space including any required landscaped areas;
    5. The location and identification of critical areas;
    6. The layout of an internal vehicular and pedestrian circulation system, including proposed ingress and egress for vehicles;
    7. The number and location of proposed or existing parking spaces on and off the site;
    8. A drainage plan which will accommodate the maximum proposed square footage of impervious surface and the maximum proposed square footage of impervious surface exposed to vehicular use, subject to the requirements of City’s Surface Water Design Manual or other City surface water design standards;
    9. The location and size of utility trunk lines and service laterals serving the site;
    10. The location and size of water bodies and drainage features, both natural and manmade;
    11. A grading plan showing proposed clearing and tree retention and the existing and proposed topography, detailed to five-foot contours, unless smaller contour intervals are otherwise required by the City Code or rules and regulations promulgated thereunder;
    12. A layout of sewers and the proposed water distribution system;
    13. Proposed easements and access; and
C. A completed environmental checklist, if required by the State Environmental Policy Act and implementing ordinances;
D. A downstream drainage analysis or any other requirement specified in the City’s Surface Water Design Manual, Site Development Regulations or surface water policy ordinance;
E. All covenants, easements, maintenance agreements or other documents regarding mutual use of parking and access;
F. Copies of all easements, deed restrictions or other encumbrances restricting the use of the site;
G. A phasing plan and time schedule, if the site is intended to be developed in phases or if all building permits will not be submitted within three years;
H. Documentation of the date and method of segregation for the subject property (original tract) verifying that the lot or lots were not created in violation of the short subdivision or subdivision laws in effect at the time of creation;
I. A list of any other development permits or permit applications having been filed for the same site; and
J. The payment of fees;
K. The Community Development Director may waive specific submittal requirements determined to be unnecessary for review of the application. [Ord. 591 § 59, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.30.040 Determination of complete application.
Within 28 days of receiving an application for binding site plan approval containing all information required by LMC 17.30.030, the Community Development Department shall issue a determination of completeness or incompleteness as required by RCW 36.70B.070. The Community Development Department is responsible for complying with all other requirements of RCW 36.70B.070. [Ord. 591 § 60, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.30.045 Review and approval.
A. Procedure. An application for a binding site plan shall be reviewed as a Process II permit type, which does not require a public hearing but does provide for public notice and comment. (See LMC 18A.02.545.) The initial decision on a binding site plan application is made by the Community Development Director. The Director’s decision may be appealed to the City’s Hearing Examiner.
    1. Upon receipt of a complete application for a binding site plan, the Community Development Department shall forward copies of the application and binding site plan map to the Public Works Department, the Fire Marshal, the Pierce County Assessor’s Office, the Pierce County Public Works Sewer Utility, the Lakewood Water District, any affected public utility agencies, and the Tacoma-County Health Department. The initial review by the departments/agencies of the proposed binding site plan shall be completed within 15 days, unless, upon the request of the Community Development Department, the applicant consents to an extension of such time period.
    2. Each department or official shall either recommend approval, disapproval, or revision of the binding site plan application within the 15-day initial review period.
    3. If returned for revision, the applicant or representative shall submit six prints to the Community Development Department reflecting the required revisions within 60 days after any review comments are provided by the reviewing agencies. Should the applicant require an extension of time to satisfy the requirements that were requested during the initial 30-day review, additional time may be granted upon written request.
    4. Due to the complexity of the proposal, the applicant may desire to request the following to extend the life of the application.
        a. Request in writing from the applicant that the application for the proposed binding site plan be placed on hold for due cause. “Due cause” would constitute a situation that was beyond the applicant’s controls; i.e., required environmental checklist, Health Department requirement for viewing high water table on the site prior to review for waste disposal, or water availability report required by the state.
        The request shall be accompanied by an estimated time line for completion of the required additional material, studies, or review. The hold will be placed upon the application for a specified period of time.
        b. Request in writing by the applicant that a time extension would be necessary to provide the reviewing departments the necessary material, documents, and studies, as requested in the initial City review. The Community Development Department may provide a second additional extension, not to exceed 180 days. A fee may be charged for the extended time, per the fee schedule.
        c. Any applicable time limitations for processing an application, including time limits set forth in Chapter 36.70B or 58.17 RCW, LMC Title 18A, or this title, shall be tolled while the applicant responds to requests for revision or additional information within the time frames set forth in this section.
    5. The applicant is required to submit the revisions as requested, at the expiration of the allowable time line, along with six prints to the Community Development Department. The reviewing departments shall have a 14-day review period to consider the revised plans. At the conclusion of the review period, the reviewing department directors or authorized representatives shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the binding site plan.
B. Review Criteria. The Community Development Director shall consider and base a decision to approve with or without conditions, deny, or return the application for modifications, based on:
    1. A finding that the newly created lots or units will continue to function and operate as one site, for fully developed sites; or
    2. Conformity of the proposed site plan with the adopted rules and regulations listed in LMC 17.30.030(A) as represented in the approved site development plan, if the binding site plan is being considered with a site development plan.
    3. The binding site plan shall contain applicable inscriptions or attachments setting forth limitations and conditions to which the plan is subject, including any applicable irrevocable dedications of property and containing a provision requiring that any development of the site shall be in conformity with the approved site plan.
    4. The Director may modify lot-based or lot line requirements contained with the building, fire and other similar uniform codes adopted by the City.
    5. The Director may authorize sharing of open space, parking, access and other improvements among contiguous properties subject to the binding site plan. Conditions of use, maintenance and restrictions on redevelopment of shared open space, parking, access and other improvements shall be identified on the binding site plan and enforced by covenants, easements or other similar mechanisms.
    6. The decision of the Director may be appealed to the City’s Hearing Examiner per LMC 18A.02.740. [Ord. 591 § 61, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.30.050 Recording and binding effect.
A. Prior to recording, the approved binding site plan shall be surveyed and the final recording forms shall be prepared by a professional land surveyor, licensed in the state of Washington. Surveys shall include those items prescribed by RCW 58.09.060, records of survey, contents – record of corner, information;
B. The approved binding site plan recording forms shall include the following, in the format prescribed by the Director:
    1. Lots designated by number on the binding site plan within the area of the lot. Tracts shall be similarly designated and each tract shall be clearly identified with the ownership and purpose;
    2. Signature and stamp of the land surveyor who prepared the binding site plan;
    3. Reference to the recording number of the completed survey as required by this section if the boundaries have been previously surveyed;
    4. Reference to all agreements or covenants required as a condition of approval;
    5. Notarized signatures of all persons having an ownership or security interest in the land being divided;
    6. Approval of the City Engineer;
    7. Approval of the Director.
C. The Director shall examine and sign the approved binding site plan if it conforms with the commercial site development permit or the approved site plan and all conditions of approval. Binding site plans shall be recorded with the Pierce County Auditor’s Office with a record of survey.
D. Lots, parcels, or tracts created through the binding site plan procedure shall be legal lots of record. All provisions, conditions, and requirements of the binding site plan shall be legally enforceable on the purchaser or any other person acquiring a lease or other ownership interest of any lot, parcel, or tract created pursuant to the binding site plan.
E. Any sale, transfer, or lease of any lot, tract, or parcel created pursuant to the binding site plan, that does not conform to the requirements of the binding site plan or without binding site plan approval, shall be considered a violation of Chapter 58.17 RCW and shall be restrained by injunctive action and be illegal as provided in Chapter 58.17 RCW.
F. Property subject to a binding site plan shall be governed by the terms of approval of the binding site plan, and the statutes and ordinances, and regulations in effect at the time of preliminary approval for a period of one year. Any building permits issued pursuant to a binding site plan shall vest the specific improvement during the period that the building permit is active and valid. After one year, any new improvements shall be subject to the land use regulations and building codes then in effect, unless otherwise specified in the terms of the binding site plan approval. [Ord. 591 § 62, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.30.060 Amendment, modifications and vacations.
Except as provided in LMC 17.14.010, amendment, modification and vacation of a binding site plan shall be accomplished by following the same procedure and satisfying the same laws, rules and conditions as required for a new binding site plan application, as set forth in this chapter. If a portion of a binding site plan is vacated, the property subject to the vacated portion shall constitute one lot unless the property is subsequently divided by an approved subdivision or short subdivision. [Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.30.070 Administrative rules.
As part of the binding site plan approval, the Director may promulgate administrative rules and regulations to implement the terms of the binding site plan approval with regard to future land uses and development on the subject property. [Ord. 591 § 63, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

Chapter 17.34 RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM BINDING SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCESS

Sections:
17.34.010    Applicability.
17.34.030    Binding site plan for approved residential project.
17.34.035    Determination of completeness.
17.34.040    Conceptual plans.
17.34.050    Appeal.
17.34.060    Recording.
17.34.070    Amendments and rescindment.

17.34.010 Applicability.
Binding site plans are required for residential condominium projects which propose to subdivide (overtly or in effect) land into separate lots. Binding site plans are not required for condominiums which hold the underlying land as a single undivided parcel. [Ord. 591 § 64, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.34.030 Binding site plan for approved residential project.
Whenever a binding site plan for a residential condominium development is proposed on a parcel of land for which a building permit has been issued for the entire project, the following must be satisfied prior to recording:
A. A plan shall be prepared in a form prescribed by the Director which is adequate for permanent retention by the Pierce County Auditor’s Office.
B. The plan must be prepared by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer.
C. The plan must substantially reflect the site plan approved for the building permit. Specific details not relevant to the division of land may be omitted.
D. The plan must be verified by the Director for compliance with the approved building permit. The Director may require dedication of additional right-of-way for public streets.
E. The legal description and map must be verified by the City Engineer. [Ord. 591 § 66, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.34.035 Determination of completeness.
Within 28 days of receiving an application for binding site plan approval containing all information required by LMC 17.34.030, the Community Development Department shall issue a determination of completeness or incompleteness as required by RCW 36.70A.440. The Community Development Department is responsible for complying with all other requirements of RCW 36.70A.440. [Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.34.040 Conceptual plans.
Whenever a binding site plan for a residential condominium project is proposed on a parcel of land for which a development plan has not yet been approved for the entire parcel, the following plans must be submitted with the application:
A. A conceptual site plan shall be prepared in a form prescribed by the Director which includes the following information:
    1. Maximum number of dwelling units permitted.
    2. Approximate size and location of all proposed buildings.
    3. Approximate layout of an internal vehicular circulation system, including proposed ingress and egress.
    4. Approximate location of proposed open space, including required landscaped areas, if any.
    5. Approximate location of proposed parking areas.
    6. Location and size of utility trunk lines serving the site.
    7. Topography detailed to five-foot contours.
B. Upon application the Director shall distribute copies to public agencies having pertinent expertise or jurisdiction for review and comment.
C. The Director shall consider, and base his decision to approve with or without conditions, deny or return the binding site plan application on the following:
    1. Conformance of the proposed site plan with any applicable codes and ordinances of the state of Washington and the City. The Director shall identify, to the extent feasible, conditions likely to be imposed on building permits related to dedication of right-of-way or open space, and tracts, easements or limitations which may be proposed or required for utilities, access, drainage controls, sanitation, water supply, protection of sensitive areas or other unique conditions or features which may warrant protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. Such preliminary conditions may not be binding at the time of building permit approval, unless they would be required for the same project being developed without a binding site plan.
    2. The recommendations and comments of agencies having pertinent expertise or jurisdiction.
    3. The Director may require dedication of additional road right-of-way pursuant to City ordinance.
D. Additional documents shall be submitted as necessary for review and approval which may include a plat certificate, boundary survey, agreements, easements and covenants.
E. The development plan must be approved and signed by the City Engineer.
F. Prior to recording, the Director shall verify the final plan and any attachments to determine whether the binding site plan is accurate and complete and complies with any conditions of approval. Approval of a conceptual plan will provide the applicant a vested right to build the approved project without regard to subsequent changes in zoning or building codes or other applicable land use regulations for a period of one year from the date of the preliminary approval. Any building permits issued pursuant to the approved binding site plan shall vest the specific improvement during the period that the building permit is active and valid. After one year, any new improvements shall be subject to the land use regulations and building codes then in effect unless otherwise specified in the terms of the binding site plan approval. A statement shall be placed on the binding site plan map that notes the vesting status. [Ord. 591 § 67, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.34.050 Appeal.
Any decision of the Director shall be final unless appealed to the Hearing Examiner. [Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.34.060 Recording.
The proposed binding site plan approved by the Director shall be recorded with the Pierce County Auditor’s Office within 30 days of approval. Upon recording, the site plan shall be binding on the owner, his heirs and assigns, and shall permit the division of land within the site. Divisions shall only be permitted upon the filing of a declaration under the Horizontal Regimes Act, Chapter 64.32 or 64.34 RCW, provided the structure or structures, road and parking systems, and related facilities substantially conform to the recorded binding site plan. [Ord. 591 § 68, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.34.070 Amendments and rescindment.
A. Amendment of a recorded residential condominium binding site plan shall be accomplished by following the same process as required for a new application as set forth in this chapter.
B. Upon the request of the owner or owners of a legal lot or lots subject to a recorded binding site plan, the Director shall rescind all or a portion of a binding site plan; provided, that any portion of a binding site plan which is rescinded shall be considered to be one lot unless divided by an approved subdivision or short subdivision.
C. Signatures of owners of portions of a binding site plan which are not altered by an amendment or rescission are not required on the amended binding site plan or application for rescission. [Ord. 591 § 69, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

Chapter 17.38 BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENTS

Sections:
17.38.010    Purpose.
17.38.020    Scope.
17.38.030    Application.
17.38.035    Record of survey.
17.38.040    Administrative review.

17.38.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to clearly delineate the criteria used by City departments to review boundary line adjustments. Boundary line adjustments provide a procedure for changes in property lines where no new lots, units, or parcels are created. A boundary line adjustment is generally exempt from the provisions of Chapter 58.17 RCW. A boundary line adjustment does not apply to boundary changes that would result in increased development or density otherwise regulated by applicable City land use codes and regulations, or to actions requiring replat, amendment, alteration, or vacation of a plat or short subdivision. This chapter is also intended to ensure compliance with the Survey Recording Act. [Ord. 591 § 70, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.38.020 Scope.
The boundary lines separating two lots of record may only be adjusted under the provisions of this chapter. Extinguishing such lot lines or the merger of lots is also considered a boundary line adjustment subject to the requirements of this chapter. Actions which change or impair conditions or requirements imposed by previous platting decisions must be accomplished pursuant to the subdivision regulations. Boundary line adjustments shall not:
A. Create any additional lot, tract, parcel, site, or division;
B. Result in a lot, tract, parcel, site, or division which contains increased density or insufficient area or dimension to meet the minimum requirements for area and dimension as set forth in the land use and health codes and regulations. This provision shall not be construed to require correction or remedy of preexisting nonconformities or substandard conditions;
C. Diminish or impair drainage, water supply, existing sanitary sewage disposal, and access or easement for vehicles, utilities, and fire protection for any lot, tract, parcel, site, or division;
D. Create or diminish any easement or deprive any parcel of access or utilities;
E. Increase the nonconforming aspects of an existing nonconforming lot;
F. Replat, alter, or vacate a plat or short subdivision;
G. Amend the conditions of approval for previously platted property;
H. Reduce the overall area in a plat or short plat devoted to open space;
I. Involve lots which do not have a common boundary;
J. Circumvent the subdivision or short subdivision procedures set forth in this title. Factors which indicate that the boundary line adjustment process is being used in a manner inconsistent with statutory intent include: numerous and frequent adjustments to the existing lot boundary, a proposal to move a lot or building site to a different location, and a large number of lots being proposed for a boundary line adjustment; or
K. Be inconsistent with applicable City code. [Ord. 591 § 71, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.38.030 Application.
A. Applications for boundary line adjustments shall be made on forms provided by the City Community Development Department and shall be submitted to the Community Development Department with one original (may be deferred) and five paper copies of a plan signed and stamped by a professional land surveyor, drawn to scale with accurate dimensions, clearly showing the following information:
    1. The proposed lines for all affected lots, indicated by heavy solid lines;
    2. The existing lot lines proposed to be changed, indicated by heavy broken lines;
    3. The location of all structures/improvements existing upon the affected lots and the distance between structure/improvements and the proposed lot/boundary lines;
    4. The original legal description of the entire property together with new separate legal descriptions for each parcel, labeling them specifically as Parcel A, Parcel B, etc.;
    5. The position of rebar and caps set at each new property corner;
    6. All parcel numbers of affected lots;
    7. The location of the property to quarter/quarter section;
    8. The location and dimensions of any drain field, easement, or right-of-way existing within or adjacent to any affected lots;
    9. The area and dimensions of each lot following the proposed adjustment;
    10. The existing, and if applicable, proposed future method of sewage disposal for each affected lot.
B. Zoning designations shall follow boundary lines of separate lots and parcels. Where a zoning map or comprehensive plan map appears to reflect a division of a single lot or parcel into two zoning districts, each portion of that lot shall be subject to all the regulations applicable to the district in which it is located; except, lands which fall partially into and partially out of the McChord Air Corridors, as designated in the comprehensive plan, shall be exempt from this interpretation.
C. Where a boundary line adjustment is sought to facilitate development of the affected property, the City shall be entitled to require compliance with the subdivision, zoning, and site development standards of the City as a condition of approval of the boundary line adjustment.
D. The total change(s) in lot size resulting from one or more boundary line adjustments shall not produce a lot smaller than the minimum developable lot size for the zoning district in which the lot is located as of the time of the completion of the boundary line adjustment(s). [Ord. 591 § 72, 2015; Ord. 500 § 5, 2009; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.38.035 Record of survey.
A. The plat map shall be titled on the top of the page, in large capital letters, as follows:RECORD OF SURVEY FOR BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT
B. A note shall be placed on the plat map that reads as follows:THIS BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT IS NOT A PLAT, REPLAT, OR SUBDIVISION.
APPROVAL OF A BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT IS NOT A GUARANTEE THAT FUTURE PERMITS WILL BE GRANTED FOR ANY STRUCTURE OR DEVELOPMENT WITHIN A LOT AFFECTED BY A BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT.
C. All requirements of Chapter 58.09 RCW and Chapter 332-130 WAC governing minimum standards for land boundary surveys shall be met and a note shall be placed on the plat map that reads as follows:THIS SURVEY COMPLIES WITH ALL STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES OF THE "SURVEY RECORDING ACT" CHAPTER 58.09 RCW AND 332-130 WAC.
D. Boundary line adjustment applications shall be submitted to the Community Development Department with a preliminary title report on forms approved by that Department with liability for errors not to exceed the value of the affected lots, as determined by the assessed value on the date of approval. The preliminary title report shall set forth all persons having an interest in the lots affected by the boundary line adjustment. The preliminary title report must be dated no more than 30 days prior to application and must be updated to the date of boundary line adjustment approval, without cost to the City.
E. The plat map submitted for recording in the Auditor’s Office shall contain all survey information required for a record of survey under the “Survey Recording Act,” Chapter 58.09 RCW and Chapter 332-130 WAC, together with the following additional signature blocks, which shall be fully executed before approval:SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATE
This map correctly represents a survey made by me or under my direction in conformance with the requirements of Survey Recording Act at the request of on
, 20__ .
Certificate Number
SurveyorCOMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
______________________ _________
Community Development Director Date
CITY ASSESSOR-TREASURER
I hereby certify that all state and city taxes heretofore levied against the property described hereon, according to the books and records of my offices, have been fully paid.
_______________________ _____________
Deputy Assessor/Treasurer Date
Reviewed for Segregation
_______________________ ______________
Deputy Assessor/Treasurer Date
F. A free consent statement, as shown below, shall be inked on the plat map. This shall be signed and notarized, prior to submittal, in permanent black ink, by all parties having interest in the property. Owners’ names shall also be lettered below the signatures.The undersigned agree that the boundary line adjustment set forth herein is made with the free consent and in accordance with the desires of the owners.
(Black Ink Seal. Paper Press Seals Will Not Be Accepted)
Notary Seal
I hereby certify that the above individual(s) signed as a free and voluntary act and deed for the uses and purposes herein mentioned.
Given under my hand and seal this ____day of____ , 20__.
_____________________, NOTARY PUBLIC, in and for the State of Washington, residing at _______.
G. An application for a boundary line adjustment shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable planning review fee as set forth in separate resolution. [Ord. 591 § 73, 2015.]

17.38.040 Administrative review.
An application for a boundary line adjustment shall be processed as a Process I permit action. The Department shall not be considered to be in receipt of a complete application unless and until such time as the applicant meets the requirements of LMC 17.38.030, as determined by the Community Development Director or his/her designee.
A. The Community Development Department may forward a copy of the proposed boundary line adjustment to the City Engineer, the Fire Marshal, the Tacoma-Pierce Health Department, and to any other county department or division which may be affected.
B. A copy of the proposed boundary line adjustment shall be forwarded to the Assessor-Treasurer’s Office. The Assessor-Treasurer’s Office shall review the boundary line adjustment for accuracy of legal description, ownership, lot dimensions, and improvements on the lots.
C. The departments shall review the proposed boundary line adjustment against the purpose and scope described in LMC 17.38.010 and 17.38.020, respectively, and submit any comments to the Community Development Department no later than 30 days from the date of the agency transmittal.
D. If the Department of Community Development determines that an application for boundary line adjustment may impair drainage, water supply, existing sanitary sewage disposal, access or easement for vehicles, utilities, or fire protection for any lot, tract parcel, site, or decision, it shall refer the application to the appropriate department for review.
E. Following receipt of the comments of consulted departments under subsection A of this section, but in no case later than 60 days from receipt of completed application, the Director or his/her designee shall approve or deny the requested adjustments.
F. After approval, the applicant’s surveyor must record the survey of boundary line adjustment, together with deeds of conveyance signed by parties disclosed in the title report when the adjusted boundary separates different ownerships. If the record of survey and required deeds of conveyance have not been recorded within 30 days of boundary line approval, the boundary line adjustment shall be null and void.
G. The approval of a boundary line adjustment shall not be a guarantee that future permits will be granted for any structure or development within a lot affected by the boundary line adjustment.
H. An aggrieved person may appeal the Director’s decision on a boundary line adjustment to the Hearing Examiner, in accordance with procedures described in LMC 18A.02.740. The Hearing Examiner’s decision shall be final. [Ord. 591 § 74, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

Chapter 17.42 MISCELLANEOUS, REVIEW, PENALTIES AND SEVERABILITY

Sections:
17.42.010    Record of proceedings.
17.42.020    Penalties.
17.42.030    Enforcement.
17.42.040    Model home.
17.42.045    Affidavit of correction.
17.42.050    Administration.
17.42.060    Land surveys and recording fees.
17.42.070    Severability.

17.42.010 Record of proceedings.
A summary of all hearings and public meetings before the Examiner and the Hearing Examiner shall be preserved in a reasonable manner which may include a tape recorded record.
The appellant shall be responsible for paying all reasonable costs for transcribing the record of relevant hearings or meetings. [Ord. 591 § 75, 2015; Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.42.020 Penalties.
A. Any person, firm, corporation or association or any agent of any person, firm, corporation or association who violates any provision of this title adopted pursuant to state law, relating to the sale, offer for sale, lease or transfer of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor, and each sale, offer for sale, lease or transfer of each separate lot, tract or parcel of land in violation of any provision of this title shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
B. Any person who violates any court order or injunction issued pursuant to this title or state law shall be subject to a fine of not more than $5,000 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days or both.
C. Any person, firm, corporation or association or any agent of any person, firm, corporation or association who violates any provision of this title or any permit or written order or decision issued pursuant to this title shall be subject to a Class 2 civil infraction citation as defined in the City’s civil infractions ordinance.
D. If performance of an offer or agreement to sell, lease or otherwise transfer a lot, tract, or parcel of land following preliminary plat approval is expressly conditioned on the recording of the final plat containing the lot, tract, or parcel under this chapter, the offer or agreement is not subject to the penalties above and does not violate any provision of this chapter. All payments on account of an offer or agreement conditioned as provided in this section shall be deposited in an escrow or other regulated trust account and no disbursement to sellers shall be permitted until the final plat is recorded. [Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.42.030 Enforcement.
All City staff shall submit all suspected violations of this title to the City Attorney.
A. Assessor-Treasurer. The County Assessor-Treasurer, when requested to segregate any parcel of land which appears to be in violation of this title, shall notify the City Attorney.
B. Building Inspection and Permits Department. All applicants for building permits shall show by instrument of conveyance and an affidavit from his vendor, grantor or the applicant, that their building lot is not a division from an original tract or that they or their predecessors have complied with or are exempt from this title. Building permits shall be denied to any applicant whose parcel, lot or tract is not in compliance with this title. No building permit shall be issued for any lot within a plat or short plat until final approval is obtained from the appropriate City authority except as provided herein for model homes.
Building permits except as provided herein shall not be issued to any applicant until his site plan includes any required or mentioned element noted on the final plat, short plat or large lot division, including but not limited to building site location, access, drainage, sewers or septic tank and water system. An occupancy certificate shall not be issued until all such required or mentioned elements are satisfied.
C. Health Department. Septic tank permits may be denied to any applicant whose parcel, lot or tract is not divided in compliance with this title.
D. Assessor-Treasurer. A one percent real estate excise tax affidavit shall be filed in the County Assessor-Treasurer’s Office for all transfers of real property within the City. The affidavit shall include a parcel number or numbers of the current tax account or accounts involved in the sale. If there is a separation of said tax account, the total acreage or square footage of said tax account shall be stated therein and a rough diagram of the original parcel and the divided parcel shall be drawn thereon. Said diagram shall identify the section, township, range, quarter section and placement of existing buildings.
At the determination of the Assessor-Treasurer that the parcel sold is less than 20 acres and is a segregation from the original parcel, he/she shall require that said affidavit be approved by the City Community Development Department before he may place the excise stamp on the conveying instrument for the real property. [Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.42.040 Model home.
It shall be the purpose and intent of this chapter to allow up to four detached or attached dwellings within a preliminary subdivision which has been approved in accordance with all existing plans and regulations. The purpose of said dwellings shall be to demonstrate a variety of housing designs together with all associated on-site improvements, e.g., landscaping, improved driveway, patios, etc.
Model homes when proposed shall be established subject to the following criteria:
A. Model homes must meet the requirement of the City Building Codes with respect to being certified for use occupancy.
B. Only one model home may be occupied as a temporary real estate office pursuant to the Zoning Code.
C. Model homes may be sold; however, the sale shall not be considered final until such time as the preliminary plat has been approved and recorded as a final plat except as otherwise provided herein by this regulation.
D. All public and private roads providing access to the model homes shall be improved and maintained in a dust-free condition until such time as the permanent streets are established within the final plat. [Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.42.045 Affidavit of correction.
A. Any map page or document on file with the Pierce County Auditor/Recorder’s Office under the provisions of this title that contains an error in fact or omission may be amended by an affidavit of correction. The following types of errors may be corrected by affidavit:
    1. Any bearing, distance or elevation omitted from the recorded document;
    2. An error in any bearing, distance or elevation shown on the recorded document;
    3. An error in the description of the real property shown on the recorded document;
    4. An error in the field location of any shown easement; or
    5. Any other error or omission where the error or omission is ascertainable from the data shown on the recorded document.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit changes in courses, distances or elevations for the purpose of redesigning lot or tract configurations.
C. The affidavit of correction shall contain the seal and signature of the land surveyor making the correction.
D. The affidavit of correction shall set forth in detail the corrections made and show the names of the present fee owners of the property materially affected by the correction. The notarized signatures of the owners shall be required, if deemed necessary by the Department.
E. The affidavit of correction form, as provided by the Community Development Department, shall be submitted to the Department for review and approval and shall include signatures of the Development Engineer, the Director of the Department, and the Pierce County Assessor. After Department approval, the affidavit shall be recorded with the Pierce County Auditor’s Office. Submittals shall include payment of applicable fees;
F. Should a non-survey-related error occur on the recorded document as a result of information required to be placed on the document by the Department, the Department’s responsible land surveyor may prepare the affidavit providing the original land surveyor has no objections. The seal and signature of the Department’s responsible land surveyor making the correction shall be affixed to the affidavit. A copy of the affidavit shall be mailed by the Department to the original land surveyor following recording. [Ord. 591 § 77, 2015.]

17.42.050 Administration.
The Community Development Department is the primary City department responsible for administering this regulation, however, other City departments are delegated specific duties. In the event a legal question is involved, only the Community Development Department, Examiner or Council may refer the question to the City Attorney’s Office for advice. [Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.42.060 Land surveys and recording fees.
(NOTE: Please check with the Auditor’s Office for the proper fee amount.)
[Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

17.42.070 Severability.
If any provision of this title or its application to any person or legal entity or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the title, or the application of the provision to other persons or legal entities or circumstances shall not be affected. [Ord. 60 § 1, 1996.]

Title 18A LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT CODE

Chapters:
18A.01       Introduction
18A.02       Administration
18A.04       Marijuana Prohibited
18A.10       Discretionary Permits
18A.20       Land Use Types and Levels
18A.30       Zoning Districts
18A.40       Overlay Districts
18A.50       Development Standards
18A.70       Use-Specific Standards
18A.85       Eligible Facilities Modification Code (Wireless Telecommunications)
18A.90       Definitions

Chapter 18A.01 INTRODUCTION

Sections:
18A.01.100   Title.
18A.01.150   Intent and Purpose.
18A.01.200   Brief User's Guide.

18A.01.100 Title.
This title shall be shall be known and may be cited as the “Lakewood Land Use and Development Code,” hereinafter referred to as “this title” or “this code.” [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.01.150 Intent and Purpose.
The broad intent of the Lakewood Land Use and Development Code is to implement the City of Lakewood Comprehensive Plan, as now adopted and as may be subsequently amended, hereinafter referred to as the “comprehensive plan,” in order to protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of Lakewood’s citizens through regulation of the City’s physical development. The regulations included herein work toward overall public goals of providing for orderly development; lessening street congestion; promoting fire safety and public order; and ensuring the adequacy of public infrastructure such as transportation, water, sewer, schools, parks, and storm drainage.
The City strives to honor fundamental property rights and interests of private citizens while serving the overall good of the community as a whole. By their nature, land-use regulations call upon government to balance the community’s interests with those of individual property owners. This may result in regulations for the community good that serve to limit the use of property and prevent maximum financial profit for individuals. In allowing reasonable use of property, this effect is not confiscatory and is a proper exercise of the police power afforded to government.
Specifically, this code is intended to:
A. Foster improved relationships and harmony among land uses in order to overcome past, haphazard development patterns.
B. Preserve the qualities of those residential neighborhoods that offer desirable living environments, while encouraging improvement to others whose character undermines good-quality living conditions.
C. Diminish the reliance of current development patterns on automobile use and, over time, integrate multi-modal transportation opportunities into new development and redevelopment to support pedestrians, bicycles, and transit as well as cars.
D. Provide for adequate public facilities and services to support land development.
E. Promote social and economic well-being through integration of aesthetic, environmental, and economic values.
F. Encourage protection of environmentally critical or historically significant resources.
G. Ensure provision of adequate space for housing, commercial/industrial endeavors, and other activities necessary for public welfare.
H. Provide for effective and equitable administration and enforcement of the regulations contained herein. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.01.200 Brief User's Guide.
A. Organization. This title is laid out as shown below:
+-------------------------------+------------------+--------------------+--------------+
| LMC Title and Name            | Chapter of Title | Section of Chapter | Subsections  |
+-------------------------------+------------------+--------------------+--------------+
| 18A, Land Use and Development | 18A.05           | 18A.05.010         | A.1.a.(1)(a) |
| Code                          |                  |                    |              |
+-------------------------------+------------------+--------------------+--------------+
B. Format. Each chapter begins with a listing of the sections and a statement of that chapter’s purpose and applicability. General definitions and abbreviations are contained in LMC 18A.90, Definitions and Abbreviations. In some instances, specialized definitions may be found within the chapter where those definitions are used. Cross-references to other chapters and sections of this title and to other titles within the Lakewood Municipal Code can be found throughout this title. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

Chapter 18A.02 ADMINISTRATION

Sections:
18A.02.100   General Provisions.
18A.02.102   Authority.
18A.02.105   Recodification.
18A.02.110   Severability and Validity.
18A.02.115   Scope and Compliance.
18A.02.120   Consistency with Comprehensive Plan.
18A.02.125   Definitions.
18A.02.130   Rules of Construction.
18A.02.135   Use of a Development.
18A.02.140   Permit Required.
18A.02.145   Exclusions from Permit Requirement.
18A.02.148   Liability.
18A.02.150   Burden and Nature of Proof.
18A.02.152   Complete Application.
18A.02.155   Director Responsibility and Authority.
18A.02.160   Certificate of Occupancy.
18A.02.165   Official Records.
18A.02.170   Forms and Supportive Documentation.
18A.02.175   Fees.
18A.02.180   Security Mechanisms.
18A.02.185   Purpose - Security Mechanisms.
18A.02.190   Guarantee - Security Mechanisms.
18A.02.200   Interpretations.
18A.02.205   Administrative Interpretations, General.
18A.02.210   Interpretations of Text.
18A.02.215   Interpretation of Uses.
18A.02.220   Interpretation of Map Boundaries.
18A.02.225   Interpretation of Unlisted Words and Phrases.
18A.02.230   Computation of Time.
18A.02.235   Measurements.
18A.02.300   Establishment of Zones.
18A.02.310   Overlay Districts.
18A.02.320   Zoning Map.
18A.02.325   Establishment of Lines.
18A.02.330   Use Categories, Types, and Levels.
18A.02.340   Establishing Use.
18A.02.350   Vested Rights.
18A.02.355   Termination of Vested Rights.
18A.02.400   Amendments.
18A.02.405   Purpose - Amendments.
18A.02.410   Initiation - Amendments.
18A.02.415   Public Hearing - Amendments.
18A.02.420   City Council Action/Appeal - Amendments.
18A.02.425   Zoning of Annexed Lands.
18A.02.430   Purpose - Zoning of Annexed Lands.
18A.02.435   Determination of Community Development Director - Zoning of Annexed Lands.
18A.02.440   Recommendation of the Planning Commission - Zoning of Annexed Lands.
18A.02.445   City Council Action - Zoning of Annexed Lands.
18A.02.450   Moratoria - Zoning of Annexed Lands.
18A.02.460   Enforcement - Zoning of Annexed Lands.
18A.02.465   Revocation of Permits.
18A.02.470   Violations.
18A.02.475   Enforcement Measures.
18A.02.500   Permit Processes.
18A.02.502   Process Types – Permits.
18A.02.530   Permit Procedures.
18A.02.540   Process I - Permits.
18A.02.545   Process II - Permits.
18A.02.550   Process III - Permits.
18A.02.560   Process IV - Permits.
18A.02.565   Process V - Permits.
18A.02.570   Legislative Enactments Not Restricted.
18A.02.575   Resubmission of Denied Application.
18A.02.600   Public Notice and Permit Decision Procedures.
18A.02.605   Purpose - Public Notice and Permit Decision Procedures.
18A.02.610   Applicability - Public Notice and Permit Decision Procedures.
18A.02.615   Exemptions - Public Notice and Permit Decision Procedures.
18A.02.620   Preapplication Conference.
18A.02.621   Purpose - Preapplication Conference.
18A.02.622   Applicability - Preapplication Conference.
18A.02.630   Project Permit Applications.
18A.02.635   Determination of Completeness - Permit Application.
18A.02.640   Date of Acceptance - Permit Application.
18A.02.645   Project Review - Permit Application.
18A.02.650   Incorrect Applications - Permits.
18A.02.652   Appeal - Permit Applications.
18A.02.655   Referral of Applications - Permits.
18A.02.665   Public Notice - Permit Application.
18A.02.670   Notice of Application - Permits.
18A.02.675   Published Notice - Permit Application.
18A.02.680   Consistency with Development Regulations and SEPA.
18A.02.685   Initial SEPA Analysis.
18A.02.690   Categorically Exempt Actions - SEPA.
18A.02.695   Planned Actions - SEPA.
18A.02.700   Notice of Public Hearing.
18A.02.710   Hearing Staff Report.
18A.02.720   Open Record Public Hearings.
18A.02.725   Joint Public Hearings.
18A.02.730   Notice of Decision.
18A.02.735   Time Limitations.
18A.02.740   Appeals.
18A.02.800   Nonconformities.
18A.02.805   Purpose - Nonconformities.
18A.02.810   Applicability – Nonconformities.
18A.02.815   Nonconforming Lots of Record.
18A.02.820   Variances Allowable - Nonconforming Lots of Record.
18A.02.825   Alteration - Nonconforming Lots of Record.
18A.02.830   Nonconforming Uses.
18A.02.835   Maintenance, Alteration and Expansion - Nonconforming Uses.
18A.02.837   Limited Expansion of Multi-Family Residential Dwelling Units in Single Family Residential Zoning Districts.
18A.02.840   Nonconforming Structures.
18A.02.845   Proof of Nonconformity.
18A.02.850   Termination of Nonconforming Status.
18A.02.855   Damage or Destruction – Nonconformities.
18A.02.860   Transfer of Ownership – Nonconforming Uses.
18A.02.865   Administrative Determinations – Nonconforming Uses.
18A.02.870   Review of Administrative Decisions.

18A.02.100 General Provisions.

18A.02.102 Authority.
This title is adopted on August 20, 2001, by City of Lakewood Ordinance No. 264 pursuant to Chapter 36.70 et. Seq., the Planning Enabling Act, of the Revised Code of Washington (RCW), and which shall become effective as of September 1, 2001. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.105 Recodification.
Chapter 18A.12 of the Lakewood Municipal Code (LMC), as set forth in Ordinance 258 dated February 5, 2001 is hereby recodified in its entirety within this title. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.110 Severability and Validity.
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this title are severable. If any such section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction in a valid judgment or decree, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this title, which shall continue in full force and effect. Further, if any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this title is adjudged invalid or unconstitutional as applied to a particular property, use, building, or other structure, the application of said portion of this title to other property, uses, buildings, or structures shall not be affected. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.115 Scope and Compliance.
The provisions of this title shall apply to all incorporated areas of the City of Lakewood, Washington. A parcel of land or water area may be used, developed by land division or otherwise, and a structure shall be used or developed by construction, reconstruction, alteration, occupancy or otherwise only as this title permits and each development shall comply with the applicable standards set forth in this title. The requirements of this title apply to the person undertaking a development and/or the user of a development and to those persons’ successors in interest. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.120 Consistency with Comprehensive Plan.
This title is intended to implement the adopted planning goals and policies of the City of Lakewood represented in its comprehensive plan and other planning documents. Actions initiated under this title shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan as adopted or hereafter amended. Where a provision of this code is found to be in conflict with the comprehensive plan, applicable goals and/or policies of the comprehensive plan shall be evaluated against the code and shall inform an administrative interpretation by the Director as authorized in LMC 18A.02.155 and 200 (generally). A provision of this title that is in addition to another requirement of this title is not in conflict, but shall be considered to be supplementary to one another. [Ord. 552 § 2, 2012; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.125 Definitions.
The definitions contained in this title are generally those listed in Chapter LMC 18A.90, Definitions and Abbreviations, except for those definitions specified in LMC 18A.50.600, Signs; LMC 18A.50.700, Housing Incentives Program; and LMC 18A.40.460, Sexually Oriented Businesses, which are specific to those respective sections. [Ord. 483 § 4, 2008; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.130 Rules of Construction.
For purposes of this title, certain terms or words used in this title shall be interpreted as follows:
A. The word “person” includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation, as well as an individual.
B. Words used in the present tense includes the future tense, and a singular number includes the plural, and a plural number includes the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
C. The word “shall” is always mandatory and is not discretionary; the words “should” and “may” are permissive.
D. The word “used” or “occupied” includes the words “intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied.”
E. The word “lot” includes the words “plot” and “parcel.”
F. The word “building” and “structure” refers to all other structures or parts thereof.
G. Words importing the masculine gender shall also include the feminine and neuter.
H. When any provision of this title refers to or cites a section of federal law, the Revised Code of Washington (RCW), Washington Administrative Code (WAC), or Lakewood Municipal Code (LMC), and that section is later amended or superseded, this title shall be deemed amended to refer to the amended section or the section that most closely corresponds to the superseded section.
I. When any provision of this title refers to or cites a section heading within this title, that reference or cite refers to all applicable subsections of the entire section text under that heading.
J. Where the responsibility or authority is indicated in this title to lie with the Community Development Director, City Engineer, Building Official or other authorized agent of the City, responsibility or authority shall lie equally with that individual’s duly authorized designee.
K. The phrase “residential zones” shall refer to the R1, R2, R3, R4, MR1, MR2, MF1, MF2, and MF3 zoning districts. The phrase “single family residential zones” shall refer to the R1, R2, R3, R4, MR1, and MR2 zoning districts. The phrase “multi-family residential zones” shall refer to the MF1, MF2, and MF3 zoning districts. The phrase “commercial zones” shall refer to the NC1, NC2, ARC, CBD, TOC, C1, C2 and C3 zoning districts. The phrase “industrial zones” shall refer to the IBP, I1 and I2 zoning districts.
L. When any provision of this title refers to “the City”, the phrase refers to the government entity of the City of Lakewood. When any provision of this title refers to “the City”, the phrase refers to the City of Lakewood as a location or place. [Ord. 525 § 2, 2010; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.135 Use of a Development.
A development shall be used only for a lawful use. A lawful use of a development is one that is not prohibited by law and for which the development is designed, arranged, intended and which is legally permitted or is legally nonconforming. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.140 Permit Required.
No structure, portion of a structure, or sign shall be hereafter constructed, erected, enlarged, moved, or altered nor shall any use be established or changed until a zoning certification or discretionary land use permit (administrative use permit, conditional use permit, or temporary use permit), as appropriate, and a business license, if required, have been issued by the City. The Building Official shall not issue a building permit for the construction, reconstruction or alteration of a sign, structure or a part of a structure for which said zoning certification or discretionary land use permit, as appropriate, and business license have not been issued. The Community Development Director shall not issue a business license for any new development or use until a zoning certification or discretionary land use permit, as appropriate, has been issued, and said business license and/or building permit is in compliance with the terms of the zoning certification or discretionary land use permit. A fee may be charged for this compliance review. A zoning certification or discretionary land use permit shall only be issued by the Community Development Director or Hearing Examiner in accordance with the provisions of this title for all development activities and uses located within the City, except as excluded by LMC 18A.02.145, Exclusions from Permit Requirement. The Community Development Director or Hearing Examiner shall not issue a zoning certification, business license, project permit or discretionary decision for the improvement or use of land that has been previously divided or otherwise developed in violation of this title, regardless of whether the permit applicant created the violation, unless the violation has been corrected or can be rectified as part of the development. [Ord. 317 § 1, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.145 Exclusions from Permit Requirement.
Except as indicated otherwise, an activity, development or use listed below is excluded from the requirement for a zoning certification, project permit or discretionary approval. Exclusion from a permit does not exempt the development or its use from applicable requirements of this title or other applicable federal, state and local regulations.
A. Landscaping of a single family dwelling that does not involve the placement of a structure, grading, fill, excavation or otherwise require a permit.
B. Fences less than or equal to six (6) feet in height and not obstructing the clear line of vision of vehicular traffic approaching the location from any street or driveway. Fences greater than six (6) feet in height must meet applicable setback standards and require a building permit and a zoning certification.
C. A change internal to a building or other structure that does not substantially affect the use of the structure and that does not otherwise require a building permit.
D. Non-vehicular storage structures less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet and less than ten (10) feet in height, when placed on property where the owner resides. No structures may be placed on a lot within the required setbacks or so as to obstruct the clear line of vision of vehicular traffic approaching on any street or from a driveway.
E. An emergency measure necessary for the safety of the public or protection of property.
F. The establishment, construction, maintenance, or termination of a public or private utility facility that directly serves development authorized for an area, including such facilities as a private or public street, sewer, on-site or community septic system, water line, electrical power or gas distribution line, or telephone or television cable system, that do not otherwise require a City permit, license or approval.
G. Installation or construction of a residential accessory structure that does not require a building permit or a permit under the Uniform Fire Code.
H. Excavation or filling of land of less than fifty (50) cubic yards. Excavation or filling of land within or near sensitive areas shall require a development permit and shall meet applicable standards.
I. Clearing of land area less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in size, except that clearing of land shall not be exempt if the land is located in or within two hundred (200) feet of a sensitive area. A tree retention plan shall be required if trees will be removed in conjunction with the clearing of land, pursuant to Section 18A.50.300, Tree Preservation. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.148 Liability.
The provisions of this title shall not be construed as relieving or limiting in any way the responsibility or liability of any person or persons erecting any structure or owning any property for personal injury or property damage resulting from the willful acts or negligence of such person, its agents, employees or workers, in the construction, maintenance, repair or removal of any structure erected in accordance with a permit issued under the provisions of this title or without a permit, if exempted by this title; nor shall it be construed as imposing upon the City or its officers or employees any responsibility or liability by reason of the approval of any structure, action, materials or devices under the provisions of this title. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.150 Burden and Nature of Proof.
Except for legislative decisions, the burden of proof is upon the proponent. The more drastic the change or the greater the impact of the proposal on the area, the greater is the burden upon the proponent. The proposal shall not be approved unless the applicant has provided evidence demonstrating that the proposal conforms to the applicable elements of the comprehensive plan and to applicable provisions of this title, especially the specific criteria set forth for the particular type of decision under construction. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.152 Complete Application.
For the purposes of this title, a full and complete application is one that contains all of the information and materials, supporting documentation, and signatures, in the format specified, as required by the most current version of the permit application form approved by the Community Development Director; and which is accompanied by payment of any and all fees as required by the City. A valid application is one that seeks authorization for a use or development that is consistent with the provisions of the Lakewood Municipal Code, whether the use is principally permitted or reviewed under discretionary permit processes, and is submitted to the City within any applicable time requirements. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.155 Director Responsibility and Authority.
A. The Community Development Director is charged with the responsibility of carrying out the provisions of this title.
B. The Community Development Director is authorized and empowered to make administrative decisions and determinations with respect to the provisions of this title, pursuant to LMC 18A.02.200.
C. The Community Development Director is authorized and empowered to enforce or revoke any permit issued by the Community Development Department pursuant to LMC 18A.02.460 through 475.
D. The Community Development Director is authorized and empowered to create and develop all permit application forms incorporating the standards provided in this title and may, from time to time, modify and amend those forms, as appropriate, to reflect current development standards.
E. The Community Development Director shall be responsible for the coordination of the permit application and decision-making procedures and shall only issue a permit or grant an approval to an applicant whose application and proposed development is in compliance with the full provisions of this title. Before issuing any permits or approvals, the Community Development Director shall be provided with sufficient detail to establish that an application is in full compliance with the requirements of this title.
F. The Community Development Director is charged with the responsibility of compiling and maintaining an official file on each application or petition submitted under this title. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.160 Certificate of Occupancy.
A. No structure or portion of a structure hereafter constructed, erected, enlarged, moved, or altered shall be occupied, used or changed in use until a certificate of occupancy or its equivalent has been issued by the City. Such certificate shall be applied for prior to final inspection of the building. No sign, site or portion of a site hereafter constructed, erected, enlarged, moved, or altered shall be used, changed in use, or occupied until a final site inspection approval or its equivalent has been issued by the City. The final site inspection shall be applied for prior to use of the building. A certificate of occupancy or final site inspection approval shall be issued only after such building or site construction, enlargement, or alteration has been completed in conformity with the applicable provisions of this title, the approved site plan, and all required conditions.
B. Any use legally occupying an existing building on the effective date of this title may be continued but shall not be changed unless a certificate of occupancy for a new use has been issued by the City, after finding that such change in use conforms to the provisions of this title and required conditions.
C. A final site certification shall be issued before any vacant land is hereafter used or before an existing use of land is changed; provided that such use is in conformance with the provisions of this title and required conditions. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.165 Official Records.
A. An official file on each application or petition submitted under this title shall be compiled and shall consist of the following:
    1. The application or petition materials submitted by the applicant or appellant.
    2. Any staff reports prepared.
    3. All written testimony received on the matter.
    4. The written record of any public hearing held on the matter.
    5. The written decision of the granting authority on the matter.
    6. Any other information relevant to the matter, as judged by the staff member assigned to the project.
B. The official file is a public record, which shall be maintained and made available for public inspection consistent with the City's retention schedule and laws governing public disclosure. Availability may be temporarily disrupted prior to or during public hearings while staff is preparing for the hearing. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.170 Forms and Supportive Documentation.
The Community Development Department shall create and utilize administrative guidelines, applications, maps, charts, reference materials, forms, brochures, handouts and other tools to aid the public, applicants, staff, and decision-makers in interpreting and administering this title. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.175 Fees.
A. Responsibility. The Community Development Department shall collect the appropriate fees charged to applicants for any permits or discretionary approval processes provided for in this title. The amount of the fees charged shall be as established by resolution or ordinance of the City Council filed in the office of the City Clerk and may be changed without amendment to this title.
B. Payment. Fees established in accordance with this title shall be paid upon submission of a signed application or petition for appeal, or as otherwise provided by any fee ordinance or resolution adopted by the City Council. A department of the City of Lakewood shall not be required to pay application fees when applying for a permit regulated under this title. Where such an application will require substantial review time or expenditures, the City Manager may, at his sole discretion, direct that the department initiating the permit request reimburse the Community Development Department for some or all of costs expended for the permit review.
C. Waivers and Reductions. In certain instances, it may be desirable to reduce or waive fees, or a portion of the fees for development projects regulated by this title. The type, amount and applicability of fees waivers shall be as established by resolution or ordinance of the City Council and filed in the office of the City Clerk as part of the adopted fee schedule or as an amendment to this title.
D. Refunds. The Community Development Director may authorize a full or partial refund when an application is withdrawn, based on the estimated expenditure of staff time and resources at the time of withdrawal. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.180 Security Mechanisms.

18A.02.185 Purpose - Security Mechanisms.
The purpose of this section is to provide the City with financial mechanisms to ensure that conditions, requirements and all applicable provisions of this title associated with an permit approval are met in the manner intended by the City. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.190 Guarantee - Security Mechanisms.
A. The City, in its sole discretion, may require a cash guarantee, or an irrevocable letter of credit with the City to ensure the subsequent completion and continued maintenance of all conditions to which such permit is subject. The guarantee or its equivalent shall be in a form acceptable to the City and shall represent a percentage of the estimated cost of design, materials, and labor related to the project in question, based on the estimated costs on the last day covered by the device, of installing, replacing, or repairing, as appropriate, the improvements covered by the security, as agreed to by the Community Development Director and City Engineer. The cost estimate shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer prior to acceptance by the City of the guarantee or its equivalent.
    1. Completion. One hundred fifty (150) percent of the costs specified above, for the duration specified by the City, or until all improvements are installed and accepted by the City, whichever is less.
    2. Maintenance. Twenty (20) percent of the costs specified above, for the duration specified by the City, or until the City is satisfied that maintenance shall continue, whichever is less. However, the guarantee or equivalent shall be extendible by the City if repairs are made at the end of the guarantee period which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director or City Engineer, require additional guarantee of workmanship.
B. The cash guarantee or equivalent may be presented to the City after preliminary approval of a project, but in all circumstances shall be presented prior to any site work, including clearing, grading, or construction. The conditions of performance to which such guarantee is subject shall be listed on the permit attached thereto. No certificate of occupancy, or other permit for which a guarantee is required, shall be issued until all such conditions, except landscaping are satisfied. A separate guarantee may be established for landscaping, if deemed necessary by the Community Development Director or City Engineer. All securities shall be held until released by the Community Development Director or City Engineer.
C. In each case where a security is posted, the applicant and the City Engineer shall sign a notarized security agreement, approved in form by the City Attorney. The agreement shall provide the following information:
    1. A description of the work or improvements covered by the security.
    2. Either the period of time covered by the maintenance security or the date after which the City will use the proceeds of the performance security to complete the required work or improvements.
    3. The amount and nature of the security and the amount of any cash deposit.
    4. The rights and duties of the City and applicant.
    5. An irrevocable license to run with the property to allow the employees, agents, or contractors of the City to enter the subject property for the purpose of inspecting and, if necessary, performing the work or making the improvements covered by the security.
    6. The mechanism by and circumstances under which the security shall be released. At a minimum, after the work or improvements covered by a performance security have been completed, or at the end of the time covered by a maintenance security, the applicant may request that the City release the security. If the applicant has complied with the security agreement and any applicable permit conditions, the City Engineer shall release the remaining security. If the work has not been completed or repairs not made, then the City shall not release the security until such work is completed. Partial release of the security may be allowed provided that the developer provides a new security equal to one hundred fifty (150) percent of the cost of the remaining work.
D. If, during the period of time covered by a maintenance security, or after the date by which the required work or improvements are to be completed under a performance security, the City Engineer determines that the security agreement has not been complied with, the City Engineer shall so notify the applicant. The notice must state:
    1. The work that must be done or the improvements that must be made to comply with the security agreement; and
    2. The amount of time that the applicant has to commence and complete the required work or improvements; and
    3. That, if the work or improvements are not commenced and completed within the time specified, the City will use the proceeds of the security to have the required work or improvements completed.
E. If the work or improvements covered by the security are not completed within the time specified in the notice, the City shall obtain the proceeds of the security and shall cause such work to be completed. Applicant shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the City in administering, maintaining, or making the improvements covered by the security. The City shall release or refund any proceeds of a performance or maintenance security remaining after subtracting all costs for doing the work or making the improvements covered by the security. The applicant shall reimburse the City for any amount expended by the City that exceeds the proceeds of the security. The City may file a lien against the subject property for the amount of any excess. In each case where the City uses any of the funds of a security, it shall give the applicant an itemized statement of all funds used. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.200 Interpretations.

18A.02.205 Administrative Interpretations, General.
All interpretations of this title shall be made by the Community Development Director. Official interpretations shall be written and maintained in an orderly, retrievable record. Such administrative interpretations shall include determinations of uses permitted in the various districts, and approval or disapproval of development plans and zoning certifications. Other interpretations may be made as specific circumstances arise which require such interpretations. The purpose of such administrative interpretations is to provide a degree of flexibility in the administration of this title while following the intent of the City Council. Administrative interpretations are subject to the appeal procedure and requirements pursuant to LMC 18A.02.540(E). [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.210 Interpretations of Text.
A. Where the conditions imposed by one provision of this title are less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision of this title, the more restrictive provision shall govern. A provision of this title that is in addition to another requirement of this title is not in conflict, but shall be considered to be supplementary to one another.
B. When the provisions of this title impose greater restrictions than are imposed by other applicable City, County, regional, state and/or federal regulations, the provisions of this title shall govern.
C. Where the conditions imposed by one provision of this title are less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by or are in conflict with any provision of any other title of the Lakewood Municipal Code, the provision, that in the determination of the Community Development Director and the City Attorney, is most compatible with and more closely parallels the intent and purpose of the comprehensive plan, shall govern. A provision of this title that is in addition to another requirement of a title of the Lakewood Municipal Code is not in conflict, but shall be considered to be supplementary to one another.
D. This title is not intended to override any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement; provided, that where the provisions of this title are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such easements, covenants, or other private agreements, the requirements of this title shall govern.
E. Except where specifically noted, examples of uses listed in this title are intended to typify but not be an inclusive list or limit allowable uses and shall be used to identify appropriate zones and regulatory levels for a given use based on substantial similarity, in terms of activities, intensity, size, and performance, to a listed use.
F. In any case of any ambiguity, inconsistency or difference of meaning or implication between the text of any provision and any illustration or other graphics, the text of this title shall control. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.215 Interpretation of Uses.
A. Land uses that are listed as primary uses in each zoning district shall be permitted subject to the review processes, standards, and regulations specified in this title. If a described use is not listed as a use in a particular zoning district, it shall be considered to be a prohibited use within that district, excepting land uses listed as prohibited uses in Chapter 18A.04 LMC. However, it is inevitable that certain valid, justifiable uses of land will be missing from the listings of uses permitted in various zoning districts, therefore the Community Development Director is authorized to make an administrative interpretation in accordance with the procedures of this section.
B. If a proposed use is not specifically listed, an applicant may request an interpretation from the Community Development Director as to whether or not such use is a permitted use. In determining whether a proposed use closely resembles a use expressly authorized in the applicable zoning district(s), the Community Development Director shall examine the characteristics of the development and use and shall make a determination as to what zone(s) the development and use may be allowed as a primary permitted use or permitted with an administrative use permit or with a conditional use permit based on the following criteria:
    1. The use is compatible with the applicable goals and policies of the comprehensive plan.
    2. The use is consistent with the stated purpose of the applicable district or districts.
    3. The requested use is most substantially similar to the listed uses permitted in the district in which the request is being sought, as opposed to its similarity to the listed uses permitted in other districts based on the following criteria:
        a. The activities involved in or equipment or materials employed in the use;
        b. The effects of the use on the surrounding area, such as traffic impacts, noise, dust, odors, vibrations, lighting and glare, impacts on public services and facilities, and aesthetic appearance;
        c. The use has a high degree of potential to be consistent, compatible, and homogenous with listed uses;
        d. The size of the facility.
C. Unlisted developments and uses for which the Community Development Director has made an administrative interpretation as to appropriate zone and type similarity shall be considered to constitute an official interpretation and shall subsequently be applied and used for future administration in reviewing like proposals. The Community Development Director shall report such decisions to the Planning Commission when it appears desirable and necessary to amend this code.
D. The Community Development Director’s determination shall be processed and subject to the applicable requirements of LMC 18A.02.540 and may be appealed as provided in LMC 18A.02.740. [Ord. 683 § 2, 2018; Ord. 604 § 3, 2015; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.220 Interpretation of Map Boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to any of the zone boundaries as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
A. A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following a lot line or parcel boundary shall be construed as following the lot line or parcel boundary as it actually existed at the time the zoning boundary was established. If, subsequent to the establishment of the zoning boundary, a lot line should be moved as a result of a legally performed boundary line adjustment (including right-of-way dedications and vacations), the zoning boundary shall be construed as moving with the lot line if the Community Development Director, in his sole discretion, determines that the boundary line adjustment is minor in nature and that the corresponding change in the zoning is consistent with goals, objectives and intent of the comprehensive plan and is consistent with the general zoning pattern in the area. In this case, the Community Development Director shall direct that the official zoning map be amended pursuant to LMC 18A.02.320.
If the Community Development Director determines that moving the zoning line as a result of a boundary line adjustment is not clearly minor, would have a material impact on the zoning pattern of the area, or would be contrary to the goals, objectives or intent of the comprehensive plan, then the zoning boundary shall only be moved after approval through the formal zoning amendment process pursuant to LMC 18A.02.400.
B. A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following a creek, lake, or other water course shall be construed as following the actual centerline of the water course. If, subsequent to establishment of the boundary, the centerline of the water course should move as a result of natural processes, the boundary shall be construed as moving with the centerline of the water course, as determined by the ordinary high water line.
C. A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following a ridge line or topographic contour line shall be construed as following the actual ridge or contour line. If, subsequent to the establishment of the boundary, the ridge or contour line should move as a result of natural processes, the boundary shall be construed as moving with the ridge or contour line.
D. A boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following a street or railroad line shall be construed as following the centerline of the street or railroad right-of-way. If, subsequent to the establishment of the boundary, the centerline of the street or railroad right-of-way should be moved as a result of its widening or minor realignment, such as at an intersection, the boundary shall be construed as moving with the centerline.
E. Whenever any street or other public right-of-way is vacated in the manner prescribed by law, the zoning district adjoining each side of said street or other public right-of-way shall be automatically extended to the centerline of the former street or other public right-of-way, unless determined otherwise pursuant to subsection 18A.02.220(A), and all of the area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts.
F. Whenever a single lot is located within two (2) or more different zoning districts, each portion of that lot shall be subject to all the regulations applicable to the district in which it is located; except, lands which fall partially into and partially out of the McChord Air Corridors, as designated in the comprehensive plan, shall be exempt from this interpretation.
G. An Open Space and Recreation (OSR) zoning district boundary shown on the zoning map as approximately following a wetland boundary line shall be construed as following the actual edge of the wetland. If, subsequent to the establishment of the zoning district boundary, a wetland delineation report is conducted by a qualified wetland biologist and said report is reviewed and accepted by the City, the boundary shall be construed as following the delineated wetland line. The appropriate wetland buffer shall not be included within the OSR zone boundary, rather the buffer area shall be included in adjacent upland zoning district, pursuant to LMC 18A.50.125, Density Standards.
H. If the specific location of a zoning boundary line cannot be determined from application of the above rules to the zoning map, it shall be determined by the use of the scale designated on the zoning map.
I. Where questions still arise concerning the exact location of a district boundary, the Community Development Director shall interpret the zone boundaries. [Ord. 307 § 1, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.225 Interpretation of Unlisted Words and Phrases.
The definition of any word or phrase, not listed in this title, which is in question when administering this title, shall be defined from one of the following sources which are incorporated herein and adopted by reference. Said sources shall be utilized to find the desired definition in the order listed as follows:
A. City of Lakewood Land Use and Development Code.
B. City of Lakewood Comprehensive Plan.
C. Any other portion of the Lakewood Municipal Code or other City resolution, ordinance, or regulations.
D. Any statute or regulation of the State of Washington, beginning with the most applicable first.
E. Legal determinations and definitions from applicable case law.
F. Legal definitions from the most recent edition of Black’s Law Dictionary.
G. Definitions from Webster’s Dictionary or other common dictionary. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.230 Computation of Time.
For the purposes of this title, periods of time shall be computed as follows:
A. Day means calendar day and business day shall mean Monday through Friday unless it is an official City holiday or a holiday on which the United States Postal Service does not deliver mail.
B. The day that a notice is issued shall not be included in any applicable comment period.
C. The last day of the comment period shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, an official City holiday or a holiday on which the United States Postal Service does not deliver mail, then it also is excluded and the comment must be submitted by the next business day.
D. The day that a decision is issued shall not be included in the appeal period.
E. The last day of the appeal period shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, an official City holiday or a holiday on which the United States Postal Service does not deliver mail, then it also is excluded and the filing must be completed on the next business day, pursuant to RCW 35A.28.070.
F. The day an application is received is not included in the twenty-eight (28) day completeness review period. The twenty-eighth (28th) day is included in the twenty-eight (28) day completeness review period, unless that day is a Saturday, Sunday, an official City holiday or a holiday on which the United States Postal Service does not deliver mail. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.235 Measurements.
A. Distances. Distances shall be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest point of the property or parcel upon which the proposed use is to be located, to the nearest point of the parcel, buffer or wetland delineation line, ordinary high water line or the zoning district boundary line from which the proposed use is to be separated.
B. Fractions. When any measurement technique for determining the number of items required or allowed results in fractional figures, any fraction less than one-half (1/2) of the applicable unit of measurement shall be disregarded, and fractions of one-half (1/2) or larger shall require the next higher unit of measurement.
C. Value. All improvements to a building or a lot are cumulative. Where more than one (1) improvement has occurred or is proposed, whether said improvements occurred previously, simultaneously, or separately, the cumulative value of all improvements made shall be the measurement used for the value of improvements.
D. Density. Where the residential uses described in LMC 18A.20.300 do not constitute independent housekeeping units as described in the definition of “dwelling unit” under LMC 18A.90.200, the maximum allowable density or intensity of use shall be determined on the basis of the ability of the site to sustain all required improvements, including parking. Where a use combines independent housekeeping units and some other form of dwelling units, such as congregate care, the maximum allowable density shall be determined based on the independent housekeeping units alone. [Ord. 462 § 3, 2007; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.300 Establishment of Zones.
The classification system used in the comprehensive plan was established and mapped as a management tool to implement the policies and intent of the comprehensive plan. Land use designations were established which are appropriate to carry out the intent and purpose of the comprehensive plan and are defined in the comprehensive plan’s land-use element. The zoning district classifications established to implement each of the comprehensive plan land-use designations for the City are shown in Table 1 below. The zone boundaries are as shown on the City’s official zoning map, as established under LMC 18A.02.320. Where the abbreviated designation is used in this title, it has the same meaning as the entire classification title.
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
|   Comprehensive Plan Designation   |             Zoning District Classification              |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| Residential Estate                 | Residential 1 (R1); Residential 2 (R2)                  |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| Single Family                      | Residential 3 (R3); Residential 4 (R4)                  |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| Mixed Residential                  | Mixed Residential 1 (MR1)Mixed Residential 2            |
|                                    | (MR2)                                                   |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| Multi Family                       | Multi Family 1 (MF1)                                    |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| High-Density Multi Family          | Multi Family 2 (MF2)                                    |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| Multi Family 3 (MF3)               |                                                         |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| Corridor Commercial                | Commercial 1 (C1); Commercial 2 (C2); Commercial        |
|                                    | 3 (C3)                                                  |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| Central Business District          | Central Business District (CBD)                         |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| Arterial Corridor                  | Arterial Residential Commercial (ARC)                   |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| Neighborhood Business District     | Neighborhood Commercial 1 (NC1);Neighborhood            |
|                                    | Commercial 2 (NC2);Multi Family 2 (MF2);Multi           |
|                                    | Family 3 (MF3);                                         |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| Industrial                         | Industrial Business Park (IBP) Industrial 1             |
|                                    | (I1); Industrial 2 (I2)                                 |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| Air Corridor 1                     | Clear Zone (CZ); Air Corridor 1 (AC1)                   |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| Air Corridor 2                     | Air Corridor 2 (AC2)                                    |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| Public & Semi-Public Institutional | Public Institutional (PI)                               |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| Military Lands                     | Military Lands (ML)                                     |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| Open Space & Recreation            | Open Space Recreation 1 (OSR1)                          |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| Open Space Recreation 2 (OSR2)     |                                                         |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| Lakewood Station District          | Transit-Oriented Commercial (TOC); Public Institutional |
|                                    | (PI); Commercial 1 (C1); Neighborhood Commercial        |
|                                    | 2 (NC2); Multi Family 2 (MF2); Multi Family             |
|                                    | 3 (MF3); Open Space Recreation 2 (OSR2)                 |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
[Ord. 525 § 3, 2010; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.310 Overlay Districts.
A. An overlay district is a district that may be combined with any portion of any zone as appropriate to the purpose of the district. The regulations of a special purpose district consist of additional sections of this title and additional standards. Some of these regulations are supplementary so that both the regulations of the special purpose district and the zone apply and in other cases, the special purpose district regulations preempt and override the regulations of the underlying zone. Where these regulations conflict, the regulations that are more restrictive shall control. The boundaries of special purpose districts are shown on the City's official overlay districts map, which is hereby adopted by reference as part of this title, and are further described as follows:
    1. The boundaries of the Flood Hazard Overlay (FHO) district shall be the areas of flood hazards identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a report entitled: “The Flood Insurance Study for the Unincorporated Areas of Pierce County, WA, Vols. 1 and 2”, dated August 19, 1987, as amended, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) and Flood Boundary Maps dated effective August 19, 1987, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this section.
    2. The boundaries of the Riparian Overlay (RO) district shall be the areas of those parcels which abut or are adjacent to Chambers Creek, Clover Creek, Flett Creek, Leach Creek, and Ponce de Leon Creek as further described in LMC 18A.40.200.
    3. The boundaries of the Senior Housing Overlay (SHO) district shall be the area shown in Figure 3.1, Senior Housing Overlay in the City of Lakewood Comprehensive Plan.
    4. The boundaries of the Sexually Oriented Business Overlay (SOBO) district shall be the areas identified and described in “Exhibit A” as referenced in LMC 18A.40.420.
B. Each special purpose district and the abbreviated designation suffix are listed in Table 2 below.
+------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| Special Purpose District           | Abbreviated Designation |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| Flood Hazard Overlay               | (zoning district)/FHO   |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| Riparian Overlay                   | (zoning district)/RO    |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| Senior Housing Overlay             | (zoning district)/SHO   |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| Sexually Oriented Business Overlay | (zoning district)/SOBO  |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------+
[Ord. 358 § 4, 2004; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.320 Zoning Map.
The location and boundaries of all zones or districts designated in this title are hereby established as shown on the maps entitled, “City of Lakewood Zoning Map,” and “City of Lakewood Overlay Districts Map” as adopted herewith and as may be amended from time to time, and hereafter referred to as “zoning map.” The zoning map shall be as shown on a geographic coverage layer(s) attributed to zoning that is maintained as a part of the City's geographic information system (GIS) at the direction of the Community Development Director. No unauthorized person may alter or modify the zoning GIS layer. This geographic coverage layer, as amended from time to time, shall constitute the official zoning map for the City's zoning jurisdiction and shall be incorporated into this title by reference as if fully set forth herein. An original, signed paper copy of the zoning GIS layer containing the zoning districts designated at the time of adoption of this title shall be retained in the office of the City Clerk pursuant to RCW 35.63.100, and duplicates shall be filed in the Community Development Department for reference and public distribution. All amendments hereafter made to the zoning map by ordinance shall be reflected on such map, and it shall be the responsibility of the Community Development Department to ensure that an up-to-date map is maintained at all times. [Ord. 552 § 1, 2012; Ord. 539 § 1, 2011; Ord. 525 § 1, 2010; Ord. 505 § 1, 2009; Ord. 483 § 1, 2008; Ord. 462 § 1, 2007; Ord. 425 § 1 & 2, 2006; Ord. 397 § 1, 2005; Ord. 357 § 4, 2004; Ord. 323 § 1, 2003; Ord. 322 § 1, 2003; Ord. 293 § 1, 2002; Ord. 266 § 1, 2001; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.325 Establishment of Lines.
Notwithstanding any provisions in this title to the contrary, the City shall have no duty to establish lot lines or setback lines at a development. The location of lot lines or setback lines at a development and construction related thereto shall be the responsibility of the applicant and owner. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.330 Use Categories, Types, and Levels.
LMC 18A.20 groups uses into major categories: Residential, Civic, Utilities, Commercial, Industrial, Agricultural, and Accessory. Each use category includes a number of use types. Each use type may contain one (1) or more levels based on the intensity or characteristics of the use. The description of the use types and levels may contain examples of usual and customary uses. The use examples are intended to be typical and are not intended to represent all possible uses that are substantially similar in nature and intensity to the listed uses and which, as such, may be allowed and regulated equally. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.340 Establishing Use.
The use of a property is defined by the activity for which it or structures occupying it is or are intended, designed, arranged, occupied, or maintained. A property may contain uses that fall into one or more categories or use type. When more than one use category or use type level applies to one property, each use shall be classified and may be regulated separately. There shall be no limit as to the number of uses combined on a single property, provided that each use is permitted in the zoning district and each use meets all pertinent development standards and regulatory requirements, except that no more than one (1) dwelling unit, excluding ADUs, shall be permitted on a lot in a single family residential zoning district, except as may be allowed by the specific use regulations of said district. [Ord. 307 § 2, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.350 Vested Rights.
For the purposes of administration under this title, an applicant’s rights become vested in accordance with the following standards:
A. A permit application shall vest under the code requirements and processes in effect at the time that a valid and fully complete permit application is submitted to the City.
B. The determination of whether a permit application is valid and fully complete, and the date on which it is submitted shall be determined by the Community Development Director. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.355 Termination of Vested Rights.
Rights vested for a permit application shall terminate upon expiration of the permit application. For any permit applications without a specific expiration period, the expiration period shall be six (6) months. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.400 Amendments.

18A.02.405 Purpose - Amendments.
This title may be amended by the City Council by changing the boundaries of zoning districts that modify the official zoning map or by changing any other provisions thereof which add, delete or otherwise modify the text of this title, whenever the public necessity and convenience and the general welfare require such amendment, by following the procedures of this section. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.410 Initiation - Amendments.
An amendment may be initiated as follows:
A. Amendments to the text of this title and official zoning map amendments may be initiated by resolution of intention by the City Council. Amendments shall be heard by the Planning Commission and City Council.
B. Amendments to the text of this title may be initiated by resolution of intention by the Planning Commission, Community Development Director and by application of private citizens.
C. Official zoning map amendments may be initiated by application of one (1) or more owners, or their agents, of the property affected by the proposed amendment, or by the Planning Commission or Community Development Director.
D. The Community Development Director may, in his sole discretion, accept a citizen request or suggestion for an proposed amendment as City-initiated, and without fee to the citizen, only if it is demonstrated that the proposed amendment has significant merit and would benefit the general public, and not principally benefit only a limited number of property owners. [Ord. 604 § 4, 2015; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.415 Public Hearing - Amendments.
At the conclusion of one (1) or more public hearings on a proposed amendment, the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation with respect to the proposed amendment and shall forward such to the City Council, which shall have the final authority to act on the amendment. The following standards and criteria shall be used by the Planning Commission and City Council to evaluate a request for an amendment. Such an amendment shall only be granted if the City Council determines that the request is consistent with these standards and criteria.
A. The proposed amendment is consistent with the comprehensive plan.
B. The proposed amendment and subsequent development of the site would be compatible with development in the vicinity.
C. The proposed amendment will not unduly burden the transportation system in the vicinity of the property with significant adverse impacts which cannot be mitigated.
D. The proposed amendment will not unduly burden the public services and facilities serving the property with significant adverse impacts which cannot be mitigated.
E. The proposed amendment will not adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City.
F. The entire range of permitted uses in the requested zoning classification is more appropriate than the entire range of permitted uses in the existing zoning classification, regardless of any representations made by the petitioner as to the intended use of subject property.
G. Circumstances have changed substantially since the establishment of the current zoning map or zoning district to warrant the proposed amendment.
H. The negative impacts of the proposed change on the surrounding neighborhood and area are largely outweighed by the advantages to the City and community in general, other than those to the individual petitioner. [Ord. 604 § 5, 2015; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.420 City Council Action/Appeal - Amendments.
The City Council shall, at a regular public meeting, consider the recommendation and issue a decision. The City Council may choose, at its sole discretion, to hold a public hearing on proposed amendments or other legislative decisions, prior to issuing a decision. The decision of the City Council is appealable to the Pierce County Superior Court within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the issuance of a notice of decision and in accordance with the requirements of LMC 18A.02.755 and Chapter 36.70C RCW.
A. If the City Council approves the proposed change, the Community Development Director shall ensure that map changes are incorporated into the GIS zoning layer, and the City Clerk shall ensure the text changes are incorporated into the Lakewood Municipal Code.
B. If the application for an amendment is denied by the City Council, the application shall not be eligible for resubmittal for one (1) year from date of the denial, unless specifically stated to be without prejudice. A new application affecting the same property may be submitted if circumstances affecting the application have changed substantially. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.425 Zoning of Annexed Lands.

18A.02.430 Purpose - Zoning of Annexed Lands.
It is the purpose of this section to provide a procedure to ensure that the initial zoning of annexed territories is in conformance with City goals, policies and plans. [Ord. 264 §1, 2001.]

18A.02.435 Determination of Community Development Director - Zoning of Annexed Lands.
Whenever the City Council shall determine that the best interest and general welfare of the City would be served by annexing territory, the Community Development Director will cause an examination to be made of the comprehensive plan of the City. If the comprehensive plan is not current for the area of the proposed annexation, the Community Development Director will initiate an application for an update of the comprehensive plan and an application for an initial zoning recommendation. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.440 Recommendation of the Planning Commission - Zoning of Annexed Lands.
A. Comprehensive Plan. Upon application, the Planning Commission shall hold at least one (1) open record public hearing to consider the comprehensive plan for the area of the proposed annexation. Notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be mailed to all property owners in the area to be annexed and given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and the area to be annexed, at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing. Upon completion of the hearing, the Planning Commission shall transmit a copy of its recommendations for the comprehensive plan to the City Council for its consideration.
B. Initial Zoning. In addition, the Planning Commission shall hold at least one (1) open record public hearing to consider the initial zoning for the area of the proposed annexation. Notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be mailed to all property owners in the area to be annexed and given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and the area to be annexed, at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing. [Ord. 604 § 6, 2015; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.445 City Council Action - Zoning of Annexed Lands.
A. Comprehensive Plan. Within sixty (60) calendar days of the receipt of the recommendation from the Planning Commission for the comprehensive plan land-use designation for the area of the proposed annexation, the City Council shall consider the comprehensive plan at a public meeting. The City Council may approve or disapprove the designation as submitted, modify and approve as modified, or refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for further proceedings. An affirmative vote of not less than a majority of the total members of the City Council shall be required for approval. If the matter is referred back to the Planning Commission, the City Council shall specify the time within which the Planning Commission shall report back to the City Council with findings and recommendations on the matters referred to it.
B. Initial Zoning. Upon receipt of the recommendations of the Planning Commission for the initial zoning of the area of the proposed annexation, the City Council shall hold at least one (1) public hearing. Notice of the time and place and purpose of such hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and the area to be annexed, at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing. The ordinance adopting the initial zoning may provide that it will become effective upon the annexation of the area into the City. If annexation occurs prior to adoption of the comprehensive plan update and initial zoning designation, those areas designated and zoned under the authority and land-use provisions of Pierce County shall, upon annexation, be assigned an interim zoning designation of R3 for period of no longer than nine (9) months or until new zoning is adopted in conformance with the comprehensive plan, whichever occurs first. [Ord. 604 § 7, 2015; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.450 Moratoria - Zoning of Annexed Lands.
Nothing in this title shall prevent the City Council from establishing development moratoria or other interim land-use regulations upon a finding by the City Council that, due to unforeseen circumstances or other emergency, such a moratorium or temporary regulation is necessary in order to protect the purpose and effectiveness of the City’s comprehensive plan and regulations pending completion of the procedures necessary to adopt permanent land-use controls. Any such moratorium or interim land-use regulation shall be effective only for a period of a time necessary to complete adoption of the permanent land-use control, which time shall be specified by the City Council in the ordinance adopting the moratorium or other temporary regulation. No moratorium or temporary regulation shall remain in effect for a period longer than forty-five (45) days unless the City Council conducts a public hearing and, after hearing public testimony concerning the duration of the moratorium, finds that continuation of the moratorium in excess of forty-five (45) days is necessary and warranted under the circumstances, in which case the City Council may specify that the moratorium shall continue for a period of not in excess of one hundred eighty (180) days, including the initial forty-five (45) day period. Upon a subsequent finding that an extension beyond one hundred eighty (180) days is required, the City Council may extend the moratorium for one (1) additional period not to exceed ninety (90) days. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.460 Enforcement - Zoning of Annexed Lands.

18A.02.465 Revocation of Permits.
A. The Community Development Director is authorized and empowered to revoke any permit issued by the Community Development Department issued in error or based on false or misleading information or upon failure of the permit holder thereof to comply with any provision or condition of this title.
B. Any conditions or requirements placed upon a project permit by the Community Development Director or decision-making body as a result of the provisions of this title shall be strictly followed. In the event that the permit holder, or his assignee, fails to comply with any such conditions the project permit may be revoked or modified as set forth below or under the provisions of the Uniform Building Code.
C. If, after an investigation, the Community Development Director determines that one (1) or more conditions of a permit are not being met, notice shall be mailed to the permit holder or agent by regular mail advising him of the deficiency and requiring that the deficiency be remedied within ten (10) days from the date the notice is mailed or such longer period as the Community Development Director may deem appropriate.
D. If the permit holder or agent fails to remedy the deficiency within this time period set, the Community Development Director shall mail notice to the permit holder or agent advising the intent to revoke the development permit. Such notice shall state that to avoid such action the permitee must request, in writing, a hearing before the Hearing Examiner and then appear and show cause why the permit should not be revoked. Such a hearing request must be filed within ten (10) days of the date of the notice of intent to revoke. The Hearing Examiner may uphold the permit should it be determined that all conditions have been met or no longer need to be met; may modify or add conditions to the permit; or may revoke the permit. If the permitee fails to file a timely request for hearing, then the Community Development Director shall send him a notice advising him the project permit has been revoked and that any further action thereon would be in violation of City of Lakewood Land Use and Development Code.
E. The provisions of this section shall apply to all project permits issued prior to the date of adoption of this code, as well as all project permits issued thereafter. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.470 Violations.
It shall be a violation of this title for any person to:
A. Use, construct, locate or demolish any structure, land, sign or property within the City without first obtaining the permits or authorizations required for the use by this title.
B. Use, construct, locate or demolish any structure, land, sign or property within the City in any manner that is not permitted by the terms of any permit or authorization issued pursuant to this title; provided, that the terms or conditions are explicitly stated on the permit or the approved plans.
C. Remove or deface any sign, notice, complaint or order required by or posted in accordance with this title, LMC 14.02, Environmental Rules and Procedures, or other City ordinances.
D. Misrepresent any material fact in any application, plans or other information submitted to obtain any land-use authorization.
E. Fail to comply with the requirements of this title. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.475 Enforcement Measures.
The City Manager is authorized and empowered to ensure compliance with and enforce the provisions of this title to the fullest extent of the law. Except as specified elsewhere, violation of any provision of this title, including failure to comply with any lawful order issued under the authority of this title, constitutes a Class 2 civil infraction, as defined in LMC 1.48. Any violation of this title which is deemed to be a public nuisance or a danger to the public health and/or safety shall be addressed as specified in LMC 1.44. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.500 Permit Processes.

18A.02.502 Process Types – Permits.
Permit Process Types. Permit applications for review pursuant to this section shall be classified as a Process I, Process II, Process III, or Process IV action. Process V actions are legislative in nature. Permit applications and decisions are categorized by process type as set forth in Table 3. The differences between the processes are generally associated with the different nature of the decisions and the decision-making body as described below.
+-----------------+--------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
|                 | Process I Administrative |      Process II       |      Process III      |      Process IV       | Process V Legislative |
|                 |          Action          |    Administrative     |    Hearing Action     |    Hearing Action     |        Action         |
|                 |                          |        Action         |                       |                       |                       |
+-----------------+--------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Permits         | Zoning certification;    | Administrative        | Site-Specific         | Area-Wide Zoning      | Generalized           |
|                 | Building permit;         | Uses; Short           | Zoning Map            | Map Amendments;       | or comprehensive      |
|                 | Design Review;           | Plat; SEPA;           | Amendments*;          | Scrivener             | ordinance             |
|                 | Sign permit;             | Home Occupation;      | Conditional           | corrections           | text amendments;      |
|                 | Temporary                | Administrative        | Use; Major            | to Comprehensive      | Area-wide             |
|                 | Sign permit;             | Variance;             | Variance;             | Plan map and/or       | map amendments;       |
|                 | Accessory                | Binding Site          | Preliminary           | Comprehensive         | Annexation;           |
|                 | Living Quarters;         | Plans, Minor          | Plat; Major           | Plan text;            | Adoption of           |
|                 | Limited Home             | Plat Amendment,       | Plat Amendment;       | Shoreline             | new planning-related  |
|                 | Occupation;              | Major modification    | Major modification    | Redesignation,        | ordinances            |
|                 | Temporary                | of Process            | of Process            | **Final Plat          |                       |
|                 | Use; Manufactured        | II permits;           | III permits:          | **; ** Development    |                       |
|                 | or Mobile                | Shoreline             | Shoreline             | Agreement**           |                       |
|                 | Home permit;             | Conditional           | Conditional           | **No hearing          |                       |
|                 | Boundary Line            | Use; Shoreline        | Use; Shoreline        | required or           |                       |
|                 | Adjustments;             | Variance;             | Variance;             | recommendation        |                       |
|                 | Minor modification       | Shoreline             | Shoreline             | made by Planning      |                       |
|                 | of Process               | Substantial           | Substantial           | Commission**          |                       |
|                 | II and III               | Development           | Development           |                       |                       |
|                 | permits; Final           | Permits; Cottage      | Permit when           |                       |                       |
|                 | Site Certification;      | Housing Development   | referred by           |                       |                       |
|                 | Certificate              | (may be considered    | the Shoreline         |                       |                       |
|                 | of Occupancy;            | together with         | Administrator;        |                       |                       |
|                 | ***Sexually              | residential           | Public Facilities     |                       |                       |
|                 | Oriented Business        | binding site          | Master Plan;          |                       |                       |
|                 | extensions;              | plan)                 | Master Planned        |                       |                       |
|                 | Form-Based               |                       | Development –         |                       |                       |
|                 | Code Review              |                       | Town Center           |                       |                       |
|                 |                          |                       | Incentive             |                       |                       |
|                 |                          |                       | Overlay               |                       |                       |
+-----------------+--------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Impacts         | Minimal or               | Application           | Potential significant | Potential significant | Potential significant |
|                 | no effect                | of the standards      | effect on             | effect on             | effect on             |
|                 | on others,               | may require           | some persons          | some persons          | some persons          |
|                 | so issuance              | some knowledge        | or broad impact       | or broad impact       | or broad impact       |
|                 | of permit                | of impacts            | on a number           | on a number           | on a number           |
|                 | is not dependent         | and effect            | of persons            | of persons            | of persons            |
|                 | on others                | upon others           |                       |                       |                       |
+-----------------+--------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Notice &        | Participation            | Nearby property       | In addition           | In addition           | Anyone invited        |
| Comment         | of applicant             | owners invited        | to applicant,         | to applicant,         | to present            |
|                 | only                     | to comment            | others affected       | others affected       | information           |
|                 |                          | on an application     | invited to            | invited to            |                       |
|                 |                          |                       | present initial       | present initial       |                       |
|                 |                          |                       | information           | information           |                       |
+-----------------+--------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Recommendation  | NA                       | NA                    | Community Development | Planning Commission,  | Planning Commission   |
|                 |                          |                       | Department            | except for            |                       |
|                 |                          |                       | Staff                 | Final Plat            |                       |
|                 |                          |                       |                       | and Development       |                       |
|                 |                          |                       |                       | Agreement             |                       |
|                 |                          |                       |                       | as noted **           |                       |
|                 |                          |                       |                       | above                 |                       |
+-----------------+--------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Decision-Making | Community Development    | Community Development | Hearing Examiner      | City Council          | City Council          |
| Body            | Director                 | Director              |                       |                       |                       |
+-----------------+--------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Appeal          | Hearing Examiner         | Hearing Examiner      | Superior Court        | Superior Court        | Superior Court        |
|                 | Community                |                       | *Site-Specific        |                       |                       |
|                 | Development              |                       | Zoning Map            |                       |                       |
|                 | Director's               |                       | Amendments            |                       |                       |
|                 | decision on              |                       | are appealed          |                       |                       |
|                 | permits noted            |                       | to the City           |                       |                       |
|                 | *** above                |                       | Council.              |                       |                       |
|                 | is appealable            |                       |                       |                       |                       |
|                 | to Superior              |                       |                       |                       |                       |
|                 | Court.                   |                       |                       |                       |                       |
+-----------------+--------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
[Ord. 704 § 2, 2019; Ord. 695 § 4, 2018; Ord. 620 § 1, 2016; Ord. 604 § 8, 2015; Ord. 590 § 3, 2014; Ord. 423 § 1, 2006; Ord. 408 § 1, 2006; Ord. 276 § 3, 2002; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.530 Permit Procedures.
A. The Community Development Director shall determine the proper procedure for all applications. If there is a question as to the appropriate process, the Community Development Director shall resolve it in favor of the higher process number procedure. Process I is the lowest number procedure and Process V is the highest.
B. An application that involves two (2) or more procedures may be processed, at the City’s sole discretion, collectively under the highest numbered procedure required for any part of the application or processed individually under each of the procedures identified by the chapter. If the application is processed under the individual procedure option, the highest numbered process procedure must be processed prior to the subsequent lower numbered procedure. Joint public hearings with other agencies shall be held in accordance with LMC 18A.02.725.
C. Abbreviated findings shall be restricted to Process I and II, where less discretion is required to make a decision, and may serve as a permit if requirements are met.
D. Except for Process IV and V, City actions on project permits should be completed within one hundred twenty (120) days of determination of a complete application, unless the City makes written findings that a specified amount of additional time is needed for processing of specific complete project permit applications or project types. This one hundred twenty (120) day period may also be extended for a reasonable period of time at the request of the applicant pursuant to LMC 18A.02.735, Time Limitations. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.540 Process I - Permits.
A. Process I procedures are used to process zoning certifications, building and manufactured home permits, sign permits, temporary signs and temporary use permits, design review and other permits and uses as indicated in Table 3. Under Process I, an application typically can be processed without a need for a public hearing or notification of other property owners. However, for projects that are subject to environmental review under SEPA, a notice of application may be required pursuant to RCW 36.70B.110.
B. The Community Development Director shall determine whether or not the proposed development meets the required development standards. The Community Development Director may obtain technical assistance from a review committee or local or state agencies. The Community Development Director shall approve, deny, modify and/or condition the application, based on the evidence and comments received from referral agencies and the public.
C. The Community Development Director shall issue a permit if he finds that all applicable approvals or licenses by other agencies have been granted and the proposed development conforms or can be conditioned or modified to conform to all of the applicable requirements of this title and other City ordinances and regulations, including but not limited to the following:
    1. The proposed use is allowed and the proposed development and use is in compliance with the regulations of this title and:
        a. Meets lot development standards.
        b. Meets community design, parking, landscaping, signage and other general development standards.
        c. Meets any specific design standards for the specific use.
        d. An approved access is available.
        e. Water and sewage disposal is available.
    2. The proposed development and use is in compliance with all other applicable City ordinances and regulations.
    3. No other agencies need to be notified of the development prior to the City issuing a permit.
D. The Community Development Director shall deny the permit if required approvals are not obtained or the application otherwise fails to comply with the requirements of this title. The notice shall describe the reason for denial.
E. A decision of the Community Development Director under Process I may be appealed to the Hearing Examiner by an affected party in accordance with LMC 18A.02.740. In the event of an appeal, the Community Development Director may expand upon the abbreviated findings used when making the original determination. [Ord. 483 § 5, 2008; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.545 Process II - Permits.
A. Process II procedures are used to process administrative use permits, home occupations, administrative variances, and other permits and uses as indicated in Table 3. Under Process II, an application for a permit shall be processed without a need for public hearing, but provides for public notice to and comment by neighboring property owners.
B. The following public notice is required for a Process II permit:
    1. Notice posted on the subject property.
    2. Notice mailed to all property owners within 100 feet of the subject property and to all affected agencies.
    3. Courtesy notices may also be mailed to parties with a known interest in the application or which may be specifically affected by a proposed project, as determined by the Community Development Director.
    4. The public notice shall, at a minimum, provide:
        a. A description of the proposed project action;
        b. Address and description of the site, including current zoning and nearest road intersections, reasonably sufficient to inform the reader of its location;
        c. The name of the applicant or applicant’s representative and the name, address and telephone number of a contact person for the applicant, if any;
        d. A statement of the limits of the public comment period, which shall be not less than ten (10) days following the date of notice, and a statements of the right of any person to comment on the application, request a copy of the decision once made, and any appeal rights.
    5. Other actions taken in conjunction with a Process II permit, such as SEPA or other activities, may require additional public notice for the Process II permit, pursuant to LMC 18A.02.600.
C. The Community Development Director shall determine whether or not the proposed development meets the required development standards. The Community Development Director may obtain technical assistance from a review committee or local or state agencies.
D. The Community Development Director shall approve, deny, modify and/or condition the application, based on the evidence and comments received from referral agencies and the public. The Community Development Director shall issue a permit if he finds that the proposed development conforms or can be conditioned or modified to conform to all of the applicable requirements of this title and other City ordinances and regulations.
E. A decision by the Community Development Director under Process II may be appealed to the Hearing Examiner by an affected party in accordance with LMC 18A.02.740. In the event of an appeal, the Community Development Director may expand upon the abbreviated findings used when making the original determination. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.550 Process III - Permits.
A. Process III procedures are used to process Conditional Uses; Variances, and other permits and uses as indicated in Table 3. Under Process III, an application is scheduled for a public hearing before the Hearing Examiner.
B. Notice of application shall be provided to the public, pursuant to LMC 18A.02.670-675.
C. Notice of public hearing shall be provided to the public, pursuant to LMC 18A.02.700.
D. A staff report shall be provided to the public, pursuant to LMC 18A.02.710.
E. The public hearing shall be conducted, pursuant to LMC 18A.02.720.
F. At the public hearing, City staff, the applicant, and interested persons may present information relevant to the criteria and standards pertinent to the proposal, give reasons why the application should or should not be approved or propose modifications and state the reasons the person believes the modifications are necessary for approval.
G. The Hearing Examiner may attach certain development or use conditions beyond those warranted for compliance with the Land Use and Development Code standards for the permit type in granting an approval if the Hearing Examiner determines the conditions are necessary to avoid imposing burdensome public service obligations on the City to mitigate detrimental effects to others where such mitigation is consistent with an established policy of the City and to otherwise fulfill the criteria for approval.
H. A decision of the Hearing Examiner is final. [Ord. 276 § 3, 2002; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.560 Process IV - Permits.
A. Process IV procedures are used to process site specific map revisions of the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map and/or Land Use and Development Code Zoning Map; citizen-initiated and other specific text amendments to the comprehensive plan, land use and development code, or other ordinances, and other project or non-project actions as indicated in Table 3. Under Process IV, the Community Development Director shall schedule a public hearing before the Planning Commission.
B. Notice of application shall be provided to the public, pursuant to LMC 18A.02.670-675.
C. Notice of public hearing shall be provided to the public, pursuant to LMC 18A.02.700.
D. A staff report shall be provided to the public, pursuant to LMC 18A.02.710.
E. The public hearing shall be conducted, pursuant to LMC 18A.02.720.
F. At the public hearing, City staff, the applicant, and interested persons may present information relevant to the criteria and standards pertinent to the proposal, given reasons why the application should or should not be approved or proposing modifications and the reasons the person believes the modifications are necessary for approval.
G. If criteria are involved, the Planning Commission shall make a finding for each of the applicable criteria, including whether the proposal conforms to goals and policies found in the comprehensive plan. A written staff report and the Planning Commission recommendation shall be submitted to the City Council.
H. The City Council may conduct a public meeting or a public hearing on the proposal, at its discretion, pursuant to LMC 18A.02.420.
I. To the extent that a finding of fact is required, the City Council shall make a finding for each of the applicable criteria and in doing so may sustain or reverse a finding of the Planning Commission. The City Council may delete, add or modify any of the provisions pertaining to the proposal or attach certain conditions beyond those warranted for compliance with standards in granting an approval if the City Council determines the conditions are appropriate to fulfill the criteria for approval.
J. The City Council shall make its decision after information from the hearing has been received. The decision shall become effective by passage of an ordinance. [Ord. 604 § 9, 2015; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.565 Process V - Permits.
A. Process V procedures are used to process extensive text or area-wide map revisions of the Comprehensive plan, the Land Use and Development Code; zoning of annexed land and adoption of new planning-related ordinances, as indicated in Table 3. Under Process V, the Community Development Director shall schedule a public hearing before the Planning Commission.
B. Notice of public hearing shall be published pursuant to LMC 18A.02.700.
C. A staff report shall be provided to the public, pursuant to LMC 18A.02.710.
D. At least one (1) public hearing shall be conducted.
E. At the public hearing, City staff, and interested persons may present information relevant to the criteria and standards pertinent to the proposal, given reasons why the application should or should not be approved or proposing modifications and the reasons the person believes the modifications are necessary for approval.
F. If criteria are involved, the Planning Commission shall made a finding for each of the applicable criteria, including whether the proposal conforms to goals and policies found in the comprehensive plan. A written staff report and the Planning Commission recommendation shall be submitted to the City Council.
G. The City Council may conduct a public meeting or a public hearing on the proposal, at its discretion, pursuant to LMC 18A.02.420.
H. To the extent that a finding of fact is required, the City Council shall make a finding for each of the applicable criteria and in doing so may sustain or reverse a finding of the Planning Commission. The City Council may delete, add or modify any of the provisions pertaining to the proposal.
I. The City Council shall make its decision after information from the hearing has been received. The decision shall become effective by passage of an ordinance. [Ord. 604 § 10, 2015; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.570 Legislative Enactments Not Restricted.
Nothing in this section or in this title shall limit the authority of the City Council to make changes in district or zone designations or requirements as part of some more extensive revision of the comprehensive plan or the City of Lakewood Land Use and Development Code. Nothing in this chapter shall relieve a use or development from compliance with other applicable laws. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.575 Resubmission of Denied Application.
After thirty (30) days from the date of final determination denying a Process I, II, or III or a final plat application, an applicant may make appropriate alterations to a proposal and resubmit it with payment of all applicable permit fees. If a previously denied application is resubmitted within one (1) year, new land use approvals associated with the application need not be obtained unless the Community Development Director finds that changed conditions or changes in the proposal warrant such review. Resubmission of Process IV and V applications are subject to the requirements of LMC 18A.02.420(B). [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.600 Public Notice and Permit Decision Procedures.

18A.02.605 Purpose - Public Notice and Permit Decision Procedures.
This section is intended to provide procedures for the processing of project permits pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 36.70B RCW, including, but not limited to, preapplication conferences, SEPA consistency, determination of completeness, notice of application, public notice, public hearing and appeal processes for review of project permits. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.610 Applicability - Public Notice and Permit Decision Procedures.
All Process III, and IV permits and any Process I and II that are subject to environmental review under the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) (Chapter 43.21C RCW) are subject to the provisions of LMC 18A.02.600 and 700. An environmental checklist shall be submitted in conjunction with the submittal of a project permit application subject to LMC 18A.02.630. One environmental threshold determination shall be made for all related project permit applications. The City shall not issue a threshold determination, other than a Determination of Significance (DS), prior to the submittal of a complete project permit application and the expiration of the public comment period in the notice of application pursuant to LMC 18A.02.670, but may utilize the public notice procedures as outlined in LMC 18A.02.688 to consolidate public notice. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.615 Exemptions - Public Notice and Permit Decision Procedures.
The following permits or approvals are specifically excluded from the procedures set forth in LMC 18A.02.620-700, and LMC 18A.02.730:
A. Landmark designations.
B. Street or other right-of-way vacations.
C. Street use permits.
D. Building permits which are categorically exempt from environmental review under SEPA or that do not require street improvements, boundary line adjustments, or other construction permits, pursuant to RCW 36.70B.140(6).
E. Administrative approvals which are categorically exempt from environmental review under SEPA, pursuant to Chapter 43.21C RCW and LMC 14.02, Environmental Rules and Procedures, or for which environmental review has been completed in connection with other project permits.
F. Process V Legislative actions. The following Process V actions are legislative, and are not subject to the provisions of LMC 18A.02.620-700, unless otherwise specified:
    1. Zoning newly annexed lands.
    2. Area-wide rezones and zoning map amendments to implement City policies.
    3. Comprehensive plan amendments.
    4. Development regulations and zoning text amendments.
    5. Other similar actions that are non-project related. [Ord. 307 § 3, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.620 Preapplication Conference.

18A.02.621 Purpose - Preapplication Conference.
The purpose of the preapplication conference is to acquaint the applicant with the substantive and procedural requirements of the Lakewood Municipal Code in relation to the proposed project and the applicable elements of the comprehensive plan, to arrange such technical and design assistance as will aid the applicant, and to otherwise identify policies and regulations associated with the proposed development. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.622 Applicability - Preapplication Conference.
A. A preapplication conference shall be required for all Process III and IV permits and for all Process I and II permits that require environmental review. A preapplication conference may also be required for any project subject to the requirements of LMC 18A.50.200, Community Design, at the discretion of the Community Development Director. A preapplication conference may also be initiated by an applicant for a project where technical review is desired. Only one preapplication conference shall be required for all project permit applications related to the same project, however, an applicant may request multiple preapplication conferences in relationship to a given project. A preapplication conference shall precede the submittal of any project permit application, including an environmental checklist. The Community Development Director may waive, in writing, the requirement for a preapplication conference for proposals that are determined not to be of a size and complexity to require the detailed analysis of a preapplication conference, or as otherwise determined not appropriate for such review.
B. Submission of Application. To initiate a preapplication conference, an applicant shall submit a completed form provided by the City and all information pertaining to the proposal as prescribed by administrative procedures of the Community Development Department. Failure to provide all pertinent information may prevent the City from identifying all applicable issues or providing the most effective preapplication conference.
C. Limitations. It is impossible for the conference to be an exhaustive review of all potential issues. The discussion at the conference or the information form given to the applicant shall not bind or prohibit the City’s future application or enforcement of the applicable law, rather, is intended to offer the applicant guidance in preparing a development proposal for submittal. [Ord. 264 §1, 2001.]

18A.02.630 Project Permit Applications.
A. Applications for all project permits shall be submitted upon forms provided by the City and shall, at a minimum, consist of the materials specified in this section, plus any other materials required on the application form or by this title.
    1. A completed development permit application form.
    2. An explanation of intent, stating the nature of the proposed development, reasons for the permit request, pertinent background information, information required on the application form, technical reports, studies and data required to address conditions on the site or criteria of the permit or approval requested, and other information that may have a bearing in determining the action to be taken.
    3. Proof that the property affected by the application is in the exclusive ownership of the applicant, or that the applicant has the consent of all partners in ownership of the affected property.
    4. Legal description of the property affected by the application.
    5. Plans, maps and other exhibits appropriate to the type of development proposal or the area involved. The Department may require, at its discretion, boundary and/or topographical surveys of the project site and immediate surroundings prepared by a licensed land surveyor.
    6. The fee established for such application by the City Council.
B. Application materials shall be submitted to the Community Development Director who shall have the date of submission indicated on each copy of the materials submitted. [Ord. 307 § 4, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.635 Determination of Completeness - Permit Application.
A. Within twenty-eight (28) calendar days after receiving a project permit application for review for completeness, the City shall mail or personally provide a written determination of completeness to the applicant which to the extent known by the City identifies other agencies with jurisdiction over the project permit application and states either that the application is complete; or that the application is incomplete and what is necessary to make the application complete. If the City does not provide a written determination to the applicant that the application is incomplete, the application shall be deemed complete. The time period guidelines for review of project permit applications begin following the determination of a complete application. The City’s determination of completeness shall not preclude the City from requesting additional information or studies either at the time of the notice of completeness or at some later time, if there are substantial changes in the proposal or new information is received through the application review process.
B. Incomplete Applications. Prior to a determination of a complete application, if the applicant receives a written determination from the City that an application is not complete, the applicant shall have up to ninety (90) calendar days to submit the necessary information to the City. Within fourteen (14) calendar days after an applicant has submitted the requested additional information, the City shall make the determination as described in LMC 18A.02.635(A) above and notify the applicant in the same manner. If the applicant either refuses, in writing, to submit additional information, or does not submit the required information within the ninety (90) calendar day period, the application shall lapse because of a lack of information necessary to complete the review. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.640 Date of Acceptance - Permit Application.
When the project permit application is determined to be complete, the Community Development Director shall accept it and note the date of acceptance. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.645 Project Review - Permit Application.
Following a determination that an application is complete, the City shall begin project review. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.650 Incorrect Applications - Permits.
Following a determination of a complete application and the commencement of project review, the City may make a determination in writing that some information is incorrect and require that corrected information be submitted. The applicant shall have up to ninety (90) calendar days to submit corrected information. The City shall have fourteen (14) calendar days to review the submittal of corrected information. If the corrected information is still not found to be sufficient, the City shall notify the applicant in writing that the submitted information is incorrect, and the time period set forth in subsection (A) shall be repeated. This process may continue until complete or corrected information is obtained. If the requested corrected information is sufficient, the City shall continue with project review, in accordance with the time calculations exclusions set forth in LMC 18A.02.735, Time Limitations. If the applicant either refuses in writing to submit corrected information or does not submit the corrected information within the ninety (90) calendar day period, the application shall lapse. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.652 Appeal - Permit Applications.
Appeal of an administrative determination of an incomplete or incorrect application shall be made pursuant to LMC 18A.02.740. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.655 Referral of Applications - Permits.
Within ten (10) calendar days of determining a complete application, the Community Development Director shall transmit a copy of the application, or appropriate parts of the application, to each appropriate agency and City department for review and comment, including those responsible for determining compliance with state, federal and county requirements. The affected agencies and City departments shall have fifteen (15) calendar days to comment. The referral agency or City department is presumed to have no comments if comments are not received within the specified time period. The Community Development Director may grant an extension of time if the application involves unusual circumstances. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.665 Public Notice - Permit Application.
The available records of the Pierce County Assessor’s Office shall be used for determining the property taxpayer of record. Addresses for mailed notice shall be obtained from the County’s real property tax records. All public notices shall be deemed to have been provided or received on the date the notice is deposited in the mail or personally delivered, whichever occurs first. Failure to provide public notice as described in this chapter or irregularity in said notice shall not be grounds for invalidation of any permit decision. In addition to persons to receive notice as required by the matter under consideration, the Community Development Director shall provide notice to others he has reason to believe are affected or otherwise represent an interest that may be affected by the proposed development. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.670 Notice of Application - Permits.
A. A notice of application shall be issued within fourteen (14) calendar days after the City has made a determination of completeness pursuant to LMC 18A.02.635 for all Process I and II permits that require SEPA review; all short plats and shoreline substantial development permits; and all Process III and IV applications; provided, that the notice of application shall be provided at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to any required open record hearing. One (1) notice of application shall be completed for all permit applications related to the same project at the time of the earliest complete permit application.
B. SEPA exempt projects. A notice of application shall not be required for project permits that are categorically exempt under SEPA, unless a public comment period or an open record hearing is required prior to the decision on the project.
C. Contents. The notice of application shall include:
    1. The case file number(s), the date of application, the date of the determination of completeness for the application and the date of the notice of application.
    2. A description of the proposed project action and a list of the project permits included in the application and, if applicable, a list of any studies requested by the review authority pursuant to RCW 36.70B.070.
    3. The identification of other required permits which are not included in the application, to the extent known by the City.
    4. The identification of existing environmental documents that evaluate the proposed project, and, if not otherwise stated on the document providing notice of application, the location where the application and any studies can be reviewed.
    5. A statement of the limits of the public comment period, which shall be not less than fourteen (14) nor more than thirty (30) calendar days following the date of notice of application, and statements of the right of any person to comment on the application, receive notice of and participate in any hearings, request a copy of the decision once made, and any appeal rights.
    6. The tentative date, time, place and type of hearing. The tentative hearing date is to be set at the time of the date of notice of the application.
    7. A statement of those development regulations that will be used for project mitigation and of consistency as provided in LMC 18A.02.680, Consistency with Development Regulations and SEPA.
    8. The name of the applicant or applicant’s representative and the name, address and telephone number of a contact person for the applicant, if any.
    9. A description of the site, including current zoning and nearest road intersections, reasonably sufficient to inform the reader of its location.
    10. Any other information determined appropriate by the City, such as a Determination of Significance, if complete at the time of issuance of the notice of application or the City’s statement of intent to issue a Determination of Non-Significance (DNS) pursuant to the optional Determination of Non-Significance (DNS) process set forth in WAC 197-11-355.
D. Mailing of Notice. The City shall mail a copy of the notice of application to the following:
    1. The applicant.
    2. Agencies with jurisdiction.
    3. Any person who requests such notice in writing.
E. Public Comment on the Notice. All public comments on the notice of application must be received by the Community Development Department or postmarked by 5 p.m. on the last day of the comment period. Comments may be mailed, personally delivered or sent by facsimile. Comments should be as specific as possible.
F. Posted Notice. In addition to the mailed notice of application, the City will provide notice of application at Lakewood City Hall, in the register for public review at the Community Development Department office and posted on the subject property. The applicant shall be responsible for posting a notice board on the property on which City notices can be placed. Public notice shall be accomplished through the use of City poster boards mounted on a four (4) foot by four (4) foot plywood face generic notice board to be supplied by the applicant, to the specifications of the Community Development Department as follows:
    1. Posting. Posting of the property for site-specific proposals shall consist of one (1) or more notice boards as follows:
        a. A single notice board shall be placed by the applicant in a conspicuous location on a street frontage bordering the subject property.
        b. Each notice board shall be visible and accessible for inspection by members of the public.
        c. Additional notice boards may be required when:
            1. The site does not abut a public road; or
            2. Additional public notice boards are required under other provisions of the Lakewood Municipal Code; or
            3. The Community Development Director determines that additional notice boards are necessary to provide adequate public notice.
        d. Notice boards should be:
            1. Constructed and installed in accordance with specifications determined by the Community Development Department, including mounted and bolted onto at least two four (4) inch by four (4) inch wood posts, and placed securely in the ground;
            2. Maintained in good condition by the applicant during the notice period;
            3. In place at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the end of any required comment period; and
            4. Removed by the applicant within ten (10) calendar days after the end of the notice period or final hearing date.
        e. Notice boards that are removed, stolen, or destroyed prior to the end of the notice period may be cause for discontinuance of the departmental review until the notice board is replaced and remains in place for the specified time period. The City shall notify the applicant when it comes to the City’s attention that notice boards have been removed prematurely, stolen, or destroyed.
        f. An affidavit of posting shall be submitted by the Community Development Director at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the hearing. If the affidavits are not filed as required, any scheduled hearing or date by which the public may comment on the application may be postponed in order to allow compliance with this notice requirement.
        g. SEPA information shall be added by the City to the posted sign within applicable deadlines. An affidavit of posting shall be submitted by the Community Development Director. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.675 Published Notice - Permit Application.
Published notice of application in an official newspaper of general circulation in the area where the proposal is located is required for Process I and II permits that require SEPA review; all short plats and shoreline substantial development permits; and all Process III and IV applications, except subdivision final plats and appeals. Published notice shall include at least the following information:
A. Project location.
B. Project description.
C. Type of permit(s) required.
D. Comment period dates.
E. The location where the complete application may be reviewed. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.680 Consistency with Development Regulations and SEPA.
When the City receives a project permit application, consistency between the proposed project and the applicable regulations and comprehensive plan should be determined through the process in this title and LMC 14.02. During project permit application review, the City shall determine whether the items listed in this section are defined in the development regulations applicable to the proposed project. In the absence of applicable development regulations, the City shall determine whether the items listed in this section are defined in the City’s adopted comprehensive plan. This determination of consistency shall include the following:
A. The type of land uses permitted at the site, including uses that may be allowed under certain circumstances, if the criteria for their approval have been satisfied.
B. The level of development, such as units per acre, density of residential development in urban growth areas, or other measures of density.
C. Availability and adequacy of infrastructure, including public facilities and services identified in the comprehensive plan, if the plan or development regulations provide for funding of these facilities as required by Chapter 36.70A RCW.
D. Characteristics of the development, such as development standards.
E. In deciding whether a project is consistent, the determinations made pursuant to this section shall be controlling. Nothing in this section limits the City from asking more specific or related questions. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.685 Initial SEPA Analysis.
A. The City shall also review the project permit application under the requirements of the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA), Chapter 43.21C RCW, the SEPA Rules, Chapter 197-11 WAC, and LMC 14.02. This SEPA analysis shall:
    1. Determine whether the applicable federal, state and local regulations require studies that adequately analyze all of the project permit application’s specific probable adverse environmental impacts.
    2. Determine if the applicable regulations require measures that adequately address such environmental impacts.
    3. Determine whether additional studies are required and/or whether the project permit application should be conditioned with additional mitigation measures.
    4. Provide prompt and coordinated review by government agencies and the public on compliance with applicable environmental laws and plans, including mitigation for specific project impacts that have not been considered and addressed at the plan or development regulation level.
B. In its review of a project permit application, the City may determine that the requirements for environmental analysis, protection and mitigation measures in the applicable development regulations, comprehensive plan and/or in other applicable local, state or federal laws provide adequate analysis of and mitigation for the specific adverse environmental impacts of the application.
C. A comprehensive plan, development regulation or other applicable local, state or federal law provides adequate analysis of and mitigation for the specific adverse environmental impacts of an application when the impacts have been avoided or otherwise mitigated; or the City has designated as acceptable certain levels of service, land use designations, development standards or other land use planning required or allowed by Chapter 36.70A RCW.
    1. The City’s determination of consistency with the items identified in LMC 18A.02.685(A). above, shall not prohibit the City from denying, conditioning, or mitigating impacts due to other aspects of the project.
    2. In its decision whether a specific adverse environmental impact has been addressed by an existing rule or law of another agency with jurisdiction with environmental expertise with regard to a specific environmental impact, the City shall consult orally or in writing with that agency and may expressly defer to that agency. In making this deferral, the City shall base or condition its project approval on compliance with these other existing rules or laws.
    3. Nothing in this section limits the authority of the City in its review or mitigation of a project to adopt or otherwise rely on environmental analyses and requirements under other laws, as provided by Chapter 43.21C RCW.
    4. The City shall also review the application under LMC 14.02, Environmental Rules and Procedures. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.690 Categorically Exempt Actions - SEPA.
Actions categorically exempt under RCW 43.21C.110(1)(a) do not require environmental review or the preparation of an environmental impact statement. An action that is categorically exempt under the rules adopted by the Department of Ecology (Chapter 197-11 WAC) may not be conditioned or denied under SEPA. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.695 Planned Actions - SEPA.
A planned action pursuant to LMC 18A.10.700 does not require a threshold determination or the preparation of an environmental impact statement under SEPA, but is subject to environmental review and mitigation under SEPA. During project review, the City shall not reexamine alternatives or hear appeals on the items identified in LMC 18A.02.685.B., except for issues of code interpretation, the process for which is outlined in LMC 18A.02.200. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.700 Notice of Public Hearing.
A. Notice of public hearing is required for all types of applications for which a public hearing is held. Notice of public hearing shall be reasonable calculated to give actual notice and, other than for a legislative action under LMC 18A.02.500, Decision Making Processes, shall contain the following information:
    1. The name of the applicant or the applicant’s representative.
    2. Description of the affected property, which may be in the form of either a vicinity location sketch or written description, other than a legal description.
    3. The date, time, and place of the hearing.
    4. The nature of the proposed use or development.
    5. A statement that all interested persons may appear and provide testimony.
    6. When and where information may be examined, and when and how written comments addressing findings required for a decision by the hearing body may be admitted.
    7. The name of a City representative to contact and the telephone number where additional information may be obtained.
    8. That a copy of the application, all documents and evidence relied upon by the applicant and applicable criteria are available for inspection at no cost and will be provided at the cost of reproduction.
    9. That a copy of the staff report will be available for inspection at no cost at least five (5) calendar days prior to the hearing and copies will be provided at the cost of reproduction.
B. Mailed notice of public hearing. Mailed notice of the public hearing shall be provided by the City as follows:
    1. All owners of real property as shown by the records of the County Assessor’s Office within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property.
    2. Any person who submits written comments on an application.
    3. Shoreline permit notices shall be in accordance with the requirements of WAC 173-27-110.
    4. Process V actions. For Process V legislative actions, the City shall publish notice as described in LMC 18A.02.700(C), Procedure for published notice of public hearing, and use all other methods of notice as required by RCW 35A.12.160.
C. Procedure for posted and/or published notice of public hearing.
    1. Posted notice of the public hearing is required for all Process III and IV permit actions. The posted notice of hearing shall be added to the sign already posted on the property pursuant to LMC 18A.02.670(F), Posted Notice.
    2. Published notice of the public hearing is required for all Process III and IV procedures. The published notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the City and contain the following information:
        a. Project location.
        b. Project description and nature of issues to be discussed at the hearing;
        c. Type of permit(s) required.
        d. Comment period dates and how written comments addressing findings required for a decision by the hearing body may be submitted.
        e. The location where the complete application may be reviewed.
D. Time of notice of public hearing. 
    1. Notice shall be mailed, posted and first published not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the hearing requiring the notice. Any posted notice shall be removed by the applicant within ten (10) calendar days following the conclusion of public hearing(s). [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.710 Hearing Staff Report.
When an application or appeal has been set for public hearing, the Community Development Department shall coordinate and assemble the reviews of other departments and governmental agencies having an interest in the subject application or appeal and shall prepare a report summarizing the issues and factors involved, the decision criteria and the department’s findings and recommendation or decision. At least five (5) working days prior to the date of the scheduled hearing, the staff report and any written arguments or correspondence submitted to the City, shall be filed with the decision-making body and copies thereof shall be mailed to all persons of record. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.720 Open Record Public Hearings.
A. Open record hearings shall be conducted in accordance with this section. The Community Development Director shall be responsible for the hearing and shall:
    1. Schedule an application for review and public hearing.
    2. Give notice; however, applicant is responsible for some of the notice requirements.
    3. Prepare the staff report on the application, which shall be a single report stating all of the decisions made as of the date of the report, including recommendations on project permits in the consolidated permit process that do not require an open record pre-decision hearing. The report shall state any mitigation required or proposed under the development regulations or the City’s authority under SEPA. If the threshold determination other than a determination of significance has not been issued previously by the City, the report shall include or append this determination. In the case of a Process I or II project permit application, this report may be the permit.
    4. Prepare the notice of decision, if required by the hearing body, and/or mail a copy of the notice of decision to those required by this code to receive such decision.
B. Conflict of interest. The hearing body shall be subject to the code of ethics and prohibitions on conflict of interest as set forth in RCW 35A.42.020 and Chapter 42.23 RCW, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended.
C. Ex parte communications. 
    1. No member of the hearing body may communicate, directly or indirectly, regarding any issue in a quasi-judicial proceeding before him or her, other than to participate in communications necessary to procedural aspects of maintaining an orderly process, unless he or she provides notice and opportunity for all parties to participate; except as provided in this section:
        a. The hearing body may receive advise from legal counsel.
        b. The hearing body may communicate with staff members, except where the proceeding relates to a code enforcement investigation or prosecution.
    2. If, before serving as the hearing body in a quasi-judicial proceeding, any member of the hearing body receives an ex parte communication of a type that could not properly be received while serving, the member of the hearing body, promptly after starting to serve, shall disclose the communication as described in LMC 18A.02.720(C)(3), below.
    3. If the hearing body receives an ex parte communication in violation of this section, he or she shall place on the record:
        a. All written communications received.
        b. All written responses to the communications.
        c. The substance of all oral communications received and all responses made; and
        d. The identity of each person from whom the hearing body received any ex parte communication. 4. The hearing body shall advise all parties that these matters have been placed on the record.
    5. Upon request made within ten (10) calendar days after notice of the ex parte communication, any party desiring to rebut the communication shall be allowed to place a rebuttal statement on the record.
D. Disqualification. 
    1. A member of the hearing body who is disqualified may be counted for purposes of forming a quorum. Any member who is disqualified may be counted only by making full disclosure to the audience, abstaining from voting on the disqualification, vacating the seat on the hearing body and physically leaving the hearing.
    2. If all members of the hearing body are disqualified, all members present after stating their reasons for disqualification shall be re-qualified and shall proceed to resolve the issues.
    3. Except for Process VI actions, a member absent during the presentation of evidence in a hearing may not participate in the deliberations or decision unless the member has reviewed the evidence received.
E. Burden and nature of proof. The burden of proof is on the proponent, pursuant to LMC 18A.02.150, Burden and Nature of Proof. The project permit application must be supported by proof that it conforms to the applicable elements of the City’s development regulations, comprehensive plan and that any significant adverse environmental impacts have been adequately addressed.
F. Order of proceedings. The order of proceedings for a hearing will depend in part on the nature of the hearing. The following shall be supplemented by administrative procedures as appropriate.
    1. Before receiving information on the issue, the following shall be determined:
        a. Any objections on jurisdictional grounds shall be noted on the record and if there is objection, the hearing body has the discretion to proceed or terminate.
        b. Any abstentions or disqualifications shall be determined.
    2. The presiding officer may take official notice of known information related to the issue, such as:
        a. A provision of any ordinance, resolution, rule, officially adopted development standard or state law.
        b. Other public records and facts judicially noticeable by law.
    3. Matters officially noticed need not be established by evidence and may be considered by the hearing body in its determination. Parties requesting notice shall do so on the record; however, the hearing body may take notice of matters listed in this section if stated for the record. Any matter given official notice may be rebutted.
    4. The hearing body may view the area in dispute with or without notification to the parties, but shall place the time, manner, and circumstances of such view on the record.
    5. Information shall be received from the staff and from proponents and opponents. The presiding officer may approve or deny a request from a person attending the hearing to ask a question. Unless the presiding officer specifies otherwise, if the request to ask a question is approved, the presiding officer will direct the question to the person submitting testimony.
    6. When the presiding officer has closed the public hearing portion of the hearing, the hearing body shall openly discuss the issue and may further question a person submitting information or the staff if opportunity for rebuttal is provided.
G. Recommendation/decision. The hearing body shall issue a recommendation or decision, as applicable, within fourteen (14) calendar days of the record being closed.
H. Reconsideration. A party of record may ask for a reconsideration of a decision by the hearing examiner for a Process III action or a recommendation by the Planning Commission for a Process IV action. Reconsideration is not authorized for Process I and Process II applications. A reconsideration may be requested if either:
    1. A specific error of fact or law can be identified.
    2. New evidence is available which was not available at the time of the hearing.
I. A request for reconsideration shall be filed by a party of record within five (5) working days of the date of the initial decision/recommendation. Any reconsideration request shall cite specific references to the findings and/or criteria contained in the ordinances governing the type of application being reviewed. A request for reconsideration temporarily suspends the appeal deadline. The Hearing Examiner shall promptly review the reconsideration request and within five (5) working days issue a written response, either approving or denying the request. If the reconsideration is denied, the appeal deadline of the Hearing Examiner’s decision shall recommence for the remaining number of days. If a request for reconsideration is accepted, a decision is not final until after a decision on reconsideration is issued. [Ord. 604 § 11, 2015; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.725 Joint Public Hearings.
A. The Community Development Director may combine any public hearing on a project permit application with any hearing that may be held by another local, state, regional, federal, or other agency, on the proposed action, as long as:
    1. The other agency consents to the joint hearing;
    2. The other agency is not expressly prohibited by statute from doing so;
    3. Sufficient notice of the hearing is given to meet each of the agencies’ adopted notice requirements as set forth in statute, ordinance, or rule;
    4. The agency has received the necessary information about the proposed project from the applicant in enough time to hold its hearing at the same time as the local government hearing; and
    5. The hearing is held within the Lakewood City limits.
B. An applicant may request that the public hearing on a permit application be combined as long as the joint hearing can be held within the time periods set forth in LMC 18A.02.530(D) and 18A.02.730(B). In the alternative, the applicant may agree to a particular schedule if additional time is needed in order to complete the hearings. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.730 Notice of Decision.
A. Following a decision of a project permit by the applicable decision-making body, the City shall provide a notice of decision that also includes a statement of any threshold determination made under SEPA (Chapter 43.21C RCW) and the procedures for appeal.
B. The notice of decision should be issued within one hundred twenty (120) calendar days after the City notifies the applicant that the application is complete, unless the City makes written findings that a specified amount of additional time is needed for processing of specific complete project permit applications or project types. The time frames set forth in this section shall apply to project permit applications filed on or after the effective date of this title.
C. The notice of decision shall be provided to the applicant and to any person who, prior to the rendering of the decision, requested notice of the decision or submitted substantive comments on the application.
D. Notice of the decision shall be provided to the public as set forth in LMC 18A.02.700, Notice of Public Hearing. The City shall provide notice of the decision to the County Assessor’s Office if affected property owners request a change in valuation for property tax purposes.
E. If the City is unable to issue its final decision within the time limits provided in this chapter, it shall make written findings that a specified amount of additional time is needed for processing of specific complete project permit applications or project types and shall provide written notice to the parties of record. The written findings and notice shall include a statement of reasons why the time limits have not been met and an estimated date for issuance of the notice of decision. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.735 Time Limitations.
A. Calculation of time periods for issuance of notice of final decision. In determining the number of calendar days that have elapsed after the City has notified the applicant that the application is complete for purposes of calculating the time for issuance of the notice of decision, the following periods shall be excluded:
    1. Any period during which the applicant has been requested by the City to correct plans, perform required studies, provide additional required information, or otherwise requires the applicant to act. The period shall be calculated from the date the City notifies the applicant of the need for additional information until the earlier of the date the local government determines whether the additional information satisfies the request for information or fourteen (14) calendar days after the date the information has been provided to the City.
    2. If the City determines that the information submitted by the applicant under LMC 18A.02.635, Determination of Completeness, is insufficient or incorrect.
    3. Any period during which an environmental impact statement is being prepared following a determination of significance pursuant to Chapter 43.21C RCW, if the City by ordinance has established time periods for completion of environmental impact statements, or if the City and the applicant in writing agree to a time period for completion of an environmental impact statement.
    4. Any period for administrative appeals of project permit applications, if an open record appeal hearing or a closed record appeal, or both, are allowed. The time period for consideration and decision on appeals shall not exceed:
        a. Ninety (90) calendar days for an open record appeal hearing.
        b. Sixty (60) calendar days for a closed record appeal; unless the parties agree to extend these time periods.
    5. Any reasonable extension of time mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the local government.
B. Time limit exceptions. The time limits established in this section do not apply if a project permit application:
    1. Requires an amendment to the comprehensive plan or a development regulation.
    2. Requires approval of the siting of an essential public facility as provided in RCW 36.70A.200.
    3. Is substantially revised by the applicant, in which case the time period shall start from the date at which the revised project application is determined to be complete pursuant to LMC 18A.02.635-640, Determination of Completeness.
C. Failure to meet time limit. If the City is unable to issue its final decision within the time limits provided in this chapter, it shall make written findings that a specified amount of additional time is needed for processing of specific complete project permit applications or project types and shall provide written notice to the parties of record. The written findings and notice shall include a statement of reasons why the time limits have not been met and an estimated date for issuance of a final decision. The City is not liable for damages due to its failure to make a final decision within the time limits established in this chapter. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.740 Appeals.
A. Appeals of decisions. This section allows for appeals as provided in the framework in LMC 18A.02.500, Decision Making Processes. All appeals are heard by the Hearing Examiner.
B. Consolidated appeals. 
    1. All appeals of project permit application decisions, other than an appeal of a Determination of Significance (DS), shall be considered together in a consolidated appeal.
    2. Appeals of environmental determinations under LMC 14.02. Environmental Rules and Procedures, including administrative appeals of a threshold determination shall proceed as provided in that chapter.
C. Filing of an Appeal. 
    1. Any person aggrieved by a Process I or II administrative action, as described in LMC 18A.02.530, may file an appeal with the City Clerk within 14 days after the date of the action. Pursuant to WAC 197-11-680, if the appeal is of both a project decision and a SEPA Determination of Non-Significance (DNS) for which a public comment period is required by state or local law, and where the DNS is issued at the same time as the project decision, said decisions may be appealed within twenty-one (21) calendar days after the notice of decision/ threshold determination has been issued.
    2. All appeals shall be filed in writing with the City clerk and shall conform to the requirements for the filing of a notice of appeal under chapter 1.36 LMC
    3. Following receipt of an appeal and payment of the appropriate fee, an appeal hearing shall be set by the hearing examiner. Notice of filing of the appeal and the date, time and location of the scheduled open record appeal hearing shall be mailed to the applicant, appellant, and any persons that have submitted substantive comments on the proposal. The notice shall include a copy of the written appeal. In addition, upon a motion by the appellant or the City at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing date, the hearing examiner may order that notice of the open record hearing be publicly advertised or announced in any appropriate manner within the hearing examiner's discretion. The form of this public notice may be different from the form of the notice provided to the parties of record and need not include a copy of the appeal.
D. Effect. The timely filing of an appeal shall stay the effective date of the decision until such time as the appeal is adjudicated by the hearing examiner, or is withdrawn.
E. Appeal Hearing. The appeal shall be heard at an open record hearing. Participation in an appeal hearing is limited to the applicant, the applicant's representative, the appellant, the appellant's representative, appropriate City staff, and any witnesses called by each.
F. Standard of Review. The administrative decision under appeal shall be given substantial weight by the hearing examiner. On any such appeal, the standard of review shall be whether the administrative decision was clearly erroneous based on a review of all evidence, or the administrative decision was arbitrary or capricious. Failure of a party to request review by the hearing examiner of an administrative decision shall be a bar to any further judicial review. [Ord. 585 § 28, 2014; Ord. 408 § 2, 2006; Ord. 307 § 5, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.800 Nonconformities.

18A.02.805 Purpose - Nonconformities.
Within the zoning districts established by this title, or as amended, there may exist lots, uses, and structures that were lawfully established but which no longer conform to the provisions and standards of the zoning district in which they are located. Nonconformities may adversely affect the development and redevelopment of the City consistent with the provisions of the comprehensive plan. This section provides for the regulation of these legally existing nonconformities and attempts to balance the rights of property owners to continue the use of their properties and the perpetuation of uses envisioned under the City's comprehensive plan and this title. These standards specify the circumstances, conditions, and procedures under which such nonconformities are permitted to endure. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.810 Applicability – Nonconformities.
A. This section shall apply to legally existing nonconformities, except the following:
    1. Nonconforming signs as defined in LMC 18A.50.600, Sign Regulations, which shall instead be governed by standards set forth in that section.
    2. Nonconforming wireless telecommunications facilities as defined in LMC 18A.70.600, Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, which shall instead be governed by standards set forth in that section.
    3. Nonconforming mobile home parks as defined in LMC 18A.70.400, Manufactured Home Parks, which shall instead be governed by standards set forth in that section.
    4. Permit applications at the time of this title’s passage that constitute vested development as defined in LMC 18A.02.350, Vested Rights, which shall instead be governed by standards set forth in that section. Future plans to further develop property shall not constitute a basis for nonconformity status, whether or not documented in public record, except when they constitute a vesting. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a change in plans, construction, or intended use related to vested development, though it may thereafter be regulated as a nonconformity. [Ord. 651 § 21, 2016; Ord. 552 § 3, 2012; Ord. 483 § 6, 2008; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.815 Nonconforming Lots of Record.

18A.02.820 Variances Allowable - Nonconforming Lots of Record.
The entire contiguous ownership of land shall be considered as a single parcel of land for determination of non-conformance as a consideration of development. A record of separate lot or parcel boundaries shall be disregarded. It is recognized that the dimensions of some nonconforming lots of record are so constrained that meeting some development regulations such as setbacks would render such lots essentially unbuildable. The City will consider unusual hardships in reviewing applications for such development. Variances may be granted in such instances based on individual circumstances and may be conditioned to mitigate any negative effect on the surrounding area. [Ord. 264 §1, 2001.]

18A.02.825 Alteration - Nonconforming Lots of Record.
Nonconforming lots may not be altered in any way that would increase the degree of nonconformity; provided, this does not preclude acquisition or dedication of additional public right of way when deemed necessary by the City Engineer. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.830 Nonconforming Uses.

18A.02.835 Maintenance, Alteration and Expansion - Nonconforming Uses.
Nonconforming uses and the structures they occupy may continue to be operated and occupied except as provided below. Routine maintenance and repairs may be performed on land or structures containing a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. Nonconforming uses outside of a structure which occupy only a portion of a lot may not be expanded to any other portion of the property not previously regularly and actually occupied for such use. Nonconforming uses may not be expanded unless such expansion is required by law or a public agency in order to comply with public health, safety or welfare regulations; provided, that any existing nonconforming single-family detached housing unit may be expanded, and new detached accessory structures consistent with the standards set forth for residential accessory buildings in LMC 18A.50.140 may be allowed upon properties where existing nonconforming single-family detached housing is located.
All applicable construction permits must first be obtained for any such work. Other than regulations relating to public health, safety, and welfare, nonconforming uses, either inside or outside of a structure, may be altered or moved only if the proposed development and its use will be more compatible with the surrounding area than the current development and use considering the following:
A. The character and history of the use and of development in the surrounding area.
B. The comparable degree of noise, vibration, dust, odor, fume, glare, or smoke detectable at the property line.
C. The comparative amount and nature of outside storage, loading and parking.
D. The comparative visual appearance.
E. The comparative hours of operation.
F. The comparative numbers and kinds of vehicular trips to the site.
G. The comparative effect on existing vegetation.
H. The comparative effect on water drainage.
I. The degree of service or other benefit to the area.
J. Other factors which tend to reduce conflicts or increase compatibility with the character or needs of the area. [Ord. 483 § 7, 2008; Ord. 277 § 1, 2002; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.837 Limited Expansion of Multi-Family Residential Dwelling Units in Single Family Residential Zoning Districts.
The owner of a property containing multiple dwelling units in a single family residential zone may designate one of the dwelling units on the property as the “primary unit”. This designated primary unit shall thereafter be permitted to be expanded, notwithstanding the provisions of LMC 18A.02.855(A). Designation and expansion of the primary unit shall be subject to the following:
A. This policy shall be administered by the Community Development Director, or the designee thereof, and shall apply only to an individual detached dwelling unit. Units attached to other dwelling units shall not generally be permitted to be designated as the primary unit, except for duplex units where duplexes are permitted by the terms of the underlying zoning district.
B. It shall remain the policy of the City to seek the discontinuance of the non-conforming aspects of the use through attrition. The remaining units on the property shall only be permitted to remain subject to the provisions of the Lakewood Municipal Code regarding non-conforming uses.
C. The selection and designation of the “primary unit” shall be based on the specific characteristics of the site. The designated primary unit shall generally be the largest, most prominent, or highest value unit on the property.
D. Once selected, the “primary unit” designation shall not be transferred to another unit on the property. Documentation of the principal unit designation shall be kept on file with the City.
E. Expansion of the primary unit shall not include any new or additional kitchen facilities or additional dwelling units, although remodeling of existing kitchen facilities may be allowed.
F. Development of the site, including expansion of the primary unit, shall be subject to all applicable development regulations including building and impervious surface coverage, setbacks, separation between buildings, etc.
G. The Community Development Director, or the designee thereof, may impose conditions on the designation or expansion of the primary unit to make the development of property more compatible with surrounding land uses. The Community Development Director or designee may require that specific units on the property be removed where such units are in violation of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, the International Property Maintenance Code, or the development standards of the zoning district in which the property is located.
H. Any other non-conforming uses on the property shall be eliminated and removed prior to the approval of any development under this policy. [Ord. 392 § 1, 2005.]

18A.02.840 Nonconforming Structures.
Maintenance, Improvements and Alterations. Minor improvements and alterations to nonconforming structures are allowed to prevent them from becoming blighted and having detrimental impacts on the surrounding neighborhood. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any nonconforming structure or part thereof declared to be unsafe by the Building Official or other proper authority. No structure partially occupied by a nonconforming use shall be moved, altered, or enlarged in such a way as to permit the enlargement of the space occupied by the nonconforming use. Alterations or expansions of nonconforming structures which are required by law or a public agency in order to comply with public health, safety or welfare regulations are allowable, even if in conflict with other provisions of this title. All applicable construction permits must first be obtained for any such work. Other than regulations relating to public health, safety, and welfare, nonconforming structures may only be altered in a manner that increases the degree of nonconformity only if the proposed alteration to the structure will be more compatible with the surrounding area than the current development and use considering the following:
A. The character and history of the structure and of development in the surrounding area.
B. The comparable degree of noise, vibration, dust, odor, fume, glare, or smoke detectable at the property line.
C. The comparative amount and nature of outside storage, loading and parking.
D. The comparative visual appearance.
E. The comparative effect on existing vegetation.
F. The comparative effect on water drainage.
G. The degree of benefit to the surrounding area.
H. Other factors which tend to reduce conflicts or increase compatibility with the character or needs of the area. [Ord. 264 §1, 2001.]

18A.02.845 Proof of Nonconformity.
The burden of demonstrating that nonconformity is lawful under this title rests with the property or business owner. Some examples of evidence that may indicate legal nonconforming status include: tax assessment records, construction or other permit records, personal or business income tax records, business license records, dated past advertising, dated business receipts to customers, dated rent receipts, affidavits from neighbors or tenants, testamentary documents, photographs whose date may be clearly ascertained, and other such information which is competent and factual. The City may, at its discretion, request such records from a property or business owner as a basis for determining whether nonconformity was legally established and preexisting. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.850 Termination of Nonconforming Status.
A. A nonconforming structure or use or lot shall terminate under the following conditions:
    1. When the use has been discontinued for a period of six or more months.
    2. When a nonconforming structure has been damaged or destroyed to an extent exceeding 50 percent or more of its fair market value as indicated by the records of the Pierce County Assessor.
    3. When a nonconforming lot becomes subject to landscaping, site planning, or site design requirements.
B. Provided; that damaged uses that are allowed to reestablish, as provided in LMC 18A.02.855, Damage or Destruction – Nonconformities, shall not be considered to be terminated. Once terminated, the use shall not be reestablished, and any subsequent use must comply with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. [Ord. 695 § 4, 2018; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.855 Damage or Destruction – Nonconformities.
A. If a nonconforming use or structure is damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of 50 percent or more of fair market value, it may not be reestablished except in compliance with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. This provision shall not apply to dwelling units located in residential districts or in established mobile home parks, which may be reconstructed or replaced with no substantial change in floor area or other nonconforming feature.
B. If a nonconforming use or structure is damaged due to an involuntary event of fire, natural disaster or other casualty to the extent of less than 50 percent of fair market value, it may be restored to substantially the same extent of nonconformance as preexisted the damage; provided, that all applicable construction permits are obtained prior to commencement of demolition and reconstruction. This provision shall not be construed as reducing any requirements of construction standards in effect for rebuilt structures. Restoration or replacement shall commence within one year from the date of damage or the use shall be terminated pursuant to LMC 18A.02.850, Termination of Nonconforming Status. This subsection shall not apply to the Downtown District in LMC Title 18B; instead LMC 18B.700.730(C) and (D) shall apply.
C. A nonconforming lot’s landscaping or site design must be brought into conformity if improvements are damaged or destroyed greater than 50 percent of the value. Restoration or replacement shall commence within one year from the date of damage or the use shall be terminated pursuant to LMC 18A.02.850, Termination of Nonconforming Status. [Ord. 695 § 4, 2018; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.860 Transfer of Ownership – Nonconforming Uses.
The transfer of ownership of a nonconforming lot, use, or structure will not alter its legal nonconforming status. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.865 Administrative Determinations – Nonconforming Uses.
By their nature, nonconformities can be unique and difficult to identify and equitably regulate. If issues of interpretation arise regarding the nonconforming status or replacement when abandonment, damage, or destruction has occurred, the Community Development Director shall issue an administrative determination as set forth in LMC 18A.02.155 and 200. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.02.870 Review of Administrative Decisions.
The Community Development Director’s decision on an administrative decision under this chapter may be appealed to the Hearing Examiner, pursuant to chapter 1.36 LMC. [Ord. 585 § 30, 2014.]

Chapter 18A.04 MARIJUANA PROHIBITED

Sections:
18A.04.010   Findings.
18A.04.020   Purpose.
18A.04.030   Definitions.
18A.04.040   Prohibited activities.
18A.04.050   Use not permitted in any zone.
18A.04.060   No vested or nonconforming rights.
18A.04.070   Violations.

18A.04.010 Findings.
The City Council finds that nothing in this chapter shall be construed to supersede Washington State or federal law pertaining to the acquisition, possession, manufacture, sale or use of marijuana. No use that is illegal under, or contrary to, any City, county, state or federal law or statute shall be allowed in any zoning district within the City unless otherwise specifically allowed for in the Lakewood Municipal Code (LMC). [Ord. 683 § 1, 2018.]

18A.04.020 Purpose.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to enact a prohibition of all medical and recreational marijuana uses, including medical marijuana dispensaries, collective gardens, cooperatives, individual or group cultivation of marijuana, and all marijuana production, processing, research, and retailing, including those marijuana businesses licensed by the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board.
B. No part of this chapter is intended to or shall be deemed to conflict with federal law, including but not limited to the Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. Section 800 et seq., or the Uniform Controlled Substances Act (Chapter 69.50 RCW). [Ord. 683 § 1, 2018.]

18A.04.030 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:
“Collective garden” means any place, area, or garden where qualifying patients engage in the production, processing, and delivery of marijuana for medical use as set forth in Chapter 69.51A RCW and subject to the limitations therein, and to be phased out effective July 1, 2016.
“Cooperative” means an entity with up to four members located in the domicile of one of the members, registered with the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board, and meeting the requirements under Chapter 69.51A RCW.
“Cultivation” means the planting, growing, harvesting, drying or processing of marijuana plants or any part thereof.
“Dispensary, medical marijuana” means any location that does not meet the definition of a “collective garden” and does not have a license from the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board for a marijuana producer, processor or retailer pursuant to I-502, where marijuana is processed, dispensed, selected, measured, compounded, packaged, labeled or sold. It also includes any vehicle or other mode of transportation, stationary or mobile, which is used to transport, distribute, deliver, sell, barter, trade or give away marijuana.
“Marijuana” means all parts of the plant Cannabis, whether growing or not, with a THC concentration greater than 0.3 percent on a dry weight basis; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. The term does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plants, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seeds of the plant which are incapable of germination.
“Marijuana concentrates” means products consisting wholly or in part of the resin extracted from any part of the plant Cannabis and having a THC concentration greater than 60 percent.
“Marijuana-infused products” means products that contain marijuana or marijuana extracts, are intended for human use, and have a THC concentration no greater than 10 percent. The term “marijuana-infused products” does not include either usable marijuana or marijuana concentrates.
“Marijuana processor” means a person licensed by the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board to process marijuana into usable marijuana, marijuana-infused products, and marijuana concentrates, package and label usable marijuana, marijuana-infused products, and marijuana concentrates for sale in retail outlets, and sell usable marijuana, marijuana-infused products, and marijuana concentrates at wholesale to marijuana retailers.
“Marijuana producer” means a person licensed by the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board to produce and sell marijuana at wholesale to marijuana processors and other marijuana producers.
“Marijuana researcher” means a person licensed by the State Liquor and Cannabis Board to produce and possess marijuana for limited research purposes.
“Marijuana retailer” means a person licensed by the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board to sell usable marijuana, marijuana-infused products, and marijuana concentrates in a retail outlet.
“Person” means an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, joint venture, government, governmental subdivision or agency or any other legal or commercial entity.
“Usable marijuana” means dried marijuana flowers. The term “usable marijuana” does not include either marijuana-infused products or marijuana concentrates. [Ord. 683 § 1, 2018.]

18A.04.040 Prohibited activities.
A. It is unlawful to own, establish, site, operate, use or permit the establishment, siting, operation, or use of a medical marijuana dispensary, collective garden, cooperative or marijuana production, processing, research facility, or retail facility, regardless of whether it has a license from the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board.
B. It is unlawful to perform any individual or group marijuana cultivation activities anywhere in the City, regardless of whether such individual or group cultivation is addressed in Chapter 69.51A RCW or other state law.
C. It is unlawful to lease to, rent to, or otherwise allow the operation of any medical marijuana dispensary, collective garden, cooperative, marijuana production, processing, research, or retailing business, whether it is located outdoors, indoors, in any building, structure, premises, location or on land in the City and regardless of whether the activity has been licensed by the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board.
D. The City shall not issue any business license for any marijuana businesses regardless of whether the business has been licensed by the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board. Any business license obtained in error or through misrepresentation of the activities conducted by the individual business shall be invalid and of no force and effect. [Ord. 683 § 1, 2018.]

18A.04.050 Use not permitted in any zone.
The use of any building, structure, premises, location or land for a medical marijuana dispensary, collective garden, cooperative, marijuana production, processing, research, or retailing is not allowed in the City, and such uses and activities are not permitted uses in any zone. [Ord. 683 § 1, 2018.]

18A.04.060 No vested or nonconforming rights.
Neither this chapter nor any other City ordinance, City action or failure to act, statement, representation, certificate, approval, or permit issued by the City or its departments, or their respective representatives, agents, employees, attorneys or assigns, shall create, confer, or convey any vested or nonconforming right or benefit regarding any marijuana business, collective garden, cooperative or marijuana producer, processor, researcher or retailer, even if licensed by the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board. [Ord. 683 § 1, 2018.]

18A.04.070 Violations.
Any violations of this chapter may be enforced as set forth in Chapter 1.44 LMC, General Penalties, or, as applicable, the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 69.50 RCW. In addition, violations of this chapter may be deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by the City under the procedures set forth in state law for the abatement of public nuisances. [Ord. 683 § 1, 2018.]

Chapter 18A.10 DISCRETIONARY PERMITS

Sections:
18A.10.050   Purpose - Discretionary Permits.
18A.10.100   Conditional Use Permit.
18A.10.110   Purpose - Conditional Use Permit.
18A.10.120   Existing Uses - Conditional Use Permit.
18A.10.130   Application for a Conditional Use Permit.
18A.10.140   Public Hearing - Conditional Use Permit.
18A.10.150   Required Findings - Conditional Use Permit.
18A.10.160   Action of Hearing Examiner - Conditional Use Permit.
18A.10.180   Period of Validity - Conditional Use Permit.
18A.10.200   Administrative Use Permit.
18A.10.210   Purpose - Administrative Use Permit.
18A.10.215   Existing Uses - Administrative Use Permit.
18A.10.220   Application for an Administrative Use Permit.
18A.10.225   Public Notice - Administrative Use Permit.
18A.10.230   Required Findings - Administrative Use Permit.
18A.10.240   Decision - Administrative Use Permit.
18A.10.250   Appeal - Administrative Use Permit.
18A.10.260   Period of Validity - Administrative Use Permit.
18A.10.300   Variances.
18A.10.305   Purpose - Variances.
18A.10.310   Limitations - Variances.
18A.10.311   Required Findings - Variances.
18A.10.315   Administrative Variances.
18A.10.320   Scope - Administrative Variances.
18A.10.325   Application for an Administrative Variance.
18A.10.330   Public Notice - Administrative Variances.
18A.10.335   Decision - Administrative Variances.
18A.10.350   Period of Validity - Administrative Variances.
18A.10.360   Major Variances.
18A.10.365   Scope - Major Variances.
18A.10.370   Application for a Major Variance.
18A.10.375   Public Notice - Major Variances.
18A.10.380   Public Hearing - Major Variances.
18A.10.390   Hearing Examiner Action - Major Variances.
18A.10.395   Period of Validity - Major Variances.
18A.10.400   Design Review.
18A.10.410   Purpose - Design Review.
18A.10.420   Authority - Design Review.
18A.10.430   Application and Review Process - Design Review.
18A.10.500   Temporary Use Permits.
18A.10.510   Purpose - Temporary Use Permits.
18A.10.520   Permitted Uses - Temporary Use Permits.
18A.10.525   Exemptions - Temporary Use Permits.
18A.10.530   Application and Authorization - Temporary Use Permits.
18A.10.540   Standards for Temporary Use.
18A.10.550   Criteria for Granting Approval - Temporary Use Permits.
18A.10.555   Decision - Temporary Use Permits.
18A.10.600   Development Agreement.
18A.10.610   Purpose - Development Agreement.
18A.10.620   Applicability - Development Agreement.
18A.10.630   Approval - Development Agreement.
18A.10.700   Planned Action.
18A.10.710   Purpose and Scope - Planned Action.
18A.10.720   Applicability - Planned Action.
18A.10.730   Project Review - Planned Action.

18A.10.050 Purpose - Discretionary Permits.
The purpose of this section is to establish the procedures and decision criteria for a variety of permits that involve discretion or require a subjective recommendation or decision made by the Community Development Director, Hearing Examiner, or other hearing body as appropriate. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.100 Conditional Use Permit.

18A.10.110 Purpose - Conditional Use Permit.
The purpose of this section is to establish procedures and decision criteria for uses that possess unique characteristics and are of such a nature that they may not be appropriate for every location within a given zoning district. Conditional uses are those uses deemed unique due to factors such as size, technological processes, equipment, the associated impacts of the use, or the location with respect to surroundings, streets, existing improvements, or demands upon public facilities. Such uses require a special degree of review and control to assure compatibility with the comprehensive plan and adjacent uses. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.120 Existing Uses - Conditional Use Permit.
A. Any use existing at the time of adoption of this title which is within the scope of uses requiring a conditional use permit (CUP) in the zoning district in which the property is situated shall be deemed a conforming use without necessity of obtaining a CUP.
B. Any expansion of an existing conditional use shall be required to apply for a new CUP if the Community Development Director finds that there is a change in the nature of the use or a significant change in the intensity of the use created by such an expansion.
C. Any use operating under the provisions of an existing conditional use permit at the time of adoption of this title which is within the scope of uses requiring a CUP in the zoning district in which the property is situated shall be deemed a conforming use without necessity of a new CUP, unless a proposed expansion would result in a change in the nature of the use or a significant change in the intensity of the use created by such an expansion.
D. Any use operating under the provisions of an existing CUP at the time of adoption of this title which is within the scope of primary permitted uses within the applicable zoning district shall be deemed a conforming use, provided that all conditions of approval and development standards are being met. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.130 Application for a Conditional Use Permit.
A. A CUP is a Process III application type and subject to all the procedural requirements applicable to this application type.
B. Conditional use permit applications shall be on the form prescribed by the Community Development Department and shall include all of the information and materials required by the application form. An applicant shall provide sufficient facts and evidence to enable the hearing examiner to make a decision. The established fee shall be submitted at time of application.
C. Applications for a CUP shall be filed with the Community Development Department. The CUP application shall be reviewed and circulated for comment by City staff.
D. Notice of application shall be provided pursuant to LMC 18A.02.670. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.140 Public Hearing - Conditional Use Permit.
A. The Hearing Examiner shall hold an open record public hearing on any proposed conditional use and shall give notice thereof in accordance with the procedures established pursuant to LMC 18A.02.700.
B. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance to the requirements of LMC 18A.02.720. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.150 Required Findings - Conditional Use Permit.
A CUP shall only be granted after the Hearing Examiner has reviewed the proposed use and has made written findings that all of the standards and criteria set forth below have been met or can be met subject to conditions of approval:
A. The size and physical characteristics of the site are appropriate for the proposed use including all facilities and amenities that are required by this title or desired by the applicant.
B. The proposed use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community and will not introduce hazardous conditions at the site that cannot be mitigated to protect adjacent properties and the vicinity.
C. The proposed use will not be injurious to, or adversely affect the uses, property, or improvements adjacent to, or in the vicinity of, the site upon which the proposed use is to be located. The proposed use will be compatible with adjacent land uses and consistent with the character of the surrounding area.
D. The proposed use will be supported by adequate water, sewer, storm drainage, schools, electrical, police, and fire protection facilities and services. The use will not overburden or adversely affect said public facilities and services.
E. The traffic generated by the proposed use will not unduly burden the traffic circulation system in the vicinity.
F. An adequate site layout is proposed for on-site circulation and transportation activities, considering the potential impacts of the proposed use on traffic flow and control, emergency vehicle movements and safety associated with the suitability of access points, on-site drives, parking, loading and unloading areas, refuse collection and disposal points, sidewalks, bike paths, or other transportation facilities required by this title or desired by the applicant. All conditions necessary to lessen any impacts of the proposed use have been included in the project design or will be required as conditions of approval pursuant to LMC 18A.10.160, Action of Hearing Examiner. Buffering devices such as fencing, landscaping or topographic characteristics may be required to adequately protect adjacent properties from adverse effects of the proposed use, including adverse visual or auditory effects.
G. The proposed use will cause no unreasonably adverse effects to wetlands, shorelands, wildlife habitat, and other sensitive areas.
H. That the granting of the proposed conditional use is consistent and compatible with the intent of the goals, objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan. For essential public facilities, the Hearing Examiner shall balance the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan, the intent of this code, and the public need for the proposed facility.
I. The proposed use complies with the appropriate development and performance standards and all other applicable provisions of the City of Lakewood Land Use and Development Code. [Ord. 307 § 6, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.160 Action of Hearing Examiner - Conditional Use Permit.
A. In addition to demonstrating compliance with the criteria as determined by the Hearing Examiner, the applicant shall accept those conditions that the Hearing Examiner finds are appropriate to obtain compliance with the criteria.
B. In permitting a conditional use, the Hearing Examiner may impose any or all of the following conditions:
    1. Limit the manner in which the use is conducted, including restricting the time an activity may take place and restraints to minimize such environmental effects as noise, vibration, air pollution, glare and odor.
    2. Establish a special yard or other open space or lot area or dimension.
    3. Limit the height, size or location of a building or other structure.
    4. Designate the size, number, location or nature of vehicle access points.
    5. Increase the amount of street dedication, roadway width or improvements within the street right-of-way.
    6. Designate the size, location, screening, drainage, surfacing or other improvement of a parking or truck loading areas.
    7. Limit or otherwise designate the number, size, location, and height of lighting of signs.
    8. Limit the location and intensity of outdoor lighting or require its shielding.
    9. Require screening, landscaping or another facility to protect adjacent or nearby property and designate standards for installation or maintenance of the facility.
    10. Design the size, height, location or materials for a fence.
    11. Protect existing trees, vegetation, water resources, wildlife habitat or other significant natural resources.
    12. Require provisions for public access, physical and visual, to natural, scenic and recreational resources.
    13. Require provisions for stormwater drainage including designating the size, location, screening, or other improvements of detention ponds and other facilities
    14. Impose special conditions on the proposed development to ensure that development is in conformance with the surrounding neighborhood and the intent and purpose of the zoning district classification.
    15. Require such financial guarantees and evidence that any applied conditions will be complied with.
C. The decision of the Hearing Examiner is considered final and conclusive by the City. [Ord. 408 § 3, 2006; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.180 Period of Validity - Conditional Use Permit.
Authorization of a conditional use shall be void after a period of one (1) year unless the use is begun within that time or substantial construction or action pursuant thereto has taken place. However, the City may, at the discretion of the Community Development Director, extend authorization for one (1) additional year upon request, provided such request is submitted in writing at least thirty (30) days and not more than sixty (60) days prior to expiration of the permit. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.200 Administrative Use Permit.

18A.10.210 Purpose - Administrative Use Permit.
The purpose of this section is to establish an administrative review process and decision criteria to evaluate proposed land uses that, due to unique qualities or circumstances, may require some additional regulation or control. The administrative use permit (AUP) process is intended to ensure that the proposed activity, if established, will be in full compliance with applicable regulations, that the unique qualities of the use are addressed and mitigated, and that such use is compatible with the comprehensive plan and adjacent uses. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.215 Existing Uses - Administrative Use Permit.
A. Any use existing at the time of adoption of this title which is within the scope of uses requiring an administrative use permit in the zoning district in which the property is situated shall be deemed a conforming use without necessity of obtaining an AUP.
B. Any expansion of an existing administrative use shall be required to apply for a new AUP if the Community Development Director finds that there is a change in the nature of the use or a significant change in the intensity of the use created by such an expansion.
C. Any use operating under the provisions of an existing AUP at the time of adoption of this title which is within the scope of uses requiring an AUP in the zoning district in which the property is situated shall be deemed conforming use without necessity of a new AUP, unless a proposed expansion would result in a change in the nature of the use or a significant change in the intensity of the use created by such an expansion.
D. Any use operating under the provisions of an existing AUP at the time of adoption of this title which is within the scope of primary permitted uses in the applicable zoning district shall be deemed a conforming use, provided that all conditions of approval and development standards are being met. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.220 Application for an Administrative Use Permit.
A. An AUP is a Process II application type and subject to all the procedural requirements applicable to this application type.
B. An applicant proposing to develop an administrative use shall provide sufficient facts and evidence to enable the Community Development Director to make a determination. The application shall be on the form prescribed by the Community Development Department and shall include all of the information and materials required by the application form. The established fee shall be submitted at time of application.
C. Administrative use permit applications shall be filed with the Community Development Department. The AUP application shall be reviewed and circulated for comment by City staff. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.225 Public Notice - Administrative Use Permit.
A. Public notice is required for an AUP pursuant to LMC 18A.02.545.
B. Other actions taken in conjunction with the permit, such as SEPA or other activities, may require additional public notice for the AUP, pursuant to LMC 18A.02.600. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.230 Required Findings - Administrative Use Permit.
The Community Development Director shall approve an AUP only if he has reviewed the proposed use and has made written findings that all of the standards and criteria set forth below have been met or can be met subject to conditions of approval:
A. That the approval of the proposed AUP will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare; nor will it be injurious to, or adversely affect, the uses, property, or improvements adjacent to and in the vicinity of the site upon which the proposed use is proposed to be located.
B. That the approval of the proposed AUP is consistent and compatible with the intent of goals, objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan and any other City ordinances.
C. The proposed use and the project design comply with the zoning district and all applicable development regulations.
D. That all conditions necessary to mitigate the impacts of the proposed use have been included in the project design or will be required as conditions of approval, and are capable of being monitored and enforced.
E. That all requirements for a specific use have been addressed by the applicant. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.240 Decision - Administrative Use Permit.
A. When granting an administrative use permit, the Community Development Director may attach specific conditions to the permit that will serve to accomplish the standards, and/or meet the criteria, and policies established in the comprehensive plan and this title. The Community Development Director may deny an application for an AUP if the establishment of the use would be incompatible with the surrounding area or incapable of complying with specific standards set forth in this code, or if any of the above required findings are not supported by evidence in the record as determined by the Community Development Director.
B. In addition to demonstrating compliance with the criteria as determined by the Community Development Director, the applicant shall accept those conditions that the Community Development Director finds are appropriate to obtain compliance with the criteria.
C. In permitting an administrative use, the Community Development Director may impose any or all of the following conditions:
    1. Limit the manner in which the use is conducted, including restricting the time an activity may take place and restraints to minimize such environmental effects as noise, vibration, air pollution, glare and odor.
    2. Establish a special yard or other open space or lot area or dimension.
    3. Limit the height, size or location of a building or other structure.
    4. Designate the size, number, location or nature of vehicle access points.
    5. Increase the amount of street dedication, roadway width or improvements within the street right-of-way.
    6. Designate the size, location, screening, drainage, surfacing or other improvement of a parking or truck loading areas.
    7. Limit or otherwise designate the number, size, location, and height of lighting of signs.
    8. Limit the location and intensity of outdoor lighting or require its shielding.
    9. Require screening, landscaping or another facility to protect adjacent or nearby property and designate standards for installation or maintenance of the facility.
    10. Design the size, height, location or materials for a fence.
    11. Protect existing trees, vegetation, water resources, wildlife habitat or other significant natural resources.
    12. Require provisions for public access, physical and visual, to natural, scenic and recreational resources.
    13. Require provisions for stormwater drainage including designating the size, location, screening, or other improvements of detention ponds and other facilities
    14. Impose special conditions on the proposed development to ensure that development is in conformance with the surrounding neighborhood and the intent and purpose of the zoning district classification.
    15. Require such financial guarantees and evidence that any applied conditions will be complied with. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.250 Appeal - Administrative Use Permit.
The Community Development Director’s decision regarding an AUP application may be appealed to the Hearing Examiner, in accordance with LMC 18A.02.740. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.260 Period of Validity - Administrative Use Permit.
Authorization of an AUP shall be void after a period of one (1) year unless the use is begun within that time or substantial construction or action pursuant thereto has taken place. However, the City may, at the discretion of the Community Development Director, extend authorization for six (6) additional months upon request, provided such request is submitted in writing at least thirty (30) days and not more than sixty (60) days, prior to expiration of the permit. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.300 Variances.

18A.10.305 Purpose - Variances.
The intent of this section is to provide an avenue of relief where, by reason of exceptional configuration, or by reason of other unique and extraordinary situations or conditions existing on a piece of property, the strict application of development regulations enacted under this title would result in peculiar, exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner of such property, which was not the result of actions of the applicant, property owner or a previous property owner or agent. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.310 Limitations - Variances.
A variance shall not relieve an applicant from any of the procedural provisions of this title, conditions of approval established during prior permit review, any of the provisions of the critical areas code, except for the required buffer widths. The variance process shall not allow the establishment of a use that is not otherwise permitted in the zoning district in which the proposal is located or allow development that would result in an increase in density or a reduction in the minimum lot size. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.311 Required Findings - Variances.
A variance shall only be granted after the Community Development Director or Hearing Examiner, as appropriate, has reviewed the proposed variance and has made written findings that the standards and criteria set forth below have been met or can be met subject to conditions of approval:
A. That unique circumstances or conditions exist that are applicable to the land or buildings for which a variance is sought. Said circumstances or conditions are peculiar to such land or buildings and do not apply generally to the land or buildings in the area. The Hearing Examiner or Director may consider legal, nonconforming aspects of existing structures for the purpose of this finding.
B. That proof exists of undue hardship if the variance is not granted. It is not sufficient proof of hardship to show that a greater profit would result if a variance were granted; nor shall loss of value be a valid reason to grant a variance. Furthermore, the hardship cannot be self-created, nor can it be created by actions of a property owner or a previous property owner who purchases property with or without the knowledge of restrictions present. The hardship must result from the strict application of this title; and be suffered directly by the property in question. Evidence of a variance granted under similar circumstances shall not be considered as a solely sufficient cause to grant hardship relief.
C. That the granting of the variance shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan and in agreement with the general purpose and intent of the regulations imposed by this title.
D. That the granting of the variance shall neither be injurious to the neighborhood or community, nor otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
E. That the granting of the variance will not confer upon the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this title to other lands, structures, or buildings in the area.
F. That the granting of the variance will not permit the establishment of any development or use which is not permitted by the title. [Ord. 307 § 7, 2003.]

18A.10.315 Administrative Variances.

18A.10.320 Scope - Administrative Variances.
The Community Development Director shall have the authority to grant an administrative variance for up to twenty (20) percent of the numerical standard for building setbacks from lot lines, lot coverage, impervious surface coverage and ten (10) percent of the numerical standard for building height as provided in this title. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.325 Application for an Administrative Variance.
A. An administrative variance is a Process II application type and subject to all the procedural requirements applicable to this application type.
B. Applications for administrative variances shall be on the form prescribed by the Community Development Department and shall include all of the information and materials required by the application form. An applicant shall provide sufficient facts and evidence to enable the Community Development Director to make a decision.
C. Applications for administrative variances shall be filed with the Community Development Department. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.330 Public Notice - Administrative Variances.
A. Public notice is required for an administrative variance pursuant to LMC 18A.02.545.
B. Other actions taken in conjunction with the permit, such as SEPA or other activities, may require additional public notice for the administrative variance, pursuant to LMC 18A.02.600. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.335 Decision - Administrative Variances.
The Community Development Director shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application in accordance with the criteria set forth in LMC 18A.10.311 Required Findings - Variances. [Ord. 307 § 8, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.350 Period of Validity - Administrative Variances.
Authorization of an administrative variance shall be void after a period of one (1) year unless the use is begun within that time or substantial construction or action pursuant thereto has taken place. However, the City may, at the discretion of the Community Development Director, extend authorization for six (6) additional months upon request, provided such request is submitted in writing at least thirty (30) days and not more than sixty (60) days prior to expiration of the permit. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.360 Major Variances.

18A.10.365 Scope - Major Variances.
The Hearing Examiner shall have the authority to grant a major variance where some exceptional physical condition related to a parcel of land results in unnecessary hardship from the strict application of certain development provisions and preventing the owner from using the property as intended by this title. Any major variance granted shall be the minimum adjustment necessary for the reasonable use of the land. [Ord. 264 §1, 2001.]

18A.10.370 Application for a Major Variance.
A. A major variance is a Process III application type and subject to all the procedural requirements applicable to this application type.
B. Applications for major variances shall be on the form prescribed by the Community Development Department and shall include all of the information and materials required by the application form. An applicant shall provide sufficient facts and evidence to enable the hearing examiner to make a decision. The established fee shall be submitted at time of application.
C. Major variance applications shall be filed with the Community Development Department. The major variance application shall be reviewed and circulated for comment by City staff. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.375 Public Notice - Major Variances.
Notice of application shall be provided pursuant to LMC 18A.02.670. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.380 Public Hearing - Major Variances.
A. The Hearing Examiner shall hold an open record public hearing on any proposed major variance, and shall give notice thereof in accordance with the procedures established pursuant to LMC 18A.02.700.
B. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance to the requirements of LMC 18A.02.720. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.390 Hearing Examiner Action - Major Variances.
The Hearing Examiner shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application in accordance with the criteria set forth in LMC 18A.10.311, Required Findings - Variances. The decision of the Hearing Examiner shall be final. [Ord. 307 § 11, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.395 Period of Validity - Major Variances.
Authorization of a major variance shall be void after a period of one (1) year unless substantial construction or action pursuant thereto has taken place. However, the City may, at the discretion of the Community Development Director, extend authorization for an additional six (6) months upon request, provided such request is submitted in writing at least thirty (30) days and not more than sixty (60) days prior to expiration of the permit. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.400 Design Review.

18A.10.410 Purpose - Design Review.
Design review is an administrative process, the purpose of which is to implement and give effect to the comprehensive plan, its policies or parts thereof through the adoption of design criteria for development relative to site layout, landscape architecture and exterior structure design. It is the intent of the City that this process will serve to aid applicants in understanding the principal expectations of the City concerning design, and to encourage a diversity of imaginative solutions to development through the review and application of the design standards. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.420 Authority - Design Review.
The adoption of the design guidelines is an element of the City’s regulation of land use, which is statutorily authorized. The design review process adopted herein is established as a Process I administrative function delegated to the Community Development Director pursuant to RCW Title 35A; therefore, in implementing the administrative design review process, the Community Development Director may adopt such rules and procedures as are necessary to provide for expeditious review of proposed projects. In the administration of this process, the Community Development Director may develop supplementary handbooks for the public, which shall pictorially illustrate and provide additional guidance on the interpretation of the design standards established, as well as provide a detailed explanation of the design review process. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.430 Application and Review Process - Design Review.
A. Design review is a Process I application type and subject to all the procedural requirements applicable to this application type.
B. Design review applications shall be on a form prescribed by the Community Development Department and shall include all of the information and materials required by the application form. An applicant shall provide sufficient facts and evidence to enable the Community Development Director to make a decision. The established fee shall be submitted at time of application.
C. Applications for design review shall be filed with the Community Development Department.
D. The Community Development Director shall provide the applicant with a written decision either approving, denying or approving the application with modifications and/or conditions of approval. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.500 Temporary Use Permits.

18A.10.510 Purpose - Temporary Use Permits.
The provisions of this section are designed to provide standards and criteria for temporary relief to situations resulting from strict application of this title. Provisions authorizing temporary uses are intended to permit occasional temporary uses, activities and structures when consistent with the purpose of this title and when compatible with the general vicinity and adjacent uses. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.520 Permitted Uses - Temporary Use Permits.
The following types of temporary uses, activities and associated structures may be authorized, subject to specific limitations in this section and such additional conditions as may be established by the Community Development Director:
A. Circuses, carnivals, rodeos, fairs or similar transient amusement or recreational activities.
B. Christmas tree sales lots, flower stands, and similar seasonal sales facilities limited to location on non-residential lots in commercial or industrial zoning districts. Specific facilities that are reestablished on the same site and at the same intensity every year may be reauthorized as a minor amendment to the original permit.
C. Mobile home residences used for occupancy by supervisory and security personnel on the site of an active construction project.
D. Temporary use of mobile trailer units or similar portable structures for nonresidential purposes, located in districts where the intended use is permitted.
E. Seasonal retail sales of agricultural or horticultural products raised or produced off the premises, permitted in commercial or industrial zoning districts only.
F. Neighborhood or community garage or rummage sales, block parties, parades or holiday celebrations, and other similar neighborhood or community activities. The Community Development Director may exempt certain fund-raising or other activities by non-profit organizations from the permit requirements of this section where it is determined that the proposed activity is not likely to have adverse impacts on surrounding land uses or the community in general.
G. The Community Development Director may authorize additional temporary uses not listed in this subsection when it is found that the proposed uses are in compliance with the requirements and findings of this section. [Ord. 500 § 6, 2009; Ord. 308 § 1, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.525 Exemptions - Temporary Use Permits.
The following temporary uses, activities and structures may be exempted from the requirement to obtain a temporary use permit upon the determination by the Community Development Director that the use, activity or structure is expected and/or normal or customary for the facility or property where it is occurring, and that the expected impacts of the use, activity or structure have been anticipated or are regulated directly by other sections of this code:
A. Model homes or apartments and related real estate sales and display activities located within a subdivision or residential development to which they pertain, subject to all applicable provisions of LMC 17.42.040.
B. Indoor or outdoor art and craft shows and exhibits, swap meets and flea markets, limited parking lot and sidewalk sales and displays, warehouse sales and similar activities limited to locations on properties in commercial or industrial districts, where such activities have been anticipated and/or are considered customary for the facility, and which do not result in significant impacts on adjacent public and private properties and are conducted by the business licensed for the property. Parking lot sales that displace or interfere with required off-street parking shall require a temporary use permit.
C. Contractor’s office, storage yard and equipment parking and servicing on or adjacent to the site of an active construction project; provided that the Director may require a temporary use permit or condition such facilities to resolve site specific issues. This exemption does not include caretaker quarters or other residential uses or dwellings, which are otherwise regulated.
The Director may authorize automatic or abbreviated renewal provisions for any temporary use permit. Such provisions shall be specified in the terms of the original permit. [Ord. 500 § 7, 2009.]

18A.10.530 Application and Authorization - Temporary Use Permits.
A. A temporary use permit is a Process I application type and subject to all the procedural requirements applicable to this application type.
B. Temporary use applications shall be on a form prescribed by the Community Development Department and shall include all of the information and materials required by the application form. An applicant shall provide sufficient facts and evidence to enable the Community Development Director to make a decision. The established fee shall be submitted at time of application.
C. Applications for temporary use permits shall be filed with the Community Development Department. Application shall be made at least fifteen (15) days prior to the requested date for commencement of the temporary use.
D. A temporary use authorized pursuant to this section shall be subject to all of the applicable standards of LMC 18A.10.540, Standards for Temporary Use, and shall not be exempted or relieved from compliance with any other ordinance, law, permit or license applicable to such use, except where specifically noted. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.540 Standards for Temporary Use.
A. Each site occupied by a temporary use shall be left free of debris, litter or other evidence of temporary use upon completion or removal of the use.
B. A temporary use conducted in a parking facility shall not occupy or remove from availability more than twenty (20) percent of the spaces required for the permanent use.
C. Each site occupied by a temporary use must provide or have available sufficient off-street parking and vehicular maneuvering area for customers. Such parking need not comply with the development requirements of LMC 18A.50.500, Parking, but must provide safe and efficient interior circulation and ingress and egress from the public right-of-way.
D. No temporary use shall occupy or use public rights-of-way, parks or other public lands in any manner unless specifically approved by the City Council.
E. No temporary use shall occupy a site or operate within the City for more than ninety (90) days within any calendar year, except as follows:
    1. When authorized by the Community Development Director, a temporary use may operate an additional ninety (90) days if it is found that such an extension will be consistent with the requirements of LMC 18A.10.510, Purpose, LMC 18A.10.520, Permitted Uses, and LMC 18A.10.540, Standards for Temporary Use.
    2. A temporary use may given an additional extension if unique circumstances exist that necessitate a longer use such as construction office or security housing for an active construction site and such an extension will be consistent with the requirements of LMC 18A.10.510, Purpose, LMC 18A.10.520, Permitted Uses, and LMC 18A.10.540, Standards for Temporary Use, or can be consistent, subject to conditions of approval.
F. All signs shall comply with the requirements of LMC 18A.50.600, Signs, except as otherwise specified in this section.
G. All temporary uses shall obtain all required City permits, licenses or other approvals, prior to occupancy of the site.
H. The Community Development Director may establish such additional conditions as may be deemed necessary to ensure land use compatibility and to minimize potential impacts on nearby uses. These include, but are not limited to, time and frequency of operation, setbacks, special yards, and spaces; control of points of vehicular ingress and egress, temporary arrangements for parking, loading and traffic circulation, requirements for screening or enclosure, site maintenance during use, and guarantees for site restoration and cleanup following temporary use.
I. Subsequent temporary use permits may be denied to an applicant, event or organization based on failure to comply with the terms of an approved temporary use permit or applicable regulations. [Ord. 483 § 8, 2008; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.550 Criteria for Granting Approval - Temporary Use Permits.
A temporary use permit shall only be granted when the Community Development Director, after consultation and coordination with all other applicable City departments and other agencies, has determined that:
A. The temporary use will be compatible with uses in the general vicinity and on adjacent properties.
B. The temporary use will not create a material adverse effect on the livability or appropriate development of abutting properties and the surrounding community.
C. The temporary use will not impair the normal, safe and effective operation of a permanent use on the same site.
D. The temporary use will comply with the requirements of the zone within which it is proposed.
E. The temporary use shall comply with all applicable standards of the Pierce County Health Department.
F. In applying temporary use criteria and determination of appropriate conditions, consideration shall be given, but not limited to:
    1. The harmony and scale, bulk, coverage, and density.
    2. The availability of public facilities and utilities.
    3. The harmful effect, if any, upon a desirable neighborhood character.
    4. The generation of traffic and the capacity of surrounding streets and roads.
    5. The creation of noise, vibration, odors, or other similar nuisances. and
    6. Any other relevant impact on the peace, quiet, comfort, and enjoyment by and of the abutting properties and the surrounding community. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.555 Decision - Temporary Use Permits.
The Community Development Director shall provide the applicant with a written decision, either approving, denying or approving the application with modifications and/or conditions of approval, within fifteen (15) days after the date of submission of a complete application. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.600 Development Agreement.

18A.10.610 Purpose - Development Agreement.
A development agreement is a project-specific process and agreement that is intended to provide the developer and the City the opportunity to achieve an enhanced urban design of a development which could be not be achieved through the strict application of the development standards of the zoning district. The process is intended for larger, complex, and/or multi-phased projects. The development agreement is a voluntary, negotiated, project-specific agreement with final approval by the City Council as authorized by RCW 36.70B.170 through 210. The development agreement process allows the City and a person having ownership or control of real property within the City to enter into an agreement for the development of the property and sets forth specific development standards and other provisions that shall apply to, govern, and vest the development, use, environmental and other impact mitigation for the development for the duration specified in the agreement. Development agreements shall vest solely the project, standards, mitigation measures, and procedures set forth in the agreement and shall be subject to modifications in, or the adoption of, other development standards that are not inconsistent with those set forth in the agreement. The City reserves the power to unilaterally amend a development agreement to any extent required by a serious threat to public health and safety. This section is administrated in accordance with RCW 36.70B.170 through 210. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.620 Applicability - Development Agreement.
A development agreement may permit the modification of dimensional and quantitative development standards to enhance the design of a development while fulfilling the intent of the development regulations of the zoning district. The City may, at its discretion, address the developments standards identified in RCW 36.70B or as identified by the City which are not expressly prohibited in this code. The scope of the development agreement may include, but is not limited to:
A. The amount and payment of impact fees imposed or agreed to in accordance with any applicable provisions of state law, any reimbursement provisions, other financial contributions by the property owner, inspections fees, or dedications.
B. Mitigation measures, development conditions, and other requirements under Chapter 43.21C RCW.
C. Design standards such as maximum heights, setbacks, lot size, drainage and water quality requirements, landscaping, and other development features.
D. Affordable housing.
E. Parks and open space requirements.
F. Phasing.
G. Review procedures and standards for implementing decisions.
H. A build-out phasing or vesting period for applicable standards.
I. Any other appropriate development requirements or procedures. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.630 Approval - Development Agreement.
The City may only approve a development agreement by ordinance or resolution after a public hearing. The City Council may conduct the hearing or delegate this responsibility to the Hearing Examiner if a development agreement is combined with other land-use actions and permits for specific projects. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.700 Planned Action.

18A.10.710 Purpose and Scope - Planned Action.
A planned action means one (1) or more types of project action that are designated planned actions by an ordinance or resolution adopted by the City and have had the significant impacts adequately addressed in an environmental impact statement prepared in conjunction with either a comprehensive plan or sub-area plan adopted under Chapter 36.70A RCW or a fully contained community, a master planned resort, a master planned development or a phased project; which are not essential public facilities, as defined in RCW 36.70A.200; and are:
A. Subsequent or implementing projects for the plans, projects or proposals.
B. Located within an urban growth area, as defined in RCW 36.70A.030.
C. Consistent with the City’s comprehensive plan adopted under Chapter 36.70A RCW. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.720 Applicability - Planned Action.
The City shall limit planned actions to certain types of development or to specific geographical areas that are less extensive than the jurisdictional boundaries of the City and may limit a planned action to a time period identified in the environmental impact statement or in the ordinance or resolution designating the planned action under RCW 36.70A.040. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.10.730 Project Review - Planned Action.
Project review of a planned action shall be used to identify specific project design and conditions relating to the character of development, such as the details of site plans, building plans, pedestrian and vehicular access and circulation, stormwater drainage plans, the payment of impact fees, or other measures to mitigate a proposal’s probable adverse environmental impacts. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

Chapter 18A.20 LAND USE TYPES AND LEVELS

Sections:
18A.20.100   Purpose - Land Use Types and Levels.
18A.20.150   Applicability - Land Use Types and Levels.
18A.20.200   Organization - Land Use Types and Levels.
18A.20.300   Residential Use Category - Land Use Types and Levels.
18A.20.320   Boarding Houses.
18A.20.321   Purpose- Boarding Houses.
18A.20.322   18A.20.322 – Applicability- Boarding Houses.
18A.20.323   Standards- Boarding House.
18A.20.400   Civic Use Category - Land Use Types and Levels.
18A.20.500   Utilities Use Category - Land Use Types and Levels.
18A.20.600   Commercial Use Category – Land Use Types and Levels.
18A.20.700   Industrial Use Category – Land Use Types and Levels.
18A.20.800   Agricultural Use Category – Land Use Types and Levels.
18A.20.900   Accessory Use Category – Land Use Types and Levels.

18A.20.100 Purpose - Land Use Types and Levels.
This chapter lists and describes various types of land uses that are regulated within this title in order to ensure orderly, uniform, and fair regulation that results in not only the appropriate siting of land uses, but also the appropriate physical relationship between different land uses, which may not always be complementary to one another, as zoning is applied. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.20.150 Applicability - Land Use Types and Levels.
Each land use within Lakewood shall be characterized according to the descriptors listed herein which form the use categories, types, and levels listed herein. The use of a property is defined by the activity for which it or structures occupying it is or are intended, designed, arranged, occupied, or maintained. For the purpose of reasonable and appropriate regulation, uses which are not listed shall be evaluated for substantial similarity to the listed use categories, types, and levels, pursuant to LMC 18A.02.210(D) and 18A.02.215. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.20.200 Organization - Land Use Types and Levels.
Uses listed herein are grouped into the following major categories: Residential, Civic, Utilities, Commercial, Industrial, Agricultural, and Accessory. Each use category includes a number of use types which, in turn, may contain one or more levels that are organized from the least to most intensive, in terms of size and/or potential impact on surrounding land uses.
Example:
Category: Commercial Use
Use Type: Lodging
Level: 2 [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.20.300 Residential Use Category - Land Use Types and Levels.
The Residential use category includes permanent living accommodations for individuals or families of varying economic means, including those having special needs. The Residential use category has been separated into the following types based upon distinguishing features such as the type and scale of the structure, ownership pattern; number, age and special needs of individuals who reside in the structure; and any applicable state and/or local licensing requirements.
A. Single-Family Residential. A residential dwelling unit that provides living accommodations for a single individual or family. This category includes development with up to two dwelling units per individual lot, except cottage housing development where multiple detached single-family dwellings are required, does not include accessory dwelling units permitted under LMC 18A.70.310.
Level 1: Detached single-family: conventionally built, manufactured, or modular homes permanently constructed on-site to meet applicable uniform codes, and placed on a permanent foundation as specified by the manufacturer, where each unit is detached from any other unit and located on its own separate legal lot of record. Manufactured and modular homes are subject to the provisions of LMC 18A.50.180, Manufactured Homes on Individual Lots.
Level 2: Two Family Residential: A legal lot of record containing two units, whether attached or detached from each other (including instances where individual units are held in condominium ownership on a commonly owned parcel), but not including units attached to multiple units on other lots, which are instead classified as Single Family - Level 3 (Attached Single Family-multiple). Two Family Residential also includes attached single-family conventionally built or modular homes permanently constructed on-site to meet applicable uniform codes, and placed on a permanent foundation, where each unit is structurally attached to one, and only one, other unit on a separate parcel, so that the units are attached in pairs.
Level 3: Attached Single Family-multiple: Attached single-family conventionally built or modular homes permanently constructed on-site to meet applicable uniform codes, and placed on a permanent foundation, where each unit is structurally attached to at least one other unit, usually on a separate parcel. A maximum of two units may be located on any individual parcel. This term includes “townhouses” and “rowhouses.”
Level 4: Manufactured home parks, subject to the provisions of LMC 18A.70.400, Manufactured Home Parks.
Level 5: Cottage Housing, subject to the provisions of LMC 18A.70.700, Cottage Housing.
B. Multifamily Residential. Multiple residential units within a single residential structure, or multiple residential structures, which provide separate living accommodations for multiple individuals or families on a single parcel of land, not including manufactured home parks, which are instead treated as a Level 4 Single-Family Residential use type. Multifamily dwelling units are typically under common ownership and management but may be separately owned condominium units on a commonly owned parcel or cooperatively owned. Modular construction may be utilized.
Level 1: Three or more attached or detached dwelling units on a single parcel of land, in structures comprising six or less units.
Level 2: Seven or more attached or detached dwelling units on a single parcel of land in structures comprising more than six units.
Level 3: Multiple, horizontally and/or vertically attached dwelling units combined vertically with and above an allowed commercial use. Commercial uses shall comprise a minimum of 50 percent of the square footage of the ground floor and shall align with the building’s street frontage.
C. Co-Housing. A variety of housing options in which a community facility is included for the purpose of such things as communal meals, laundry, recreation or socialization, day care, and/or other functions supportive of voluntary communal living by an organized group. Examples include fraternity/sorority houses; intentional communities; and religious orders, whether or not in conjunction with a Religious Assembly use type.
D. Type 1 Group Home. Publicly or privately operated living accommodations for related or unrelated individuals having handicaps, subject to compliance with all applicable federal, state, and/or local licensing requirements. For the purposes hereof, “handicap” shall mean a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of the person’s major life activities, a record of having such an impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment; however, the term does not include current, illegal use of or an addiction to a controlled substance.
    1. Adult Family Home Business – Defined. An “adult family home business” is a Type 1 group home licensed pursuant to RCW 70.128.150 and the City’s business licensing requirements. Adult family homes shall serve those with functional limitations and are not intended to serve those with a history of violence, including sex offenses.
    2. Adult Family Home Business – Shall Not Be Converted. An adult family home business which is located in a residential zone shall not be converted or otherwise changed to an enhanced services facility or any other type of use not permitted in a residential zone. Enhanced services facilities are not permitted in a residential zoning district.
E. Type 2 Group Home. Publicly or privately operated living accommodations for related or unrelated individuals such as group homes for children, group homes providing an alternate residential setting for families in crisis, and other groups not listed within Type 1, 3, 4, or 5 Group Home Residential use types; all subject to compliance with all applicable federal, state, and/or local licensing requirements.
Level 1: A group home with a maximum of seven residents, plus resident staff.
Level 2: A group home with a maximum of 10 residents, plus resident staff.
Level 3: A group home with more than 10 residents, plus resident staff.
F. Type 3 Group Home. Publicly or privately operated living accommodations for juveniles under the jurisdiction of DSHS and/or the criminal justice system, including state-licensed group care homes or halfway houses for juveniles which provide residence in lieu of incarceration, and halfway houses providing residence to juveniles needing correction or for juveniles selected to participate in state-operated minimum security facilities as defined in RCW 72.05.150, as hereafter may be amended. A community facility as defined in RCW 72.05.020(1), as hereafter may be amended, is considered to constitute a Type 3 Group Home. All are subject to compliance with all applicable federal, state, and/or local licensing and other requirements.
Level 1: A group home with a maximum of eight residents, plus resident staff.
Level 2: A group home with a maximum of 12 residents, plus resident staff.
Level 3: A group home with more than 12 residents, plus resident staff.
G. Type 4 Group Home. Publicly or privately operated living accommodations for adults under the jurisdiction of the criminal justice system who have entered a pre- or post-charging diversion program or have been selected to participate in state-operated work/training release or other similar programs as provided in Chapters 137-56 and 137-57 WAC, as may hereafter be amended. All are subject to compliance with all applicable federal, state, and/or local licensing and other requirements.
H. Type 5 Group Home. A secure community transition facility as defined in RCW 71.09.101(14), as hereafter may be amended, which is a residential facility that provides supervision and security for people who have completed their criminal sentences for sexually violent offenses but who remain subject to additional requirements for sexually violent predators under Chapter 71.09 RCW, as hereafter may be amended. All are subject to compliance with all applicable federal, state, and/or local licensing and other regulations.
I. Assisted Living Facilities. A multifamily residential facility serving the elderly and/or persons with special needs, which provides its residents with assistance with Activities of Daily Living (ADL) and which are regulated under Chapter 18.20 RCW, subject to compliance with all applicable federal, state, and/or local licensing requirements. This use type may include dementia care but does not include hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics or offices, medical treatment, or multifamily residences which do not provide ADL assistance.
J. Continuing Care Retirement Community. A residential community for the elderly which operates under a single ownership on a contractual basis and offers a range of living arrangements which may include independent living, assisted living, and/or skilled nursing care, along with a variety of common amenities and ancillary services; subject to all applicable federal, state, and/or local licensure.
K. Nursing Home. Multi-unit or multi-bed facilities that are licensed or approved to provide living accommodations and round-the-clock health care and medical supervision and which are regulated under Chapter 18.51 RCW, subject to compliance with all appropriate federal, state, and/or local licensing requirements.
L. Hospice Care Center. A homelike, non-institutional facility where services such as symptom and pain management are provided to terminally ill individuals and emotional, spiritual, and bereavement support is offered for the individual and family, and which are regulated under Chapter 70.127 RCW, subject to compliance with all appropriate federal, state, and/or local licensing requirements.
M. Enhanced Services Facility – Defined. Pursuant to RCW 70.97.010(12), an “enhanced services facility” means a facility that provides treatment and services to persons for whom acute inpatient treatment is not medically necessary and who have been determined by the Department of Social and Health Services to be inappropriate for placement in other licensed facilities due to the complex needs that result in behavioral and security issues. An enhanced services facility is subject to the City’s business licensing requirements.
    1. Enhanced Services Facility in Commercial Zoning Districts. An enhanced service facility is permitted in the NC2, TOC, CBD and C2 zoning districts subject to the approval of a conditional use permit and all applicable development permits.
    2. Enhanced Services Facility in All Other Zoning Districts. An enhanced services facility is prohibited in all other zoning districts. [Ord. 680 § 1, 2018; Ord. 620 § 2, 2016; Ord. 462 § 4, 2007; Ord. 423 § 1, 2006; Ord. 412 § 1, 2006; Ord. 277 § 1, 2002; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.20.320 Boarding Houses.
[Ord. 592 § 2, 2014.]

18A.20.321 Purpose- Boarding Houses.
The purpose of the boarding house regulations is to address issues related to rental housing primarily located in single family residential zones. If not properly regulated, this rental practice can increase density above the limitations set forward in the underlying zoning district; result in a general decline in property maintenance; and increase traffic volumes, and traffic and speeding in general. [Ord. 592 § 3, 2014.]

18A.20.322 18A.20.322 – Applicability- Boarding Houses.
A. Boarding houses are allowed in Single-Family Residential zoning districts upon the issuance of a conditional use permit, and subject to the requirements of this chapter:
    1. A Boarding House housing more than four (4) unrelated individuals is a Process III application type (conditional use permit) and subject to all the procedural requirements applicable to this application type.
    2. Applications for a Boarding House shall be on the form prescribed by the Community Development Department and shall include all of the information and materials required by the application form.
    3. Applications for a Boarding House shall be filed with the Community Development Department. [Ord. 592 § 4, 2014.]

18A.20.323 Standards- Boarding House.
A. Parking Requirements. 
    1. At a minimum there must be one (1) off-street parking stall per occupant. A owner may reduce the off-street parking requirement if an affidavit is signed that an occupant does not own a vehicle.
B. Solid Waste Management Regulations. 
    1. All occupied units shall have minimum garbage service as prescribed by the City pursuant to LMC Title 13.
    2. The owner is responsible to provide each occupant with the solid waste connection schedule and that schedule is to be posted within the unit as approved by the City.
C. International Property Maintenance Code. Pursuant to Title 15 LMC, International Property Maintenance Code occupancy requirements are applicable to a boarding house regardless of the number of individuals living in the residence.
D. Amortization Schedule. Existing boarding houses have until December 31, 2015 to become compliant with the regulations outlined in this Title and Title 5 as it pertains to boarding house.
E. Additional Standards. The following additional standards are required to be met for any boarding house housing over four (4) unrelated individuals excluding Types 1, 2, 3, and 4 Group Homes as defined in LMC 18.20.300, Use Types and Levels; hotels and motels as defined in LMC 18A.90.200; and excluding state-licensed foster homes, in addition to the criteria for a conditional use permit under LMC 18A.10.230.
    1. Adequate living space based on the International Property Maintenance Code standards will be taken into account when a request for more than four (4) unrelated individuals is requested.
    2. A designated property manager that is available twenty-hour (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week is required.
    3. The request for more than four (4) unrelated individuals will not adversely impact the surrounding community.
    4. General Business License Required. A boarding house falling under this subsection is deemed a business activity and is subject to the requirements of Chapter 5.02 LMC.
    5. The applicant must adhere to the provisions of the City’s noise control regulations found in LMC 8.36.010. [Ord. 592 § 5, 2014.]

18A.20.400 Civic Use Category - Land Use Types and Levels.
The Civic use category includes facilities or services that serve a demonstrated public function and are generally considered to be of community importance, such as educational, cultural, medical, protective, and governmental facilities and uses.
A. Community and Cultural Services. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of services that are strongly associated with community, social, or public importance. Examples include libraries, museums, art galleries, senior centers, community centers, performing arts theaters, and community clubs and organizations.
Level 1: Establishments which do not exceed five thousand (5,000) gross square feet.
Level 2: Establishments of between five thousand (5,000) and twenty thousand (20,000) gross square feet.
Level 3: Establishments which are larger than twenty thousand (20,000) gross square feet.
B. Daycare Facilities. The use of a building, or any portion thereof, for the regular care of individuals needing supervision and care on a less-than-around-the-clock basis. The term shall also include facilities commonly known as day care facilities, day care centers, and preschools, but not pet day cares, which shall instead be treated as a Pet Sales and Services Commercial use type. All are subject to compliance with all appropriate federal, state, and/or local licensing requirements and the specific standards set forth in LMC 18A.70.100, Daycare Facilities.
Level 1: Home-based day care for up to twelve (12) children or adults.
Level 2: Daycare centers serving children or adults that provide services for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours that a not based from a home.
C. Education. Educational services provided by public, private, or parochial institutions. Examples include grade schools, community colleges, public and private colleges or universities.
Level 1: Primary and secondary educational facilities such as kindergarten, elementary, middle schools, junior high schools, and high schools.
Level 2: Higher educational facilities such as community colleges, colleges or universities.
D. Essential Public Facilities. Under the state Growth Management Act, essential public facilities include those facilities that are typically difficult to site such as airports, state education facilities and state or regional transportation facilities as defined in RCW 47.06.140; state and local correctional facilities; solid waste handling facilities; and in-patient facilities including substance abuse facilities, mental health facilities, group homes, and secure community transition facilities as defined in RCW 71.09.020. For the purposes of and within this title, essential public facilities are treated as listed or substantially similar to listed use types, thereby affirming their siting in appropriate areas; except as applied to public lands, where they are liberally construed to include a broad array of public services. Essential public facilities do not include wireless telecommunications facilities.
E. Government Administration Facilities. The executive, legislative, judicial, administrative and regulatory activities of local, state, federal, and international governments or special districts that may perform public services and work directly with citizens. Examples include courthouses, armories, human and social service offices, health offices, and government offices.
Level 1: Uses that do not exceed 5,000 gross square feet.
Level 2: Uses of between five thousand (5,000) and twenty thousand (20,000) gross square feet.
Level 3: Uses that exceed twenty thousand (20,000) gross square feet.
F. Health Services. Any health-related facilities and services that are not listed elsewhere such as hospitals, day surgery facilities, medical facilities providing round-the-clock walk-in services, and blood banks.
G. Military Installations. A governmentally owned or controlled property and facilities which support a range of uses to facilitate military operations in a “compound” setting, as distinguished from stand-alone facilities such as recruiting stations. The autonomy associated with governmental ownership or control of the property, in combination with the unique character of the military operations and support structures, are not typical of civilian uses.
Level 1: State installation owned or controlled by the Washington State Military Department.
Level 2: Federal installation owned or controlled by the U.S. Department of Defense.
H. Outdoor Recreation. Recreational areas and recreation facilities which primarily are owned or operated by public or non-profit entities for the use and enjoyment of the general public. Examples include neighborhood parks, community parks, regional parks, waterfront parks, open space, arboretums, small or special landscaped areas, community and “pea patch” gardens, fairgrounds, zoos, and swimming pools. In some cases, such areas and facilities may be incidental to private development, such as open space set-asides necessary for environmental mitigation and children’s play areas (“tot lots”) within a subdivision; are intended to be principally used by a finite group; and may constitute private property.
Level 1: Natural open space and passive recreation. Protected open space areas in a natural state, together with low-impact passive recreational facilities including single-track hiking trails, beaches, viewing areas, interpretive signage, and fences.
Level 2: Neighborhood-scale active recreation and limited accessory structures. Parks, playgrounds, arboretums, and community gardens two (2) acres or less in size; open sports fields two (2) acres or less in size, with no spectator seating; improved trail systems; paved multi-use areas and bridle trails within defined park areas; ranger stations; public restrooms; playground equipment; sports equipment, including swimming pools, for neighborhood use; and picnic tables and shelters.
Level 3: Parks and playgrounds from two (2) to twenty (20) acres in size; multi-use linear trails; open sports fields with unenclosed seating for up to four hundred (400) spectators; swimming pools for community or regional use; public and private outdoor recreational facilities such as golf courses and associated driving ranges, equestrian clubs, and marinas; and arboretums and community gardens more than two (2) acres in size.
Level 4: Parks and playgrounds over twenty (20) acres in size, open sports fields with unenclosed seating for more than four hundred (400) spectators, and regional recreational facilities.
I. Postal Services. Mailing services provided by the United States Postal Service or contractors, including branch post offices, contract stations, terminals, and distribution centers.
Level 1: Postal facilities serving neighborhoods, such as contract stations or branch offices.
Level 2: Central or main postal facilities which process mail and provide full customer services.
Level 3: Terminal postal processing facilities which provide no or limited customer services.
J. Public Maintenance Facilities. Facilities for storage and maintenance of vehicles, equipment, or related materials used in a utility or public facility activity. May include usable and/or scrap tire piles of up to a total of two hundred (200) tires as an accessory use.
Level 1: Indoor maintenance and storage facility not exceeding three thousand (3,000) gross square feet. Outdoor storage of equipment, materials, or vehicles and vehicle maintenance is prohibited.
Level 2: Indoor maintenance and storage facility not exceeding five thousand (5,000) gross square feet with outdoor storage not exceeding two thousand (2,000) gross square feet.
Level 3: City-wide or regional maintenance and storage facility exceeding five thousand (5,000) gross square feet and/or exceeding two thousand (2,000) gross square feet of outdoor storage.
K. Public Safety Services. Public safety and emergency services such as police and fire stations; animal control facilities, such as an animal shelter or Humane Society facilities; and correctional facilities. This use type may include accessory dispatch facilities but does not include stand-alone dispatch facilities (“com centers”) that, by their nature, provide service to multiple jurisdictions or entire regions, which shall instead be treated as a Level 3 Communication Facilities Utilities use type.
Level 1: Police and fire/emergency medical aid stations, including private ambulance services.
Level 2: Animal control services.
Level 3: City correctional facilities.
Level 4: County, state, federal, or private correctional facilities.
L. Religious Assembly. Religious services involving public assembly such as those that customarily occur in synagogues, temples, and churches. For the purpose of compliance with the federal Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act of 2000, except where lands are restricted to public facilities, Religious Assembly use types shall be treated equally with Community and Cultural Services Civic use types. These use types do not include homeless shelters, food banks, or other social services, which shall instead be treated as a Social Services Civic use type; daycares or preschools, which shall instead be treated as a Daycare Facilities Civic use type; schools, which shall instead be treated as an Education Civic use type; or facilities for residence of religious orders, which shall instead be treated as a Co-Housing Residential use type.
Level 1: Establishments where the principal place of assembly does not exceed five thousand (5,000) gross square feet.
Level 2: Establishments where the principal place of assembly is between five thousand (5,000) and twenty thousand (20,000) gross square feet.
Level 3: Establishments which have a principal place of assembly more than twenty thousand (20,000) gross square feet.
M. Social Services. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of services that are strongly associated with meeting basic needs. Examples include clothing banks, food banks, temporary shelters, and counseling services.
Level 1: Establishments which are accessory to a primary Community and Cultural Services, Religious Assembly, or Education Civic use type and do not exceed one thousand (1,000) gross square feet or twenty (20) percent of the structure, whichever is less, and do not contain more than five (5) beds or serve more than fifteen (15) people per day or meal.
Level 2: Establishments which are accessory to a primary Community and Cultural Services, Religious Assembly, or Education Civic use type and do not exceed one thousand, five hundred (1,500) gross square feet or twenty (20) percent of the structures, whichever is less, and does not contain more than ten (10) beds or serve more than twenty-five (25) people per day or meal.
Level 3: Establishments which are a primary or accessory use and serve a City-wide or regional area with an intensity greater than Level 2.
N. Transportation. The provision of public or semi-public transportation services. Examples include parking garages, park-and-ride lots, commercial parking lots, bus shelters, bus stations, bus transfer centers, passenger rail stations, ferry docks, and other types of public and quasi-public transportation facilities.
Level 1: Transportation uses serving neighborhoods, such as bus shelters.
Level 2: Transportation uses serving communities and regions, such as passenger rail and bus stations; parking facilities, including park-and-rides; and weigh stations.
Level 3: Commercial parking lots, structures, and satellite lots providing short-term parking for operational vehicles.
Level 4: Taxi, shuttle, and bus “barns” and yards, and motor pool facilities. May include usable and/or scrap tire piles of up to a total of two hundred (200) tires as an accessory use.
Level 5: Airports, heliports, landing fields or waterways, and ferry docks. [Ord. 500 § 8, 2009; Ord. 483 § 9, 2008; Ord. 307 § 12, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.20.500 Utilities Use Category - Land Use Types and Levels.
The Utilities use category refers to facilities serving the public by means of an integrated system of collection, transmission, distribution, and processing facilities through more or less permanent physical connections between the plant of the serving entity and the premises of the customer. Included are systems for the delivery of water, natural gas, electricity, telecommunication services, for the collection of stormwater, and for the collection and disposal of sewage and refuse.
A. Communication Facilities. Facilities used in the transmission of information by wire, radio, optical cable, electromagnetic or other similar means. Examples include central office switching units, remote switching units, telecommunications radio relay stations and cellular communication facility support structures.
Level 1: Local cable, fiber optics, traffic control, or telephone transmission lines, poles, or apparatus, not including antennae, wireless telecommunications facilities, structures, or private antenna and satellite dishes.
Level 2: Regional cable, fiber optics, traffic control, or telephone transmission lines, poles, or apparatus, not including antennae or wireless telecommunications facilities.
Level 3: Stand-alone emergency services dispatch facilities (“com centers”) that provide service to multiple jurisdictions or entire regions.
Level 4: Commercial or non-profit radio and/or television broadcasting stations.
Level 5: Wireless telecommunications facilities, subject to specific standards, including siting criteria, set forth in LMC 18A.70.600.
B. Electrical Facilities. Level 1: Above ground and below ground electrical distribution lines, poles, and associated facilities and appurtenances with voltages of 55,000 volts and under.
Level 2: Above ground electrical transmission facilities of an operating voltage greater than 55,000 volts, with associated facilities and appurtenances, including substations.
C. Electrical Generation Facilities. Facilities that generate or cogenerate electric energy by, or as a resource for, utilities engaged in the transmission and distribution of electricity to the public. Examples include hydropower facilities, thermal generation facilities such as cogeneration and combustion turbines, and other facilities employed to generate electric energy by or as a resource for utilities.
D. Natural Gas Facilities. Facilities engaged in the distribution and storage of natural gas. Examples include natural gas gate stations, natural gas storage facilities and interim propane storage systems.
Level 1: Local distribution lines.
Level 2: Natural and other compressed gas storage tanks for transportation.
E. Organic Waste Processing Facilities. Any solid waste facility specializing in the controlled decomposition of organic solid waste and which requires a solid waste permit under RCW 70.95.
Level 1: Soil treatment facilities. Solid waste facilities which utilize bioremediation, a thermal desorption process, or similar processes to treat petroleum contaminated soil or vactor waste for reuse or final disposal.
Level 2: Composting facility designed to handle more than forty (40) cubic yards. Solid waste facilities specializing in the composting of one (1) or more organics of a known and consistent composition, other than mixed municipal waste, to produce a marketable product for reuse or as a soil conditioner. Feedstocks may include, but are not limited to, yard waste, biosolids or food waste.
Level 3: Municipal solid waste composting facility. Solid waste facilities specializing in the composting of mixed waste from municipal sources to reduce the waste for final disposal or to produce a marketable product.
F. Pipelines. Facilities engaged in the transmission of water, petroleum, oil, natural gas, or other substance, where lines do not serve as local distribution lines but may serve as a single regional facility.
G. Sewage Collection Facilities. Facilities used to collect sewage, such as wastewater transfer facilities, odor control structures, pump stations and lift stations.
H. Sewage Treatment Facilities. Facilities used to treat any liquid or waterborne waste of domestic origin or a combination of domestic, commercial or industrial origin, and which by its design requires the presence of an operator for its operation, including alternative treatment works and package treatment plants. Also included are all of the various types of associated equipment, structures, and operations as they are currently constructed and operating or will result from technology, such as administrative offices, storage, laboratories, public walkways, recreational and educational uses, and parking lots. Sewage treatment facilities do not include any facility used exclusively by an individual residence, septic tanks with subsoil absorption, industrial pretreatment facilities, privately owned treatment plants for industrial wastewater, or wastewater collection systems.
I. Stormwater Facilities. A conveyance, system of conveyances, or stormwater control facilities (including roads with drainage systems, catch basins, curbs, and gutters); ditches; man-made channels; storm drains; retention/detention facilities; and infiltration facilities which are designed or used for collection, storage, conveyance and treatment of stormwater.
Level 1: Stormwater collection and local conveyance systems.
Level 2: Regional detention/retention ponds and facilities, and constructed wetlands.
Level 3: Stormwater pond facilities that are also developed to allow uses such as parks, recreational, educational and research structures and activities, known as stormwater multiple use facilities.
J. Waste Disposal Facilities. Permanent disposal sites for solid waste. Examples include wood waste, inert/demolition, municipal solid waste, special waste and biosolids landfills, and waste-to-energy facilities. Excludes tire piles.
Level 1: Inert landfill.
Level 2: Inert landfills as accessory uses to mineral extraction sites.
Level 3: Wood waste, demolition, and special waste landfills.
Level 4: Municipal solid waste landfills, special waste landfills (including ash landfills, any landfill for special waste not previously identified and biosolids landfills), and waste-to-energy facilities.
K. Waste Transfer Facilities. Solid waste facilities where solid waste is collected or subjected to interim processing before being transported to a permanent disposal site. Examples include recycling collection sites, drop-box transfer stations, transfer stations, recyclables recovery facilities, waste separation recovery facilities, moderate-risk waste facilities, and scrap tire piles which are not otherwise listed as accessory to numerous specific use types.
Level 1: Recycling collection sites serving a single neighborhood or limited area, not requiring a state solid waste permit.
Level 2: Drop-box transfer stations.
Level 3: Scrap tire piles not exceeding a total of eight hundred (800) tires, with no pile larger than forty (40) horizontal feet or more than ten (10) feet in height, and each pile having a thirty (30) foot fire lane on all sides, subject to Fire Marshal approval.
Level 4: Transfer stations; waste separation recovery facilities; moderate-risk waste facilities; and scrap tire piles between a total of eight hundred (800) and four thousand, five hundred (4,500) tires, with no pile larger than forty (40) horizontal feet or more than ten (10) feet in height, and each pile having a thirty (30) foot fire lane on all sides, subject to Fire Marshal approval.
L. Water Supply Facilities. Water purification facilities, water storage facilities, wellheads and pump stations.
Level 1: Local distribution systems, wellheads, pump stations, water purification facilities not exceeding two thousand (2,000) square feet of building area. Water storage facilities.
Level 2: Water purification facilities exceeding two thousand (2,000) square feet of building area.
Level 3: Chemical storage, handling, and usage in a water supply facility.
M. Enhanced Services Facility – Defined. Pursuant to RCW 70.97.010 (12), an “enhanced services facility” means a facility that provides treatment and services to persons for whom acute inpatient treatment is not medically necessary and who have been determined by the Department of Social and Health Services to be inappropriate for placement in other licensed facilities due to the complex needs that result in behavioral and security issues. An enhanced services facility is subject to the City’s business licensing requirements.
    1. Enhanced Services Facility in Commercial Zoning Districts. An enhanced service facility is permitted in the NC2, TOC, CBD and C2 zoning districts subject to the approval of a conditional use permit and all applicable development permits.
    2. Enhanced Services Facility in All Other Zoning Districts. An enhanced services facility is prohibited in all other zoning districts. [Ord. 680 § 1, 2018; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.20.600 Commercial Use Category – Land Use Types and Levels.
The Commercial use category includes establishments, facilities, and individuals providing services and the sale, distribution or rental of goods that benefit the daily needs of the general public, which are not otherwise classified in another use category.
A. Amusement and Recreation. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the provision of sports, entertainment, or recreational services to the general public or members, which may or may not include Eating and Drinking Establishment Commercial use types in conjunction, but where eating and drinking is clearly secondary to a primary Amusement and Recreation Commercial use type, and which do not otherwise constitute Sexually Oriented Business Commercial use types. Examples include video arcades; teen clubs; dance halls; athletic clubs; indoor swimming pools; billiard parlors; bowling alleys; ice or roller skating rinks; indoor and drive-in movie theaters; outdoor recreational equipment rental, including marine-related; mini-golf and indoor or outdoor driving ranges that are not located in conjunction with a golf course; enclosed sports arenas or stadiums; amusement parks; and gambling establishments or activities such as cardrooms, enhanced cardrooms (“mini-casinos”), bingo parlors, off-track betting, or similar gambling activities, subject to appropriate state licensure; specifically excluding Lottery and pull tabs. Such uses may include facilities or activities clearly incidental and secondary to the primary use which provide functions typical of a “pro shop” in conjunction with the primary use.
Level 1: Indoor facilities not exceeding five thousand (5,000) gross square feet and/or outdoor facilities of less than thirty-five thousand (35,000) square feet, without alcohol sales.
Level 2: Indoor facilities of between five thousand (5,000) and thirty thousand (30,000) gross square feet and/or outdoor facilities of between thirty-five thousand (35,000) and eighty-seven thousand, one hundred twenty (87,120) gross square feet (two acres), without alcohol sales.
Level 3: Indoor facilities of up to thirty thousand (30,000) gross square feet with up to five thousand (5,000) gross square feet of enclosed outdoor facilities, with or without alcohol sales.
Level 4: Indoor facilities exceeding thirty thousand (30,000) gross square feet and/or outdoor facilities exceeding five thousand (5,000) gross square feet, with or without alcohol sales.
B. Building/Garden Supply and Nurseries. Establishments primarily engaged in wholesale and retail selling of lumber, building materials, paint, glass, wallpaper, hardware, nursery stock, lawn and garden, plumbing, and electrical supplies.
Level 1: Establishments primarily engaged in retail sales. Utilization of outdoor areas for retail display and storage may occur as an accessory use. The combination of total floor area and outdoor storage and display area is less than ten thousand (10,000) gross square feet.
Level 2: Establishments primarily engaged in retail sales. Utilization of outdoor areas for retail display or storage purposes may occur as an accessory use. The combination of total floor area and outdoor storage and display area ranges between ten thousand (10,000) and eighty thousand (80,000) gross square feet.
Level 3: Establishments primarily engaged in retail sales where the combination of total floor area and outdoor storage and display area exceeds eighty thousand (80,000) square feet.
Level 4: Establishments primarily engaged in wholesale activities, except for and as distinguished from Level 2 Agriculture uses.
C. Bulk Fuel Dealers. Establishments that sell fuels which, by their nature, are flammable, explosive, or toxic, to businesses and households for transportation, heating, and business purposes. Examples include propane gas sales, heating oil dealers, liquefied petroleum gas dealers, coal, wood, or other fuel dealers.
D. Business Services. Businesses primarily engaged in providing services to other businesses on a contract or fee basis. Examples include courier services, parcel delivery services, fax services, telegraph services, reproduction services, commercial art and photography services, stenographic services, and janitorial services.
E. Buy-Back Recycling Center. Any small-scale business without industrial activity which collects, receives or buys recyclable materials (typically recyclable consumer goods and containers) from household, commercial or industrial sources for the purpose of sorting, grading or packaging recyclables for subsequent shipment and marketing, as distinguished from Recycling Processor Industrial use types, which use heavy equipment for processing and may provide for outdoor storage of recyclable materials. Examples of commercial buy-back recycling centers include small scale glass or aluminum container and paper buy-back centers. Facilities which process vehicle parts, building materials, or industrial scrap material are classified under the Recycling Processor Industrial use type. All materials stored outdoors must be containerized.
F. Convenience Commercial. Stores which may be either primarily engaged in serving the auto-driving public or, at lesser levels, principally oriented to neighborhood pedestrian traffic, which may include any combination of gasoline sales, uses typical of Food Stores as listed herein, and same-structure collocation of limited prepared food and drink sales such as fast food or espresso; as distinguished from Food Stores Commercial use type, which does not allow gasoline sales.
Level 1: Structure of up to ten thousand (10,000) gross square feet, without gas sales.
Level 2: Structure of up to 10,000 gross square feet, with up to six (6) two-sided gas pumps.
Level 3: Structure of up to twenty thousand (20,000) gross square feet, with up to nine (9) two-sided gas pumps.
Level 4: Structure of over twenty thousand (20,000) gross square feet, with more than nine (9) two-sided gas pumps. Level 4 shall include levels 1, 2 and 3.
G. Drive-Through Facilities. Facilities which are standalone or provided in conjunction with and accessory to a collocated allowed use for the purposes of allowing a customer or patron to transact business from a motor vehicle. Examples include fast food, coffee kiosks, financial institutions or unstaffed automatic teller machines, and pharmacy prescription drop-off/pick-up. Does not include drive-through car washes or other forms of automobile service, which shall instead be treated as Motor Vehicle Service and Repair Commercial use types. Drive-Through Facilities shall not be comprised of a mobile unit such as a trailer or other vehicle with chassis which has been parked and/or converted to a permanent installation by virtue of removal of wheels or addition of blocking and skirting.
H. Eating and Drinking Establishment. Establishments that sell prepared food and/or beverages, which may include liquor, subject to appropriate state and local licensure, including health permits. Such uses may or may not include Amusement and Recreation Commercial use types in conjunction but shall be considered to constitute Eating and Drinking Establishments for the purpose of zoning only where amusement and recreation is clearly secondary to a primary Eating and Drinking Establishment Commercial use type. Does not include sexually oriented businesses serving food and/or beverages, which are instead treated as Sexually Oriented Business Commercial use types.
Level 1: Mobile vending occurring from motorized or non-motorized outdoor carts or vehicles which go from place to place selling pre-prepared or made-to-order products, where no seating is provided. Examples include lunch wagons, coffee or hot dog carts, popcorn vendors, and ice cream trucks.
Level 2: Mobile vending as described in Level 1, but occurring from a fixed, identifiable location to which the vendor returns each business day, serving pre-prepared or made-to-order products intended to be consumed off the premises. Examples include taco trucks.
Level 3: Establishments selling pre-prepared or made-to-order products intended to be consumed on the premises or which may, at the customer's option, be taken away, where a Drive-Through Facilities Commercial use type may or may not be collocated. Examples include coffee shops; juice bars; fast food, fast casual, and family style restaurants; and fine dining establishments.
Level 4: Establishments primarily involved in alcohol sales, or which include a specific bar/lounge area, serving made-to-order products intended to be consumed solely on the premises, which may, from time to time, feature entertainment such as video sports events, comedy shows, or dancing to recorded or live music, or low-intensity entertainment such as video games, pool tables, darts, television, and/or jukebox music. A Level 4 Eating and Drinking Establishment shall not be collocated with a Drive-Through Facilities Commercial use type. Examples include sports bars, restaurants with bars/lounges, taverns and brewpubs. Distinguished from establishments primarily involved in alcohol sales, where pre-prepared or made-to-order food may also be available, which routinely offer entertainment such as dancing to live or recorded music, which shall instead be treated as Amusement and Recreation Commercial use types. Examples include dance or karaoke bars and “nightclubs.”
I. Food Stores. Stores primarily engaged in the retail sale of a variety of canned and dry foods, fresh fruits and vegetables, or meats, poultry, and fish, which may include a variety of non-food products as well. Examples include meat and fish markets, vegetable markets, retail bakeries, dairy stores, grocery stores, and specialty food and beverage stores; provided, that gasoline sales shall not be located on the same lot and as distinguished from Convenience Commercial use types.
Level 1: Floor area up to thirty thousand (30,000) gross square feet.
Level 2: Floor area between thirty thousand (30,000) and eighty thousand (80,000) gross square feet.
Level 3: Floor area over eighty thousand (80,000) gross square feet.
J. Funeral Services. Funeral facilities such as preparation and display facilities, funeral chapels, crematories, and affiliated offices.
Level 1: Mortuaries, including affiliated funeral chapels and offices.
Level 2: Crematories, including affiliated funeral chapels and offices, subject to state air quality standards and intensity limits when situated within the military-related zoning districts.
Level 3: Cemeteries, which may include Level 1 and Level 2 uses.
K. Lodging. Establishments that provide transitory lodging services, subject to appropriate state and local licensure.
Level 1: Bed and breakfast, subject to the requirements of LMC 18A.70.900.
Level 2: Camping and recreational vehicle parks where a tract of land under single ownership or unified control is developed with individual sites for rent and containing roads and utilities to accommodate recreational vehicles or tent camping for vacation or other similar short stay purposes, subject to design standards set forth in LMC 18A.70.500. This use does not include the rental of recreational vehicles or manufactured home parks.
Level 3: Hotels and motels, or other transient lodging facilities not listed herein, containing a single building or a group of detached or semi-detached buildings containing guest rooms or self-contained suites, with parking provided on the site for the use of those staying in the rooms or suites, which is or are designed and used for the accommodation of transient travelers.
L. Manufactured and Modular Homes Sales. Establishments that provide for the marketing, sale, and distribution of new manufactured and modular homes.
M. Motor Vehicle Sales and Rental. Establishments or places of business engaged in the sales or leasing of motor vehicles, utility trailers, recreational and/or sporting vehicles, commercial vehicles, construction equipment, and heavy equipment subject to compliance with all applicable federal, state, and/or local licensing requirements. Service of vehicles may be permitted as an incidental, and clearly secondary, accessory use.
Level 1: New and used motor, recreational, and sporting vehicle sales and rental of no less than 20,000 square feet and up to two acres in size.
Level 2: New and used motor, recreational, and sporting vehicle sales and rental of more than two and up to five acres in size.
Level 3: New and used motor, recreational, and sporting vehicle sales and rental of larger than five acres.
Level 4: Commercial truck-trailer and heavy equipment sales and rental.
N. Motor Vehicle Service and Repair. Facilities or places where the repair and service of motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, sporting vehicles, commercial vehicles, and construction equipment occurs. Includes the sale of or refilling of personal or recreational propane tanks. Where outdoor storage is allowed, may include usable and/or scrap tire piles of up to a total of two hundred (200) tires as an accessory use.
Level 1: Minor service and repair of motor vehicles, including glass repair and replacement, truck bedliners, installation of vehicle accessories, lube/oil, tires, mufflers, brakes, and carpet/upholstery and other related services, conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building of less than two thousand (2,000) gross square feet which utilizes no outdoor storage. Specifically excludes transmission and engine rebuild shops, vehicle painting, body work or the installation and/or testing of audio or alarm systems; but may include short-term parking of customer vehicles while awaiting service.
Level 2: Car wash, subject to water recapture and treatment, and/or motor vehicle detailing services. May include short-term parking of customer vehicles while awaiting service.
Level 3: Minor service and repair of motor vehicles with up to two thousand (2,000) gross square feet of outdoor storage of vehicles under repair. Level 3 shall include Level 1 uses.
Level 4: Major service and repair of motor vehicles including transmission and engine rebuild shops; towing services; vehicle customization and fabrication; motor vehicle rebuilds; motor vehicle and vehicle trailer manufacturing/assembly; installation and/or testing of audio or alarm systems; body work and vehicle painting, subject to state air quality standards, including outdoor storage of vehicle body parts and vehicles under repair; and minor service and repair uses with more than two thousand (2,000) gross square feet of outdoor storage. Level 4 shall include Level 3 and Level 1 uses.
Level 5: Commercial vehicle fueling and/or service stations, such as truck stops, with or without convenience shopping; wash and repair services for commercial vehicles, their trailers, and recreational vehicles; and construction and heavy equipment service, repair and body work.
O. Personal Services. Businesses primarily engaged in providing services to meet individuals’ periodic personal needs. Examples include coin-operated laundries, dry cleaning drop-off/pick-up establishments, dry cleaners, beauty shops, barber shops, clothing alterations, tanning salons which do not otherwise constitute Sexually Oriented Business Commercial use types, travel agencies, payday loan establishments, photographic studios, carpet and upholstery cleaners, and personal improvement services.
Level 1: Establishments of up to two thousand, five hundred (2,500) gross square feet which do not involve outdoor storage of vehicles.
Level 2: Establishments exceeding two thousand, five hundred (2,500) gross square feet or which involve outdoor storage of vehicles.
P. Pet Sales and Services. Businesses primarily engaged in retail sales and services associated with small animals and household pets. Examples include pet stores, pet grooming shops, pet day cares, and veterinary hospitals for small animals and pets.
Level 1: Completely indoor retail and service establishments, with or without accessory kennels, of less than two thousand, five hundred (2,500) gross square feet.
Level 2: Completely indoor retail and service establishments, with or without accessory kennels, exceeding two thousand, five hundred (2,500) gross square feet.
Level 3: Retail and service establishments with outdoor sales, kennels, and/or yard area.
Level 4: Commercial kennels and catteries, subject to LMC 5.52.
Q. Private Training School. Educational services provided for profit by private organizations or individuals with the primary purpose of preparing students for jobs in a trade or a profession. Examples include commercial/vocational schools, drivers’ training, beauty and barber schools, business or computer training schools, and conservatories of art, music, or drama. Facilities larger than ten thousand (10,000) gross square feet shall be regulated as a Level 2 Education Civic use type.
Level 1: Establishments of up to five thousand (5,000) gross square feet and/or which utilize up to one thousand (1,000) square feet of outdoor area for instructional purposes or for parking of vehicles or storage of materials utilized in the instructional program.
Level 2: Establishments of between five thousand (5,000) and ten thousand (10,000) gross square feet and/or which utilize more than one thousand (1,000) square feet of outdoor area for instructional purposes or for parking of vehicles or storage of materials utilized in the instructional program.
R. Professional Offices. Offices, private firms, or organizations which provide professional or administrative services to individuals or businesses. Examples include employment services, property management services, title companies, law offices, engineering/surveying consulting firms, architecture and landscape architecture firms, advertising and public relations firms, medical and dental offices, diagnostic testing services, advertising agencies, travel agencies, talent agencies, insurance offices, real estate offices, investment brokers, financial planners, banking services, administrative offices for non-profit and quasi-public agencies, and other business offices customarily associated with professional or administrative office services.
Level 1: Office building of up to ten thousand (10,000) gross square feet.
Level 2: Office building of between ten thousand (10,000) and thirty thousand (30,000) gross square feet.
Level 3: Office building exceeding thirty thousand (30,000) gross square feet.
S. Rental and Repair Services. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of rental and repair services or closely related uses. Examples include home improvement, garden, and party equipment rental; upholstery shops; appliance repair shops; small engine and power tool rental and repair such as lawn mowers and chainsaws; vacuum cleaner repair; medical equipment rental and repair services; rental furnishings; and instrument repair services. Does not include vehicle repair or auto body, which are instead treated as Motor Vehicle Service and Repair Commercial use types.
Level 1: Rental and repair services not exceeding five thousand (5,000) gross square feet with no outdoor storage.
Level 2: Rental and repair services not exceeding five thousand (5,000) gross square feet with up to one thousand (1,000) gross square feet of outdoor storage/display of equipment.
Level 3: Rental and repair services exceeding five thousand (5,000) gross square feet of floor area with no outdoor storage/display of equipment.
Level 4: Rental and repair services exceeding five thousand (5,000) gross square feet with over one thousand (1,000) square feet of outdoor storage/display of equipment.
T. Sales of General Merchandise. Establishments that sell new general merchandise including apparel and accessories; auto parts; bookstores which do not otherwise constitute Sexually Oriented Business Commercial use types; legal pharmaceuticals; optical goods; furniture and home furnishings; and computers and electronics. Does not include establishments primarily engaged in selling lumber and other building materials, paint, glass, wallpaper, hardware, nursery stock, and lawn and garden supplies, which are instead treated as Building/Garden Supply and Nurseries Commercial use types. May include usable and/or scrap tire piles of up to a total of two hundred (200) tires as an accessory use.
Level 1: Establishments of up to five thousand (5,000) gross square feet primarily engaged in retail sales activities.
Level 2: Establishments of between five thousand (5,000) and thirty thousand (30,000) gross square feet primarily engaged in retail sales activities.
Level 3: Establishments of up to thirty thousand (30,000) gross square feet primarily engaged in retail/wholesale sales activities.
Level 4: Establishments exceeding thirty thousand (30,000) gross square feet primarily engaged in retail/wholesale sales activities.
U. Sales of New and Secondhand Property. Individuals or establishments that sell new and secondhand property. Examples include pawnbrokers; secondhand, antique, and transient traders in secondhand property, including garage sales and flea markets. This use type does not include used or pre-owned automobiles or other vehicles, which are instead treated as Motor Vehicle Sales and Rental Commercial use types, nor wrecking or parts yards, which are instead treated as Salvage/Wrecking Yards and Vehicle Storage Facilities Industrial use types.
Level 1: Antique stores; used bookstores which do not otherwise constitute Sexually Oriented Business Commercial use types; and used clothing, furniture and appliances, jewelry and valuable coins, and valuable collectibles sales.
Level 2: Surplus, military, and miscellaneous sales and flea markets. Flea markets include swap meets but does not include antique malls where stalls are leased, which are instead treated as a Level 1 use listed above. This use type does not include junk and/or salvage dealers, which are instead treated as Salvage/Wrecking Yards and Vehicle Storage Facilities Industrial use types.
Level 3: Pawnshops, subject to the provisions of Chapter 5.12 LMC. Businesses which are engaged, in whole or in part, in the business of loaning money on the security of pledges, deposits, or conditional sales of personal property; or which publicly display, at or near their place of business, any sign or symbol generally used by pawnbrokers or indicating that the business loans money on personal property on deposit or pledge.
V. Sexually Oriented Business. A business that includes as a primary use any one or more of the following: an adult entertainment facility; adult-oriented merchandise; adult retail use; panoram; or similar facility, merchandise, or entertainment as defined in LMC 18A.40.400, subject to specific standards, including siting criteria, set forth therein.
W. Storage. Businesses engaged in the storage of items for personal and business use. Business activities other than rental of storage spaces are prohibited. Does not include vehicle impound lots or wrecking yards, which are instead regulated as Salvage/Wrecking Yards and Vehicle Storage Facilities Industrial use types.
Level 1: Indoor mini-warehouse/storage facility.
Level 2: Indoor/outdoor mini-warehouse/storage facility, including the storage of motor, recreational, and sporting vehicles not otherwise regulated as a Level 1 Salvage/Vehicle Storage Facilities Industrial use type.
Level 3: Outdoor storage, including the storage of shipping containers, which is not accessory to a primary permitted use on the site, including the storage of motor, recreational, and sporting vehicles not otherwise regulated as a Level 1 Salvage/Vehicle Storage Facilities Industrial use type. [Ord. 697 § 3, 2018; Ord. 678 § 3, 2018; Ord. 525 § 4, 2010; Ord. 472 § 4, 2008; Ord. 397 § 4, 2005; Ord. 358 § 5, 2004; Ord. 317 § 2, 2003; Ord. 307 § 13, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.20.700 Industrial Use Category – Land Use Types and Levels.
The Industrial use category includes the on-site production, manufacturing, assembly, processing, storage, movement, servicing or repair of goods and materials. Industrial uses regulated under this category typically exhibit one (1) or more of the following characteristics: requires relatively large acreage, creates substantial odor or noise, creates heavy traffic passenger vehicle and/or truck volumes, employs relatively large numbers of people, and/or creates visual impacts incompatible with residential development.
A. Primary Manufacturing. Uses that involve the primary processing of a raw or initially-processed material into a product that requires additional processing, manufacturing, or assembly in order to become a consumer good. This use type does not include animal rendering or rendering of animal products, nor manufacturing of illegal substances. Examples include:
• Production of basic chemicals.
• Manufacturing of castings and other basic metal products, including sheet metal, and the manufacture of nails, spikes, and insulated wire and cable.
• Tanning, curing, or storage of raw hides or skins.
• Manufacturing of cement, ready-mix concrete, cut stone, and crushed rock and other primary products from materials taken principally from the earth in the form of stone, clay and sand.
• Manufacturing of asphalt and asphalt reclamation processes.
• Soil remediation facilities.
• Saw, lathe, shingle, planing, plywood and veneer mills engaged in producing lumber and basic wood materials.
• Manufacturing of pulps from woods and other cellulose fibers and from rags.
• Petroleum and natural gas refining and processing.
• Smelting and refining of ferrous and non-ferrous metals from ore or scrap, rolling, drawing and alloying metals.
• Manufacturing of paving and roofing materials, compounding lubricating oils and greases, rubber reclaiming, manufacturing of synthetic rubber.
Level 1: Indoor manufacturing and assembly of up to thirty thousand (30,000) gross square feet.
Level 2: Indoor manufacturing and assembly exceeding thirty thousand (30,000) gross square feet and/or outdoor storage of materials.
B. Secondary Manufacturing and Major Assembly. Uses that involve the processing of previously prepared natural and/or synthetic materials. This use type does not include animal rendering or rendering of animal products, nor manufacturing of illegal substances. Examples include:
• Manufacturing of products by predominantly chemical processes and which are to be used for ultimate consumer or industrial consumption.
• Manufacturing of computer hardware components and related equipment, and other machinery, apparatus and supplies for the generation, storage, transmission, transformation and utilization of electrical energy.
• Manufacturing and assembly of industrial and commercial machinery and equipment.
• Manufacturing and assembly of paper and paperboard and its conversion into other paper-based products.
• Manufacturing and assembly of ferrous and non-ferrous metal products and a variety of metal and wire products manufacturing, including sheet metal.
• Manufacturing and assembly of woven and knit fabrics, and carpets and rugs from yarn.
• Manufacturing and assembly of equipment for transportation of people or cargo by land, air, rail or water.
Level 1: Indoor manufacturing and assembly of up to fifteen thousand (15,000) gross square feet.
Level 2: Indoor manufacturing and assembly exceeding fifteen thousand (15,000) gross square feet.
C. Limited Manufacturing/Assembly. Uses that involve intermediate processing of semi-processed material into a consumer good and to uses that involve the assembly of semi-processed and/or intermediate processed products into a consumer good. Such uses also may involve intermediate services such as machining, welding, grinding, and machine/industrial repair. Examples include:
• Manufacturing and assembly of clothing and fabricated products.
• Assembly of electronic computers, computer hardware components and related equipment, and other machinery, apparatus and supplies for the generation, storage, transmission, transformation and utilization of electrical energy.
• Assembly of industrial and commercial machinery and equipment.
• Assembly of finished products made entirely or mainly from wood for use in construction.
• Assembly of ferrous and non-ferrous metal products and a variety of metal and wire products.
• Manufacturing and assembly of products manufactured or assembled from plastic resins and from natural, synthetic or reclaimed rubber.
• Manufacturing and assembly of instruments for measuring, testing, analyzing and controlling, optical instruments and lenses, surveying and drafting instruments, medical instruments and equipment, photographic equipment, watches and clocks, and supplies associated with the previous products.
• Photographic processing labs.
• Manufacturing and assembly of glass and glass products, clay products, pottery, concrete and gypsum products, abrasive and asbestos products, and other secondary products from materials taken principally from the earth in the form of stone, clay and sand.
• Manufacturing and assembly of dyeing, finishing, coating, waterproofing and other treating of fiber, yarn and fabrics.
• Manufacturing and assembly of felt, lace goods, non-woven fabrics, and miscellaneous textiles.
• Other manufacturing and/or assembly processes in which processed or semi-processed materials are made or assembled into consumer products.
Level 1: Indoor manufacturing and assembly as an accessory use of up to one thousand (1,000) gross square feet.
Level 2: Indoor manufacturing and assembly of up to fifteen thousand (15,000) gross square feet.
Level 3: Indoor manufacturing and assembly exceeding fifteen thousand (15,000) gross square feet.
D. Contractor Yards. Construction or contracting business offices with area for associated interior or outdoor storage, repair or maintenance of heavy equipment, vehicles, and construction supplies and materials.
Level 1: Maintenance and storage facilities of up to five thousand (5,000) gross square feet and outdoor storage and yard area of up to twenty thousand (20,000) gross square feet, without storage and maintenance of heavy equipment.
Level 2: Maintenance and storage facilities exceeding five thousand (5,000) gross square feet and outdoor storage and yard area exceeding twenty thousand (20,000) gross square feet, or where storage and maintenance of heavy equipment occurs.
E. Flex Space. Mixed-use industrial buildings or parks adaptable to multiple use types which primarily serve a number of small- to medium-size tenants, which predominantly require direct access for truck deliveries and have limited or controlled on-site customer service, and which are generally comprised of adaptable open floor space with a delineated office area.
Level 1: Commercial office/warehouse/retail/residential uses combined within a single structure or structures, where residential is limited to live/work space and where a maximum of 35 percent may be office use and a maximum of 25 percent may be retail use.
Level 2: Commercial office/warehouse combined within a single structure or structures, where a maximum of 35 percent may be office use. In the Central Business District zone, Level 2 Flex Space may include retail to a maximum of 25 percent.
Level 3: Commercial office/secondary manufacturing and major assembly and limited manufacturing/assembly at the level allowed in the zoning district, combined within a single structure or structures, where a maximum of 25 percent may be office use and where a maximum of 50 percent may be warehouse use.
F. Food and Related Products. Uses which involve the processing of non-animal food materials, raw milk, ice manufacturing, and other food products manufacturing, processing, storage and packaging. This use type does not include animal rendering or rendering of animal products. Examples include bakeries that distribute products to many retail outlets; creameries and other dairy products manufacturing without on-site dairy animals; soft drink bottling plants, breweries, and distilleries; feed, cereal, and flour mills; vegetable oil manufacturing, refining or storage; yeast, starch, glucose and dextrin manufacturing; pickles, sauerkraut, and vinegar manufacturing; and sugar refining, all subject to appropriate state and local licensure.
Level 1: Indoor production operations and associated warehousing of up to ten thousand (10,000) gross square feet.
Level 2: Indoor production operations and associated warehousing exceeding ten thousand (10,000) gross square feet.
G. Industrial Services. Uses providing large scale or bulk services to commercial and industrial businesses but not directly to the consumer. Examples include clothes cleaning plants, bulk laundries, diaper services, power laundries, linen supply, dry cleaning plants, industrial launders, other laundry and garment services; and industrial services related strictly to industrial uses.
H. Mineral Extraction. The extraction of any natural substance, other than water, from the ground.
I. Motion Picture Production Studios. Warehouse-style facilities used in the production of motion pictures.
J. Off-Site Hazardous Waste Treatment and Storage Facilities. Facilities that treat and store hazardous substances and waste, extremely hazardous waste, or dangerous waste generated off-site and are authorized pursuant to RCW 70.105, including hazardous substance processing or handling and moderate risk waste fixed facilities. All contiguous land and structures used for recycling, reusing, reclaiming, transferring, storing, or treating hazardous substances and waste, extremely hazardous waste, or dangerous waste are included.
K. Outdoor Distribution and Freight Movement. Large-scale distribution of raw, manufactured, or processed products for one (1) or more businesses at a central, predominantly outside location. This use type does not include the distribution or movement of illegal substances. Examples include raw log storage and shipping container yards.
L. Printing and Publishing. Uses engaged in printing by one (1) or more common processes, such as letterpress, lithography, or screen; services for the printing trade, such as bookbinding and platemaking; and publishing newspapers, books and periodicals.
Level 1: Printing/pressing operation of up to five thousand (5,000) gross square feet.
Level 2: Printing/pressing operation exceeding five thousand (5,000) gross square feet.
M. Recycling Processor. Any large-scale buy-back recycling business or other industrial activity which specializes in collecting, storing and processing any waste, other than hazardous waste or municipal garbage, for reuse and which uses heavy mechanical equipment to do the processing, as distinguished from Buy-Back Recycling Center Commercial use types. Examples include facilities where commingled recyclables are sorted, baled or otherwise processed for transport off-site, which is referred to as a “clean” materials resource recovery facility. May include scrap tire piles of up to a total of two hundred (200) tires as an accessory use.
N. Research, Development, and Laboratories. Businesses primarily devoted to experimental research and development.
Level 1: Research, development, and laboratories with limited manufacturing/assembly at the level allowed in the zoning district.
Level 2: Research, development, and laboratories with secondary manufacturing and major assembly at the level allowed in the zoning district.
Level 3: Research, development, and laboratories and basic manufacturing.
O. Salvage/Wrecking Yards and Vehicle Storage Facilities. Uses that involve the dismantling and salvage of wrecked vehicles, vehicle parts, appliances, building materials, and other such items intended for reuse or resale, and the associated storage of vehicles, subject to LMC 5.28. May include usable and/or scrap tire piles of up to a total of five hundred (500) tires as an accessory use.
Level 1: Vehicle storage facilities dealing with the storage and/or impound of vehicles which are associated with the repair, sale or other permitted vehicle uses on the same site, or another site, and not associated with wrecking or salvage. Examples include impound yards; auto, boat, and commercial vehicle transporters excluding hulk haulers; and vehicle auctions including motor, recreational, sporting and commercial vehicles and heavy equipment.
Level 2: Salvage yards dealing with the dismantling and/or salvage of appliances, building materials, and other goods, other than vehicles and heavy equipment.
Level 3: Wrecking yards dealing with dismantling facilities for motor vehicles and salvage facilities for wrecked motor vehicles and vehicle parts. Includes dismantling, wrecking, hulk haulers, and salvage of motor, commercial, recreational, and sporting vehicles and heavy equipment.
P. Warehousing, Distribution and Freight Movement. Warehousing and distribution of manufactured or processed products for one (1) or more businesses and the large scale distribution of raw, manufactured or processed products for one (1) or more businesses at a central location. This use type does not include warehousing, distribution, or movement of illegal substances. Examples include grocery chain distribution centers and parcel delivery distribution centers, storage of fabricated concrete blocks, finished lumber storage yards, new automobile storage areas.
Level 1: Indoor facilities of up to ten thousand (10,000) gross square feet.
Level 2: Indoor facilities of up to twenty thousand (20,000) gross square feet and/or outside storage of up to five thousand (5,000) gross square feet.
Level 3: Indoor facilities exceeding twenty thousand (20,000) gross square feet and/or outside storage exceeding five thousand (5,000) gross square feet. [Ord. 695 § 4, 2018; Ord. 317 § 3, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.20.800 Agricultural Use Category – Land Use Types and Levels.
The Agricultural use category includes uses which typically might be found and are generally restricted to rural environments, but which can pose viable, inobtrusive land uses in portions of the urban environment that, by their nature, otherwise possess limited development potential.
A. Agriculture. The use of land for growing, producing, or harboring plants and animals.
Level 1: Crop and tree farms. Example include row crops, hay, alfalfa, orchards, Christmas trees, aquaculture, vineyards and wholesale nurseries without greenhouses.
Level 2: Wholesale nurseries with over seventy-five (75) percent of stock grown on-site, which may include associated greenhouses and other buildings.
Level 3: Raising or boarding of poultry or livestock, including fowl, swine, cattle, horses, sheep, goats, and exotic animals, but excluding domestic pets, which are otherwise regulated. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.20.900 Accessory Use Category – Land Use Types and Levels.
The Accessory use category includes those uses which are customarily and routinely found in conjunction with, and which are clearly incidental and secondary to, other listed uses, except as may be specifically limited by use levels otherwise listed herein.
A. Residential Accessory. Uses accessory to a primary permitted residential use or in conjunction with a residential use requiring a discretionary permit, subject to LMC 18A.50.140, Residential Accessory Buildings, and all applicable construction permits.
    1. Accessory dwelling unit, subject to the provisions of LMC 18A.70.310.
    2. Boarding Houses, subject to the provisions of LMC 18.70.320.
    3. Private docks and mooring facilities as regulated by applicable shoreline management regulations.
    4. Storage. 
        a. Attached carports or garages for the sole use of occupants of premises and their guests, for storage of personal household goods and motor, recreational, and sporting vehicles.
        b. Detached carports or garages are allowed in conjunction with an approved access and driveway.
        c. In addition to attached carports or garages, detached carports, garages, and other accessory buildings and structures such as hobbyist greenhouses and storage buildings for personal household goods and yard maintenance equipment, but excluding accessory dwelling units, are allowed.
    5. Outdoor storage of two (2) recreational/sporting/utility vehicles, subject to LMC 18A.50.145, Outdoor Storage of Recreational, Utility and Sporting Vehicles Accessory to Residential Uses.
    6. Home occupations and limited home occupations, subject to the provisions of LMC 18A.70.200.
    7. Minor maintenance of a vehicle owned by a resident or a relative of a resident of the site on which the activity is performed, where the activity is not performed for pay or the exchange of goods or services, and subject to the provision of LMC 18A.50.155, Vehicle Service and Repair Accessory to Residential Uses.
    8. Hobbyist crop or flower gardens which are non-commercial and serve one (1) or more neighborhood homes on an informal, cooperative basis, as distinguished from Outdoor Recreation uses.
    9. Civic use types, limited to “pea patch” or community gardens, “tot lots,” private parks and open space set-asides. May include private, on-site composting facility with less than ten (10) cubic yards’ capacity.
    10. On-site underground fuel storage tanks to serve a residential use.
    11. Antennae and satellite dishes for private telecommunication services, subject to specific standards, including siting criteria, set forth in LMC 18A.70.600, Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
    12. Decks and patios.
    13. Non-commercial recreational facilities and areas, indoor and outdoor, including swimming pools and tennis courts, for exclusive use by residents and guests.
    14. On-site soil reclamation in accordance with state regulations.
    15. Retaining walls, freestanding walls, and fences.
    16. Yard sales.
    17. Eating and Drinking Establishment Level 1, limited to ice cream trucks but excluding their storage.
    18. Continuation of equestrian uses, which are accessory to a single-family dwelling, already legally existing within the zone at the time of adoption of this title. Maintenance, repair and replacement of existing equestrian structures shall be permitted.
B. Civic Accessory. Uses accessory to a primary permitted civic use or in conjunction with a civic use requiring a discretionary permit, subject to all applicable construction permits.
    1. Professional Offices Level 1
    2. Daycare Facilities Level 3
    3. Eating and Drinking Establishment Level ½
    4. Storage buildings and outdoor storage, subject to the provisions of LMC 18A.50.170, Outdoor Storage and Commercial Yard Surfacing Standards, for maintenance equipment and goods utilized in the primary use.
    5. Antennae and satellite dishes for private telecommunication services, subject to specific standards, including siting criteria, set forth in LMC 18A.70.600, Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
    6. Facilities used in on-site grounds maintenance.
    7. On-site soil reclamation treatment in accordance with state regulations.
    8. Retaining walls, freestanding walls, and fences.
    9. Accessory caretaker's dwelling, subject to the provisions of LMC 18A.70.350.
    10. Private docks and mooring facilities as regulated by applicable shoreline management regulations.
    11. Community and Cultural Services Level 1/2, in conjunction with an Outdoor Recreation use type.
    12. Amusement and Recreation Level 1, in conjunction with an Outdoor Recreation use type.
    13. Lodging Level 2, in conjunction with an Outdoor Recreation use type.
C. Commercial Accessory. Uses accessory to a primary permitted commercial use or in conjunction with a commercial use requiring a discretionary permit, subject to all applicable construction permits.
    1. Professional Offices Level 1
    2. Daycare Facilities Level 3
    3. Eating and Drinking Establishment Level ½
    4. Outdoor storage, subject to the provisions of LMC 18A.50.170, Outdoor Storage and Commercial Yard Surfacing Standards.
    5. Antennae and satellite dishes for private telecommunication services, subject to specific standards, including siting criteria, set forth in LMC 18A.70.600, Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
    6. Facilities used in on-site grounds maintenance.
    7. On-site soil reclamation treatment in accordance with state regulations.
    8. Retaining walls, freestanding walls, and fences.
    9. Accessory caretaker's dwelling, subject to the provisions of LMC 18A.70.350.
    10. Unloading of shipping containers and semi-truck trailers may occur in non-residential zoning districts. Railroad cars, shipping containers, and semi-truck trailers may be kept in conjunction with commercial, industrial and transportation use types only where the placement and or use of the vessel is typically integral to the use type, and properly screened areas for storage and maintenance of such vessels is shown on the site plans for the facility. For existing facilities, areas for storage of shipping containers and semi-truck trailers, etc. may be approved by the Community Development Director via the zoning certification process outlined in LMC 18A.02.140.
D. Industrial Accessory. Uses accessory to a primary permitted industrial use or in conjunction with an industrial use requiring a discretionary permit, subject to all applicable construction permits.
    1. Professional Offices Level 1
    2. Daycare Facilities Level 3
    3. Eating and Drinking Establishment Level ½
    4. Outdoor storage, subject to the provisions of LMC 18A.50.170, Outdoor Storage and Commercial Yard Surfacing Standards.
    5. Antennae and satellite dishes for private telecommunication services, subject to specific standards, including siting criteria, set forth in LMC 18A.70.600, Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
    6. Incidental hazardous materials storage or use, subject to applicable federal and state regulations.
    7. Facilities used in on-site grounds maintenance.
    8. On-site soil reclamation treatment in accordance with state regulations.
    9. Retaining walls, freestanding walls, and fences.
    10. Accessory caretaker's dwelling, subject to the provisions of LMC 18A.70.350.
E. Agricultural Accessory. Uses accessory to a primary permitted agricultural use or in conjunction with an agricultural use requiring a discretionary permit, subject to all applicable construction permits.
    1. Retail sales of products grown on site.
    2. Wholesale nursery activities on the site.
    3. Outdoor storage, subject to the provisions of LMC 18A.50.170, Outdoor Storage and Commercial Yard Surfacing Standards.
    4. Incidental hazardous materials storage or use, limited to agricultural chemicals, subject to applicable federal and state regulations.
    5. Retaining walls, freestanding walls, and fences.
    6. Barns and outbuildings, except in the CZ zoning district. [Ord. 592 § 1, 2014; Ord. 307 § 14, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

Chapter 18A.30 ZONING DISTRICTS

Sections:
18A.30.100   Single-Family Residential Zoning Districts.
18A.30.110   Purpose - Single-Family Residential Zoning Districts.
18A.30.120   Applicability - Single-Family Residential Zoning Districts.
18A.30.130   Primary Permitted Uses - Single-Family Residential Zoning Districts.
18A.30.140   Administrative Uses - Single-Family Residential Zoning Districts.
18A.30.150   Conditional Uses - Single-Family Residential Zoning Districts.
18A.30.160   Development Standards - Single-Family Residential Zoning Districts.
18A.30.200   Mixed Residential Zoning Districts.
18A.30.210   Purpose - Mixed Residential Zoning Districts.
18A.30.220   Applicability - Mixed Residential Zoning Districts.
18A.30.230   Primary Permitted Uses - Mixed Residential Zoning Districts.
18A.30.240   Administrative Uses - Mixed Residential Zoning Districts.
18A.30.250   Conditional Uses - Mixed Residential Zoning Districts.
18A.30.260   Development Standards - Mixed Residential Zoning Districts.
18A.30.300   Multi-Family Zoning Districts.
18A.30.310   Purpose - Multi-Family Zoning Districts.
18A.30.320   Applicability - Multi-Family Zoning Districts.
18A.30.330   Primary Permitted Uses - Multi-Family Zoning Districts.
18A.30.340   Administrative Uses - Multi-Family Zoning Districts.
18A.30.350   Conditional Uses - Multi-Family Zoning Districts.
18A.30.360   Developmental Standards - Multi-Family Zoning Districts.
18A.30.400   Neighborhood Business Zoning Districts.
18A.30.410   Purpose - Neighborhood Business Zoning Districts.
18A.30.420   Applicability - Neighborhood Business Zoning Districts.
18A.30.430   Primary Permitted Uses - Neighborhood Business Zoning Districts.
18A.30.440   Administrative Uses - Neighborhood Business Zoning Districts.
18A.30.450   Conditional Uses – Neighborhood Business Zoning Districts.
18A.30.460   Development Standards – Neighborhood Business Zoning Districts.
18A.30.500   Commercial Zoning Districts.
18A.30.510   Purpose - Commercial Zoning Districts.
18A.30.520   Applicability - Commercial Zoning Districts.
18A.30.530   Primary Permitted Uses – Commercial Zoning Districts.
18A.30.540   Administrative Uses – Commercial Zoning Districts.
18A.30.550   Conditional Uses - Commercial Zoning Districts.
18A.30.560   Development Standards - Commercial Zoning Districts.
18A.30.600   Industrial Zoning Districts.
18A.30.610   Purpose - Industrial Zoning Districts.
18A.30.620   Applicability - Industrial Zoning Districts.
18A.30.630   Primary Permitted Uses - Industrial Zoning Districts.
18A.30.640   Administrative Uses – Industrial Zoning Districts.
18A.30.650   Conditional Uses – Industrial Zoning Districts.
18A.30.660   Development Standards - Industrial Zoning Districts.
18A.30.700   Military-Related Zoning Districts.
18A.30.710   Purpose - Military-Related Zoning Districts.
18A.30.720   Applicability - Military-Related Zoning Districts.
18A.30.730   Primary Permitted Uses - Military-Related Zoning Districts.
18A.30.740   Administrative Uses - Military-Related Zoning Districts.
18A.30.750   Conditional Uses - Military-Related Zoning Districts.
18A.30.760   Development Standards - Military-Related Zoning Districts.
18A.30.770   Intensity Limits - Military-Related Zoning Districts.
18A.30.780   Performance Criteria - Military-Related Zoning Districts.
18A.30.790   Noise Attenuation - Military-Related Zoning Districts.
18A.30.800   Public/Institutional Zoning District.
18A.30.810   Purpose - Public/Institutional Zoning District.
18A.30.820   Applicability - Public/Institutional Zoning District.
18A.30.830   Permitted Uses - Public/Institutional Zoning District.
18A.30.840   Development Standards - Public/Institutional Zoning District.
18A.30.850   Public Facilities Master Plan Standards - Public/Institutional Zoning District.
18A.30.900   Open Space/Recreation Zoning Districts.
18A.30.910   Purpose - Open Space/Recreation Zoning Districts.
18A.30.920   Applicability - Open Space/Recreation Zoning Districts.
18A.30.930   Primary Permitted Uses - Open Space/Recreation Zoning Districts.
18A.30.940   Administrative Uses - Open Space/Recreation Zoning Districts.
18A.30.950   Conditional Uses - Open Space/Recreation Zoning Districts.
18A.30.960   Development Standards - Open Space/Recreation Zoning Districts.

18A.30.100 Single-Family Residential Zoning Districts.

18A.30.110 Purpose - Single-Family Residential Zoning Districts.
The Residential 1 (R1) and Residential 2 (R2) zoning districts provide for a continuation of large residential lots in specific areas where a pattern of large lots and extensive tree coverage exists. These zoning districts seek to preserve the identity of these residential areas, preserve significant tree stands and riparian environments along lake shores and within stream corridors, and reduce traffic volumes in the east-west arterial corridors.
The Residential 3 (R3) and Residential 4 (R4) zoning districts are the City’s primary residential zones, which provide for single-family dwellings in established residential neighborhoods. The Residential 4 (R4) designation provides for increased residential density through smaller lot sizes and allowance for residential development comprising two units per lot. [Ord. 412 § 2, 2006; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.120 Applicability - Single-Family Residential Zoning Districts.
The R1 and R2 zoning districts are applicable to lands designated Residential Estate in the comprehensive plan.
The R3 and R4 zoning districts are applicable to lands designated Single Family in the comprehensive plan. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.130 Primary Permitted Uses - Single-Family Residential Zoning Districts.
The following uses are permitted within the Residential zoning districts, subject to approval of a zoning certification and all applicable development permits:
A. R1, R2, R3, and R4 Zoning Districts. 
    1. Single-Family Residential (Level 1)
    2. Type 1 Group Home
    3. Type 2 Group Home (Level 1)
    4. Daycare Facilities (Level 1)
    5. Outdoor Recreation (Level 1/2)
    6. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 1)
    7. Transportation Facilities (Level 1)
    8. Communication Facilities (Level 1)
    9. Electrical Facilities (Level 1)
    10. Natural Gas Facilities (Level 1)
    11. Sewage Collection Facilities
    12. Stormwater Facilities (Level 1)
    13. Water Supply Facilities (Level 1)
    14. Residential Accessory Uses
    15. Continuation of private and commercial equestrian facilities already legally existing within the zone at the time of adoption of this title. Maintenance, repair and replacement of existing equestrian structures shall be permitted.
B. R4 Zoning District. Single-Family Residential-Level 2 [Ord. 412 § 3, 2006; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.140 Administrative Uses - Single-Family Residential Zoning Districts.
The following uses are permitted within the Residential zoning districts, subject to approval of a administrative use permit and all applicable development permits:
A. R1, R2, R3, and R4 Zoning Districts. 
    1. Single Family Residential (Level 5)
    2. Type 2 Group Home (Level 2)
    3. Community and Cultural Services (Level 1)
    4. Daycare Facilities (Level 2)
    5. Religious Assembly (Level 1)
    6. Social Services (Level 1)
    7. Communication Facilities (Level 2)
    8. Lodging (Level 1)
B. R1 and R2 Zoning Districts. 
    1. Expansion of private and commercial equestrian facilities already legally existing within the zone at the time of adoption of this title. [Ord. 620 § 3, 2016; Ord. 412 § 4, 2006; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.150 Conditional Uses - Single-Family Residential Zoning Districts.
The following uses are permitted within the Residential zoning districts, subject to approval of a conditional use permit and all applicable development permits:
A. R1, R2, R3, and R4 Zoning Districts. 
    1. Community and Cultural Services (Level 2)
    2. Education (Level 1)
    3. Outdoor Recreation (Level 3)
    4. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 2)
    5. Public Safety Services (Level 1)
    6. Religious Assembly (Level 2)
    7. Electrical Facilities (Level 2)
    8. Pipelines
    9. Stormwater Facilities (Level 2/3)
    10. Waste Transfer Facilities (Level 1)
    11. Water Supply Facilities (Level 2/3)
B. R3 and R4 Zoning Districts. 
    1. Single-Family Residential (Level 4)
    2. Type 3 Group Home (Level 1)
    3. Hospice Care Center
    4. Government Administration Facilities (Level 1)
    5. Social Services (Level 2) [Ord. 483 § 10, 2008; Ord. 412 § 5, 2006; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.160 Development Standards - Single-Family Residential Zoning Districts.
Unless otherwise specifically modified by an adopted development agreement, in addition to the regulations and requirements contained in other sections of this title, the following property development standards apply to all land and buildings in the Residential zoning districts:
A. Density. The maximum density for the Residential zoning districts is the maximum number of dwelling units allowed per gross acre (dua) and shall be as follows:
    1. R1 zoning district: 1.45 dua
    2. R2 zoning district: 2.2 dua
    3. R3 zoning district: 4.8 dua
    4. R4 zoning district: 6.4 dua
B. Lot Size. The minimum lot sizes for the Residential zoning districts shall be as follows:
    1. R1 zoning district: 25,000 gsf
    2. R2 zoning district: 17,000 gsf
    3. R3 zoning district: 7,500 gsf
    4. R4 zoning district: 5,700 gsf
C. Lot Coverage. All building coverage and impervious surface maximums stated herein for the Residential zoning districts may be reduced at the time they are applied to individual properties, because of stormwater requirements. For existing lots in the R1 and R2 zoning districts that are less than ten thousand (10,000) gsf in size, the maximum building coverage and maximum impervious surface requirements of the R3 zoning district shall apply. The maximum lot coverage standards for the Residential zoning districts shall be as follows:
    1. R1 and R2 zoning districts. 
        a. Building coverage: 35%
        b. Impervious surface: 45%
    2. R3 zoning district. 
        a. Building coverage: 45%
        b. Impervious surface: 60%
    3. R4 zoning district. 
        a. Building coverage: 50%
        b. Impervious surface: 70%
D. Setbacks. For existing lots in the R1 and R2 zoning districts that are less than ten thousand (10,000) gsf in size, the setback requirements of the R3 zoning district shall apply. The minimum setbacks for the Residential zoning districts shall be as follows, except where increased setbacks due to landscaping and building/fire code requirements apply. No minimum setback is required between attached units.
    1. R1 and R2 zoning districts
        a. Front yard/street setback: 25 feet
        b. Garage/carport setback: 30 feet
        c. Principal arterial and state highway setback: 25 feet
        d. Rear yard setback: 20 feet
        e. Interior setback: 8 feet
    2. R3 and R4 zoning districts
        a. Front yard/street setback: 10 feet
        b. Garage/carport setback: 20 feet
        c. Principal arterial and state highway setback: 25 feet
        d. Rear yard setback: 10 feet
        e. Interior setback: 5 feet
        Note: No minimum setback is required between attached units.
E. Building Height. The maximum building height, not including any applicable height bonus, in the Residential zoning districts shall be thirty-five (35) feet.
F. Design. Design features shall be required as set forth in LMC 18A.50.200, Community Design.
G. Tree Preservation. Significant tree identification and preservation and/or replacement shall be required as set forth in LMC 18A.50.300, Tree Preservation.
H. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided as set forth in LMC 18A.50.400, Landscaping.
I. Parking. Parking shall conform to the requirements of LMC 18A.50.500, Parking.
J. Signs. Signage shall conform to the requirements of LMC 18A.50.600, Signs. [Ord. 483 § 11, 2008; Ord. 412 § 6, 2006; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.200 Mixed Residential Zoning Districts.

18A.30.210 Purpose - Mixed Residential Zoning Districts.
The purpose of the Mixed Residential 1 (MR1) and Mixed Residential 2 (MR2) zoning districts is to promote residential renewal to small-lot detached single family residential dwellings, attached single-family dwellings, and two-family residential development. Small scale multi-family residential development is permitted in the MR-2 zone. These districts provide for moderate residential density using a variety of urban housing types and designs. The mix of housing may take a variety of forms, either mixed within a single site or mixed within a general area, with varied dwelling types. Development standards for the Mixed Residential zoning districts are intended to encourage increased residential densities. [Ord. 412 § 7, 2006; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.220 Applicability - Mixed Residential Zoning Districts.
The MR1 and MR2 zoning districts are applicable to land designated Mixed Residential in the comprehensive plan. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.230 Primary Permitted Uses - Mixed Residential Zoning Districts.
The following uses are permitted within the Mixed Residential zoning districts, subject to approval of a zoning certification and all applicable development permits:
A. MR1 Zoning District. 
    1. Single-Family Residential (Level 1/2/3)
    2. Co-Housing
    3. Type 1 Group Home
    4. Type 2 Group Home (Level 1)
    5. Community and Cultural Services (Level 1)
    6. Daycare Facilities (Level 1)
    7. Outdoor Recreation (Level 1/2)
    8. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 1)
    9. Religious Assembly (Level 1)
    10. Social Services (Level 1)
    11. Transportation (Level 1)
    12. Communication Facilities (Level 1)
    13. Electrical Facilities (Level 1)
    14. Natural Gas Facilities (Level 1)
    15. Sewage Collection Facilities
    16. Stormwater Facilities (Level 1)
    17. Water Supply Facilities (Level 1)
    18. Residential Accessory Uses
    19. Continuation of private and commercial equestrian facilities already legally existing within the zone at the time of adoption of this title. Maintenance, repair and replacement of existing equestrian structures shall be permitted.
B. MR2 Zoning District. 
    1. Single-Family Residential (Level 1), provided that the lot size does not exceed 7,950 sq. ft.
    2. Single-Family Residential (Level 2/3)
    3. Multifamily Dwelling (Level 1)
    4. Co-Housing
    5. Type 1 Group Home
    6. Type 2 Group Home (Level 1)
    7. Community and Cultural Services (Level 1)
    8. Daycare Facilities (Level 1)
    9. Outdoor Recreation (Level 1/2)
    10. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 1)
    11. Religious Assembly (Level 1)
    12. Social Services (Level 1)
    13. Transportation (Level 1)
    14. Communication Facilities (Level 1)
    15. Electrical Facilities (Level 1)
    16. Natural Gas Facilities (Level 1)
    17. Sewage Collection Facilities
    18. Stormwater Facilities (Level 1)
    19. Water Supply Facilities (Level 1)
    20. Residential Accessory Uses
    21. Continuation of private and commercial equestrian facilities already legally existing within the zone at the time of adoption of this title. Maintenance, repair and replacement of existing equestrian structures shall be permitted. [Ord. 412 § 8, 2006; Ord. 277 § 1, 2002; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.240 Administrative Uses - Mixed Residential Zoning Districts.
The following uses are permitted within the Mixed Residential zoning districts, subject to approval of an administrative use permit and all applicable development permits:
A. MR1 and MR2 Zoning Districts. 
    1. Type 2 Group Home (Level 2)
    2. Hospice Care Center
    3. Community and Cultural Services (Level 2)
    4. Daycare Facilities (Level 2)
    5. Government Administration Facilities (Level 1)
    6. Religious Assembly (Level 2)
    7. Social Services (Level 2)
    8. Communication Facilities (Level 2) [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.250 Conditional Uses - Mixed Residential Zoning Districts.
The following uses are permitted within the Mixed Residential zoning districts, subject to approval of a conditional use permit and all applicable development permits:
A. MR1 and MR2 Zoning Districts. 
    1. Type 2 Group Home (Level 3)
    2. Type 3 Group Home (Level 1)
    3. Education (Level 1)
    4. Outdoor Recreation (Level 3)
    5. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 2)
    6. Public Safety Services (Level 1)
    7. Electrical Facilities (Level 2)
    8. Pipelines
    9. Stormwater Facilities (Level 2/3)
    10. Waste Transfer Facilities (Level 1)
    11. Water Supply Facilities (Level 2/3)
B. MR1 Zoning District. 
    1. Single-Family Residential (Level 4)
C. MR2 Zoning District. 
    1. Assisted Living Facilities
    2. Nursing Home [Ord. 483 § 12, 2008; Ord. 412 § 9, 2006; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.260 Development Standards - Mixed Residential Zoning Districts.
Unless otherwise specifically modified by an adopted development agreement, in addition to the
regulations and requirements contained in other sections of this title, the following property development standards apply to all land and buildings in the Mixed Residential zoning districts:
A. Density. The maximum density for the Mixed Residential zoning districts is the maximum number of dwelling units allowed per gross acre (dua) and shall be as follows:
    1. MR1 zoning district: 8.7 dua
    2. MR2 zoning district: 14.6 dua
B. Lot size. The minimum lot size for the Mixed Residential zoning districts shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet for one (1) unit, and the following minimum lot size for developments in excess of one (1) unit:
    1. MR1 zoning district: 5,000 gsf/unit
    2. MR2 zoning district: 3,000 gsf/unit for two or more units
    For the purposes of this subsection, development standards regarding minimum lot size shall apply where multiple adjacent parcels are being created or developed with structures simultaneously as part of a common development plan.
C. Lot Coverage. All building coverage and impervious surface maximums stated herein for the Mixed Residential zoning districts may be reduced at the time they are applied to individual properties, because of stormwater requirements. For existing lots in the MR1 and MR2 zoning districts that are less than six thousand (6,000) gsf in size, the maximum building coverage and impervious surface requirements of the R3 zoning district shall apply, otherwise the maximum lot coverage standards for the Mixed Residential zoning districts shall be as follows:
    1. MR1 zoning district
        a. Building coverage 55%
        b. Impervious surface 70%
    2. MR2 zoning district
        a. Building coverage 60%
        b. Impervious surface 75%
D. Setbacks. The required setbacks for the Mixed Residential zoning districts shall be as follows, except where increased setbacks due to landscaping and building/fire code requirements apply:
    1. MR1 and MR2 zoning districts
        a. Front yard/street setback: 5 feet
        b. Garage/carport setback: 20 feet
        c. Principal arterial and state highway setback: 25 feet
        d. Rear yard setback: 5 feet
        e. Interior setback for attached units 0 feet
        f. Interior setback for detached units: 5 feet
E. Building Height. The maximum building height, not including any applicable height bonus, for the Mixed Residential zoning districts shall be as follows:
    1. MR1 zoning district: 35 feet
    2. MR2 zoning district: 50 feet
    Provided, that when structured parking is provided for attached units, an additional height bonus of ten (10) feet shall apply.
F. Design. Design features shall be required as set forth in LMC 18A.50.200, Community Design.
G. Tree Preservation. Significant tree identification and preservation and/or replacement shall be required as set forth in LMC 18A.50.300, Tree Preservation.
H. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided as set forth in LMC 18A.50.400, Landscaping.
I. Parking. Parking shall conform to the requirements of LMC 18A.50.500, Parking.
J. Signs. Signage shall conform to the requirements of LMC 18A.50.600, Signs. [Ord. 483 § 13, 2008; Ord. 412 § 10, 2006; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.300 Multi-Family Zoning Districts.

18A.30.310 Purpose - Multi-Family Zoning Districts.
The purpose of the Multifamily 1 (MF1) zoning district is to provide for a variety of medium-density housing types and designs offering a wide choice of living accommodations for families of diverse composition and lifestyles. The designation incorporates a combination of urban design elements to enhance the living environment while integrating the housing into a neighborhood. Urban design elements such as private and public open space, pedestrian orientation and connections, and security are integrated into the housing to create a high standard of community cohesion and character.
The Multifamily 2 (MF2) zoning district provides for high-density housing types and designs, especially of a multiple-story design, that combine urban design elements to enhance the living environment. Urban design elements stress pedestrian orientation and connections, security, transportation, and integration of housing.
The Multifamily 3 (MF3) zoning district is intended to integrate urban, high-density, multi-story housing in close proximity to a principal or minor arterial, with commercial/residential districts. The MF 3 zoning districts are predominantly located adjacent to land zoned NC2, CBD, or SD. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.320 Applicability - Multi-Family Zoning Districts.
The MF1 zoning district is applicable to lands designated Multi-Family in the comprehensive plan.
The MF2 and MF3 zoning districts are applicable to lands designated High Density Multi-Family in the comprehensive plan. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.330 Primary Permitted Uses - Multi-Family Zoning Districts.
The following uses are permitted within the Multifamily zoning districts, subject to approval of a zoning certification and all applicable development permits:
A. MF 1 Zoning District. 
    1. Single-Family Residential (Level 3)
B. MF1, MF2, and MF3 Zoning Districts. 
    1. Multifamily Residential (Level 1 and 2)
    2. Co-Housing
    3. Type 1 Group Home
    4. Type 2 Group Home (Level 1)
    5. Assisted Living Facilities
    6. Nursing Home
    7. Hospice Care Center
    8. Community and Cultural Services (Level 1)
    9. Daycare Facilities (Level 1/2)
    10. Government Administration Facilities (Level 1)
    11. Outdoor Recreation (Level 1/2)
    12. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 1)
    13. Religious Assembly (Level 1)
    14. Social Services (Level 1)
    15. Transportation (Level 1)
    16. Communication Facilities (Level 1)
    17. Electrical Facilities (Level 1)
    18. Natural Gas Facilities (Level 1)
    19. Sewage Collection Facilities
    20. Stormwater Facilities (Level 1)
    21. Water Supply Facilities (Level 1)
    22. Residential Accessory Uses
    23. Continuation of private and commercial equestrian facilities already legally existing within the zone at the time of adoption of this title. Maintenance, repair and replacement of existing equestrian structures shall be permitted. [Ord. 412 § 11, 2006; Ord. 277 § 1, 2002; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.340 Administrative Uses - Multi-Family Zoning Districts.
The following uses are permitted within the Multifamily zoning districts, subject to approval of an administrative use permit and all applicable development permits:
A. MF1, MF2, and MF3 Zoning Districts. 
    1. Type 2 Group Home (Level 3)
    2. Community and Cultural Services (Level 2)
    3. Daycare Facilities (Level 3)
    4. Outdoor Recreation (Level 3)
    5. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 2)
    6. Religious Assembly (Level 2)
    7. Social Services (Level 2)
    8. Communication Facilities (Level 2)
    9. Stormwater Facilities (Level 2)
    10. Waste Transfer Facilities (Level 1)
B. Solely within that portion of the MF3 zoning districts located within the Lakewood Station district as designated in the comprehensive plan, and solely in conjunction with Multifamily Dwelling Level 3 uses, the following uses shall be permitted subject to approval of an administrative use permit and all applicable development permits:
    1. Building/Garden Supply and Nurseries (Level 1)
    2. Convenience Commercial (Level 1)
    3. Eating and Drinking Establishment (Level 3/4)
    4. Personal Services (Level 1)
    5. Professional Offices (Level 1)
    6. Sales of General Merchandise (Level 1)
    7. Sales of Secondhand Property (Level 1) [Ord. 397 § 5, 2005; Ord. 307 § 15, 2003; Ord. 277 § 1, 2002; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.350 Conditional Uses - Multi-Family Zoning Districts.
The following uses are permitted within the Multifamily zoning districts, subject to approval of a conditional use permit and all applicable development permits:
A. MF1, MF2, and MF3 Zoning Districts. 
    1. Type 3 Group Home (Level 1/2/3)
    2. Education (Level 1/2)
    3. Public Safety Services (Level 1)
    4. Electrical Facilities (Level 2)
    5. Pipelines
    6. Stormwater Facilities (Level 3)
    7. Water Supply Facilities (Level 2/3) [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.360 Developmental Standards - Multi-Family Zoning Districts.
Unless otherwise specifically modified by an adopted development agreement, in addition to the regulations and requirements contained in other sections of this title, the following property development standards apply to all land and buildings in the Multifamily zoning districts:
A. Density. The maximum density for the Multifamily zoning districts shall be as follows:
    1. MF1 zoning district: 22 dua
    2. MF2 zoning district: 35 dua
    3. MF3 zoning district: 54 dua
B. Lot Size. There is no minimum established lot size for the Multifamily zoning districts. Proposed uses and their associated densities within these zoning districts, and the applicable community design standards shall be used to establish the minimum lot size for a project.
C. Lot Coverage. All building coverage and impervious surface maximums stated herein for the Multifamily zoning districts may be reduced at the time they are applied to individual properties, because of stormwater requirements. The maximum building coverage for the Multifamily zoning districts shall be sixty (60) percent. The maximum impervious surface coverage for the Multifamily zoning districts shall be seventy (70) percent.
D. Setbacks. The minimum yard setbacks for the Multifamily zoning districts shall be as follows, except where increased setbacks due to landscaping and building/fire code requirements apply:
    1. MF1, MF2, and MF3 Zoning Districts. 
        a. Front yard/street setback: 15 feet
        b. Garage/carport setback: 20 feet
        c. Principal arterial and state: highway setback: 25 feet
        d. Rear yard setback: 15 feet
        e. Interior setback: 8 feet
E. Building Height. The maximum building height, not including any applicable height bonus, for the Multifamily zoning districts shall be as follows:
    1. MF1 zoning district: 45 feet
    2. MF2 zoning district: 65 feet
    3. MF3 zoning district: 80 feet
    Provided, that when structured parking is utilized for attached units, an additional height bonus of ten (10) feet shall apply.
F. Design. Design features shall be required as set forth in LMC 18A.50.200, Community Design.
G. Tree Preservation. Significant tree identification and preservation and/or replacement shall be required as set forth in LMC 18A.50.300, Tree Preservation.
H. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided as set forth in LMC 18A.50.400, Landscaping.
I. Parking. Parking shall conform to the requirements of LMC 18A.50.500, Parking.
J. Signs. Signage shall conform to the requirements of LMC 18A.50.600, Signs. [Ord. 483 § 14, 2008; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.400 Neighborhood Business Zoning Districts.

18A.30.410 Purpose - Neighborhood Business Zoning Districts.
The Arterial Residential/Commercial (ARC) zoning district provides for continuance of residential uses, many of which are existing, along busy City streets while permitting the incorporation of low-intensity and low-impact commercial uses into these compact areas.
The Neighborhood Commercial 1 (NC1) zoning district is intended to foster a sense of neighborhood identity and provide limited services within a neighborhood. The district provides for a small-scale mix of activities, including residential, retail, office, and local services, which serve the surrounding neighborhood.
The Neighborhood Commercial 2 (NC2) zoning district is intended to foster a sense of urban community in Lakewood. The district provides for a concentrated mix of activities, including residential, retail, office, and local services, which may serve the surrounding neighborhood or may serve more than one (1) neighborhood and attract people from other areas. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.420 Applicability - Neighborhood Business Zoning Districts.
The ARC zoning district is applicable to lands designated Arterial Corridor in the comprehensive plan.
The NC1 and NC2 zoning districts are applicable to lands designated Neighborhood Business District in the comprehensive plan. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.430 Primary Permitted Uses - Neighborhood Business Zoning Districts.
The following uses are permitted within the Neighborhood Business zoning districts, subject to approval of a zoning certification and all applicable development permits:
A. ARC Zoning District. 
    1. Single Family Residential (Level 1/2/3)
    2. Multifamily Residential (Level 1/3)
    3. Type 1 Group Home
    4. Type 2 Group Home (Level 1/2)
    5. Community and Cultural Services (Level 1)
    6. Daycare Facilities (Level 1/2)
    7. Outdoor Recreation (Level 1/2)
    8. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 1)
    9. Religious Assembly (Level 1)
    10. Social Services (Level 1)
    11. Transportation (Level 1)
    12. Communication Facilities (Level 1)
    13. Electrical Facilities (Level 1)
    14. Natural Gas Facilities (Level 1)
    15. Sewage Collection Facilities
    16. Stormwater Facilities (Level 1)
    17. Water Supply Facilities (Level 1)
    18. Business Services
    19. Personal Services (Level 1)
    20. Professional Offices (Level 1)
    21. Rental/Repair Services (Level 1)
    22. Sales of General Merchandise (Level 1)
    23. Sales of Secondhand Property (Level 1)
    24. Residential Accessory Uses
    25. Civic Accessory Uses
    26. Commercial Accessory Uses
B. NC1 Zoning District. 
    1. Single Family Residential (Level 2/3)
    2. Multifamily Residential (Level 1/3)
    3. Co-Housing
    4. Assisted Living Facilities
    5. Nursing Home
    6. Government Administration Facilities (Level 1)
    7. Community and Cultural Services (Level 1/2)
    8. Daycare Facilities (Level 1/2)
    9. Outdoor Recreation (Level 1/2)
    10. Postal Services (Level 1)
    11. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 1)
    12. Religious Assembly (Level 1/2)
    13. Social Services (Level 1/2)
    14. Transportation (Level 1)
    15. Communication Facilities (Level 1)
    16. Electrical Facilities (Level 1)
    17. Natural Gas Facilities (Level 1)
    18. Sewage Collection Facilities
    19. Stormwater Facilities (Level 1)
    20. Waste Transfer Facilities (Level 1)
    21. Water Supply Facilities (Level 1)
    22. Amusement and Recreation (Level 1)
    23. Building/Garden Supply and Nurseries (Level 1)
    24. Business Services
    25. Convenience Commercial (Level 1)
    26. Eating and Drinking Establishment (Level 1/2)
    27. Food Stores (Level 1)
    28. Personal Services (Level 1/2)
    29. Pet Sales and Services (Level 1)
    30. Private Training School (Level 1)
    31. Professional Offices (Level 1)
    32. Rental and Repair Services (Level 1)
    33. Sales of General Merchandise (Level 1)
    34. Sales of Secondhand Property (Level 1)
    35. Residential Accessory Uses
    36. Civic Accessory Uses
    37. Commercial Accessory Uses
C. NC2 Zoning District. 
    1. Single Family Residential (Level 2/3)
    2. Multifamily Residential (Level 1/3)
    3. Assisted Living Facilities
    4. Continuing Care Retirement Community
    5. Nursing Home
    6. Government Administration Facilities (Level 1/2)
    7. Community and Cultural Services (Level 1/2)
    8. Daycare Facilities (Level 1/2)
    9. Health Services
    10. Outdoor Recreation (Level 1/2)
    11. Postal Services (Level 1)
    12. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 1)
    13. Religious Assembly (Level 1/2)
    14. Social Services (Level 1/2)
    15. Transportation (Level 1)
    16. Communication Facilities (Level 1)
    17. Electrical Facilities (Level 1)
    18. Natural Gas Facilities (Level 1)
    19. Sewage Collection Facilities
    20. Stormwater Facilities (Level 1)
    21. Waste Transfer Facilities (Level 1)
    22. Water Supply Facilities (Level 1)
    23. Amusement and Recreation (Level 1)
    24. Building/Garden Supply and Nurseries (Level 1/2)
    25. Business Services
    26. Convenience Commercial (Level 1/2)
    27. Eating and Drinking Establishment (Level 1/2/3)
    28. Food Stores (Level 1)
    29. Funeral Services (Level 1)
    30. Personal Services (Level 1/2)
    31. Pet Sales and Services (Level 1)
    32. Private Training School (Level 1/2)
    33. Professional Offices (Level 1/2)
    34. Rental and Repair Services (Level 1)
    35. Sales of General Merchandise (Level 1/2)
    36. Sales of Secondhand Property (Level 1)
    37. Limited Manufacturing/Assembly (Level 1)
    38. Printing and Publishing (Level 1)
    39. Residential Accessory Uses
    40. Civic Accessory Uses
    41. Commercial Accessory Uses [Ord. 483 § 15, 2008; Ord. 462 § 5, 2007; Ord. 412 § 12, 2006; Ord. 397 § 6, 2005; Ord. 277 § 1, 2002; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.440 Administrative Uses - Neighborhood Business Zoning Districts.
The following uses are permitted within the Neighborhood Business zoning districts, subject to approval of an administrative use permit and all applicable development permits:
A. ARC Zoning District. 
    1. Type 2 Group Home (Level 3)
    2. Lodging (Level 3)
    3. Limited Manufacturing/Assembly (Level 1)
B. NC1 Zoning District. 
    1. Type 2 Group Home (Level 3)
    2. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 2)
    3. Drive-Through Facilities, limited to coffee kiosks
    4. Professional Offices (Level 2)
    5. Sales of General Merchandise (Level 2)
    6. Printing and Publishing (Level 1)
C. NC2 Zoning District. 
    1. Multifamily Residential (Level 2), limited solely to sites that do not front onto a classified principal arterial street and whose dimensions are such that the average length of side property lines is twenty (20) percent or greater than the length of the property line at the street frontage; provided, that the resulting housing shall be limited in perpetuity to persons fifty-five (55) or more years of age.
    2. Type 2 Group Home (Level 3)
    3. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 2)
    4. Convenience Commercial (Level 3)
    5. Drive-Through Facilities [Ord. 567 § 1, 2013; Ord. 462 § 6, 2007; Ord. 397 § 7, 2005; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.450 Conditional Uses – Neighborhood Business Zoning Districts.
The following uses are permitted within the Neighborhood Business zoning districts, subject to approval of a conditional use permit and all applicable development permits:
A. ARC Zoning District. 
    1. Single-Family Detached Dwelling (Level 3)
    2. Type 3 Group Home (Level 1/2)
    3. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 2)
    4. Public Safety Services (Level 1)
    5. Communication Facilities (Level 2)
    6. Electrical Facilities (Level 2)
    7. Pipelines
    8. Stormwater Facilities (Level 2/3)
    9. Water Supply Facilities (Level 2/3)
    10. Printing and Publishing (Level 1)
B. NC1 Zoning District. 
    1. Type 3 Group Home (Level 1/2)
    2. Public Safety Services (Level 1)
    3. Communication Facilities (Level 2)
    4. Electrical Facilities (Level 2)
    5. Pipelines
    6. Stormwater Facilities (Level 2/3)
    7. Water Supply Facilities (Level 2/3)
    8. Eating and Drinking Establishments (Level 3)
C. NC2 Zoning District. 
    1. Type 3 Group Home (Level 1/2)
    2. Public Safety Services (Level 1)
    3. Communication Facilities (Level 2)
    4. Electrical Facilities (Level 2)
    5. Pipelines
    6. Stormwater Facilities (Level 2/3)
    7. Water Supply Facilities (Level 2/3)
    8. Food Stores (Level 2)
    9. Motor Vehicles Sales and Rental (Level 1)
    10. Motor Vehicles Service and Repair (Level 2) [Ord. 697 § 3, 2018; Ord. 567 § 2, 2013; Ord. 483 § 16, 2008; Ord. 397 § 8, 2005; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.460 Development Standards – Neighborhood Business Zoning Districts.
Unless otherwise specifically modified by an adopted development agreement, in addition to the regulations and requirements contained in other sections of this title, the following property development standards apply to all land and buildings in the Neighborhood Business zoning districts:
A. Density. The maximum density for the Neighborhood Business zoning districts is the maximum number of dwelling units allowed per gross acre (dua) and shall be as follows:
    1. ARC zoning district: 15 dua
    2. NC1 zoning district: 22 dua
    3. NC2 zoning district: 35 dua
B. Lot Size. The minimum lot size for the ARC zoning district is five thousand (5,000) gross square feet (gsf), plus 2,750 gsf for each dwelling unit over one (1) unit, where applicable.
C. Lot Coverage. All building coverage and impervious surface maximums stated herein for the Neighborhood Business zoning districts may be reduced at the time they are applied, because of stormwater requirements. The maximum lot coverage standards for the Neighborhood Business zoning districts shall be as follows:
    1. ARC zoning district. 
        a. Building coverage: 50%
        b. Impervious surface: 60%
    2. NC1 zoning district. 
        a. Building coverage: 70%
        b. Impervious surface: 80%
    3. NC2 zoning district. 
        a. Building coverage: 80%
        b. Impervious surface: 90%
D. Setbacks. The minimum yard setbacks for the Neighborhood Business zoning districts shall be as follows, except where increased setbacks due to landscaping and building/fire code requirements apply:
    1. ARC zoning district. 
        a. Front yard/street setback: 0 feet
        b. Garage/carport setback: 20 feet
        c. Rear yard setback: 0 feet
        d. Interior setback: 0 feet
    2. NC1 and NC2 zoning districts. 
        a. Front yard/street setback: 0 feet
        b. Garage/carport setback: 20 feet
        c. Rear yard setback: 0 feet
        d. Interior setback: 0 feet
E. Building Height. The maximum building height, not including any applicable height bonus, in the Neighborhood Business zoning districts shall be as follows:
    1. ARC zoning district: 40 feet
    2. NC1 zoning district: 50 feet
    3. NC2 zoning district: 60 feet
F. Design. Design features shall be required as set forth in LMC 18A.50.200, Community Design.
G. Tree Preservation. Significant tree identification and preservation and/or replacement shall be required as set forth in LMC 18A.50.300, Tree Preservation.
H. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided as set forth in LMC 18A.50.400, Landscaping.
I. Parking. Parking shall conform to the requirements of LMC 18A.50.500, Parking.
J. Signs. Signage shall conform to the requirements of LMC 18A.50.600, Signs. [Ord. 483 § 17, 2008; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.500 Commercial Zoning Districts.

18A.30.510 Purpose - Commercial Zoning Districts.
The Transit-Oriented Commercial (TOC) zoning district is an interactive mixture of uses which focus on regional transportation networks while providing for urban design, people orientation, and connectivity between uses and transportation routes.
The Central Business District (CBD) zoning district is the primary retail, office, social, urban residential, and government center of the City. The complementary and interactive mixture of uses and urban design provides for a regional intensity and viability with a local character. The regional focus and vitality of the district is evident in the urban density, intensity, and composition of the uses in the district. Local character is reflected in the district’s design, people orientation, and connectivity between uses, structures, and public spaces, that foster a sense of community.
The Commercial 1 (C1), Commercial 2 (C2), and Commercial 3 (C3) zoning districts promote employment, services, retail, and business uses serving and linking neighborhoods to Lakewood’s major transportation networks. The geographic relationship of the corridors to major road networks and their limited integration with adjacent neighborhoods promote employment, services, retail, and business/light industrial uses linked to access the major transportation networks. The C3 zoning district is distinguished by its arterial location and focus on “big-box” type uses which form an anchor for a large-scale commercial development. [Ord. 525 § 5, 2010; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.520 Applicability - Commercial Zoning Districts.
The TOC zoning district is only applicable to lands designated Corridor Commercial in the comprehensive plan which are also within the Lakewood Station District established in the comprehensive plan.
The CBD zoning district is applicable to lands designated Central Business District in the comprehensive plan.
The C1, C2, and C3 zoning districts are applicable to lands designated Corridor Commercial in the comprehensive plan. [Ord. 525 § 6, 2010; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.530 Primary Permitted Uses – Commercial Zoning Districts.
The following uses are permitted within the Commercial zoning districts, subject to approval of a zoning certification and all applicable development permits:
A. TOC Zoning District. 
    1. Multifamily Dwelling (Level 3)
    2. Assisted Living Facilities
    3. Nursing Home
    4. Community and Cultural Services (Level 1/2/3)
    5. Daycare Facilities (Level 1/2)
    6. Health Services
    7. Outdoor Recreation (Level 1/2)
    8. Postal Services (Level 1/2)
    9. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 1/2)
    10. Religious Assembly (Level 1/2/3)
    11. Social Services (Level 1/2)
    12. Transportation (Level 1/2/3)
    13. Communication Facilities (Level 1/2)
    14. Electrical Facilities (Level 1)
    15. Natural Gas Facilities (Level 1)
    16. Sewage Collection Facilities
    17. Stormwater Facilities (Level 1)
    18. Waste Transfer Facilities (Level 1)
    19. Water Supply Facilities (Level 1)
    20. Amusement and Recreation (Level 1/2/3/4)
    21. Business Services
    22. Convenience Commercial (Level 1)
    23. Eating and Drinking Establishment (Level 1/2/3/4)
    24. Food Stores (Level 1/2)
    25. Lodging (Level 3)
    26. Motor Vehicle Services and Repair (Level 1/2)
    27. Personal Services (Level 1/2)
    28. Professional Offices (Level 1/2/3)
    29. Sales of General Merchandise (Level 1/2/3)
    30. Civic Accessory Uses
    31. Commercial Accessory Uses
B. CBD Zoning District. 
    1. Multifamily Dwelling (Level 2/3)
    2. Co-Housing
    3. Assisted Living Facilities
    4. Continuing Care Retirement Community
    5. Nursing Home
    6. Community and Cultural Services (Level 1/2/3)
    7. Daycare Facilities (Level 1/2)
    8. Government Administration Facilities (Level 1/2/3)
    9. Health Services
    10. Outdoor Recreation (Level 1/2)
    11. Postal Services (Level 1/2)
    12. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 1)
    13. Religious Assembly (Level 1/2/3)
    14. Social Services (Level 1/2)
    15. Transportation (Level 1/2/3)
    16. Communication Facilities (Level 1/2/3/4)
    17. Electrical Facilities (Level 1)
    18. Natural Gas Facilities (Level 1)
    19. Sewage Collection Facilities
    20. Stormwater Facilities (Level 1)
    21. Waste Transfer Facilities (Level 1)
    22. Water Supply Facilities (Level 1/2)
    23. Amusement and Recreation (Level 1/2/3)
    24. Building/Garden Supply and Nurseries (Level 1/2/3)
    25. Business Services
    26. Convenience Commercial (Level 1/2)
    27. Eating and Drinking Establishment (Level 1/2/3/4)
    28. Food Stores (Level 1/2)
    29. Funeral Services (Level 1)
    30. Lodging (Level 3)
    31. Motor Vehicle Service and Repair (Level 1/2)
    32. Personal Services (Level 1/2)
    33. Pet Sales and Services (Level 1/2)
    34. Private Training School
    35. Professional Offices (Level 1/2/3)
    36. Rental and Repair Services (Level 1/2/3)
    37. Sales of General Merchandise (Level 1/2/3/4)
    38. Sales of New and Secondhand Property (Level 1/2)
    39. Limited Manufacturing/Assembly (Level 1)
    40. Printing and Publishing (Level 1/2)
    41. Civic Accessory Uses
    42. Commercial Accessory Uses
C. C1 Zoning District. 
    1. Community and Cultural Services (Level 1/2/3)
    2. Daycare Facilities (Level 2)
    3. Government Administration Facilities (Level 1/2)
    4. Health Services
    5. Outdoor Recreation (Level 1/2)
    6. Postal Services (Level 1)
    7. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 1/2)
    8. Religious Assembly (Level 1/2/3)
    9. Social Services (Level 1/2/3)
    10. Transportation (Level 1/2)
    11. Communication Facilities (Level 1/2/3/4)
    12. Electrical Facilities (Level 1/2)
    13. Natural Gas Facilities (Level 1)
    14. Sewage Collection Facilities
    15. Stormwater Facilities (Level 1)
    16. Waste Transfer Facilities (Level 1)
    17. Water Supply Facilities (Level 1/2)
    18. Amusement and Recreation (Level 1/2/3/4)
    19. Building/Garden Supply and Nurseries (Level 1/2/3)
    20. Business Services
    21. Convenience Commercial (Level 1/2/3)
    22. Drive-Through Facilities
    23. Eating and Drinking Establishment (Level 1/2/3/4)
    24. Food Stores (Level 1/2)
    25. Funeral Services (Level 1)
    26. Lodging (Level 3)
    27. Manufactured and Modular Homes Sales
    28. Motor Vehicle Service and Repair (Level 1/2/3)
    29. Motor Vehicle Sales and Rental (Level 1)
    30. Personal Services (Level 1/2)
    31. Pet Sales and Services (Level 1/2)
    32. Private Training School (Level 1/2)
    33. Professional Offices (Level 1)
    34. Rental and Repair Services (Level 1/2/3)
    35. Sales of General Merchandise (Level 1/2)
    36. Sales of New and Secondhand Property (Level 1/2/3)
    37. Storage (Level 1)
    38. Limited Manufacturing/Assembly (Level 1)
    39. Contractor Yards (Level 1)
    40. Flex Space (Level 1/2)
    41. Motion Picture Production Studios
    42. Printing and Publishing (Level 1/2)
    43. Warehousing, Distribution and Freight Movement (Level 1/2)
    44. Civic Accessory Uses
    45. Commercial Accessory Uses
    46. Industrial Accessory Uses
D. C2 Zoning District. 
    1. Community and Cultural Services (Level 1/2/3)
    2. Daycare Facilities (Level 2)
    3. Government Administration Facilities (Level 1/2)
    4. Health Services
    5. Outdoor Recreation (Level 1/2)
    6. Postal Services (Level 1/2)
    7. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 1/2)
    8. Religious Assembly (Level 1/2/3)
    9. Social Services (Level 1/2/3)
    10. Transportation (Level 1/2)
    11. Communication Facilities (Level 1/2/3/4)
    12. Electrical Facilities (Level 1/2)
    13. Natural Gas Facilities (Level 1)
    14. Sewage Collection Facilities
    15. Stormwater Facilities (Level 1)
    16. Waste Transfer Facilities (Level 1)
    17. Water Supply Facilities (Level 1/2)
    18. Amusement and Recreation (Level 1/2/3/4)
    19. Building/Garden Supply and Nurseries (Level 1/2/3/4)
    20. Business Services
    21. Buy-Back Recycling Center
    22. Convenience Commercial (Level 1/2/3)
    23. Drive-Through Facilities
    24. Eating and Drinking Establishment (Level 1/2/3/4)
    25. Food Stores (Level 1/2)
    26. Funeral Services (Level 1)
    27. Lodging (Level 3)
    28. Manufactured and Modular Homes Sales
    29. Motor Vehicle Sales and Rental (Level 1/2)
    30. Motor Vehicle Service and Repair (Level 1/2/3/4/5)
    31. Personal Services (Level 1/2)
    32. Pet Sales and Services (Level 1/2)
    33. Private Training School
    34. Professional Offices (Level 1/2/3)
    35. Rental and Repair Services (Level 1/2/3)
    36. Sales of General Merchandise (Level 1/2/3/4)
    37. Sales of New and Secondhand Property (Level 1/2/3)
    38. Storage (Level 1/2)
    39. Limited Manufacturing/Assembly (Level 1/2)
    40. Contractor Yards (Level 1)
    41. Flex Space (Level 1/2)
    42. Motion Picture Production Studios
    43. Printing and Publishing (Level 1/2)
    44. Warehousing, Distribution and Freight Movement (Level 1/2)
    45. Civic Accessory Uses
    46. Commercial Accessory Uses
    47. Industrial Accessory Uses
E. C3 Zoning District. 
    1. Large-Scale Commercial Facilities anchored by one or more Sales of General Merchandise (Level 4) and/or Building/Garden Supply and Nurseries (Level 3) uses, which may be collocated or otherwise integrated with one or more of the following uses either within the same structure or upon the same site:
        a. Multifamily Dwelling (Level 3)
        b. Assisted Living Facilities
        c. Community and Cultural Services (Level 3)
        d. Daycare Facilities (Level 2)
        e. Health Services
        f. Amusement and Recreation (Level 4)
        g. Business Services
        h. Convenience Commercial (Level 3)
        i. Eating and Drinking Establishment (Level 3/4)
        j. Food Stores (Level 1/2/3)
        k. Personal Services (Level 1/2)
        l. Pet Sales and Services (Level 1/2/3)
        m. Professional Offices (Level 3)
    2. Transportation (Level 2)
    3. Communication Facilities (Level 1/2)
    4. Electrical Facilities (Level 1/2)
    5. Natural Gas Facilities (Level 1)
    6. Sewage Collection Facilities
    7. Stormwater Facilities (Level 1/2)
    8. Waste Transfer Facilities (Level 1)
    9. Water Supply Facilities (Level 1)
    10. Civic Accessory Uses
    11. Commercial Accessory Uses [Ord. 678 § 1, 2018; Ord. 651 § 39, 2016; Ord. 525 § 7, 2010; Ord. 483 § 19, 2008; Ord. 462 § 7, 2007; Ord. 397 § 9, 2005; Ord. 317 § 4, 2003; Ord. 307 § 16, 2003; Ord. 277 § 1, 2002; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.540 Administrative Uses – Commercial Zoning Districts.
The following uses are permitted within the Commercial zoning districts, subject to approval of an administrative use permit and all applicable development permits:
A. TOC Zoning District. 
    1. Multifamily Dwelling (Level 2)
    2. Type 2 Group Home (Level 3)
    3. Drive-Through Facilities
    4. Motor Vehicle Sales and Rental (Level 1/2/3)
B. CBD Zoning District. 
    1. Type 2 Group Home (Level 3)
    2. Food Stores (Level 3)
    3. Stormwater Facilities (Level 2/3)
C. C1 Zoning District. 
    1. Government Administration Facilities (Level 3)
    2. Outdoor Recreation (Level 4)
    3. Postal Services (Level 2)
    4. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 3)
    5. Stormwater Facilities (Level 2/3)
    6. Waste Transfer Facilities (Level 2)
    7. Water Supply Facilities (Level 3)
    8. Convenience Commercial (Level 4)
    9. Lodging (Level 2)
    10. Motor Vehicle Sales and Rental (Level 2)
    11. Motor Vehicle Service and Repair (Level 4/5)
    12. Pet Sales and Service (Level 3)
    13. Professional Offices (Level 3)
    14. Rental and Repair Services (Level 3/4)
    15. Sales of General Merchandise (Level 3/4)
    16. Research, Development, and Laboratories (Level 1)
D. C2 Zoning District. 
    1. Government Administration Facilities (Level 3)
    2. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 3)
    3. Outdoor Recreation (Level 4)
    4. Stormwater Facilities (Level 2/3)
    5. Waste Transfer Facilities (Level 2)
    6. Water Supply Facilities (Level 3)
    7. Convenience Commercial (Level 4)
    8. Lodging (Level 2)
    9. Motor Vehicle Sales and Rental (Level 3)
    10. Pet Sales and Service (Level 3)
    11. Rental and Repair Services (Level 4)
E. C3 Zoning District. 
    1. Postal Services (Level 2)
    2. Religious Assembly (Level 3)
    3. Drive-Through Facilities
    4. Motor Vehicle Services and Repair (Level 1/2) [Ord. 651 § 39, 2016; Ord. 567 § 3, 2013; Ord. 525 § 8, 2010; Ord. 397 § 10, 2005; Ord. 392 § 2, 2005; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.550 Conditional Uses - Commercial Zoning Districts.
The following uses are permitted within the Commercial zoning districts, subject to approval of a conditional use permit and all applicable development permits:
A. TOC Zoning District. 
    1. Type 3 Group Home (Level 1/2)
    2. Education (Level 1/2)
    3. Outdoor Recreation (Level 3)
    4. Public Safety Services (Level 1)
    5. Social Services (Level 3)
    6. Transportation (Level 4)
    7. Electrical Facilities (Level 2)
    8. Pipelines
    9. Stormwater Facilities (Level 2/3)
    10. Water Supply Facilities (Level 2/3)
    11. Flex Space (Level 1)
    12. Research, Development, and Laboratories (Level 1)
B. CBD Zoning District. 
    1. Type 3 Group Home (Level 1/2)
    2. Education (Level 1/2)
    3. Outdoor Recreation (Level 3)
    4. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 2)
    5. Public Safety Services (Level 1/3)
    6. Social Services (Level 3)
    7. Transportation (Level 4)
    8. Electrical Facilities (Level 2)
    9. Pipelines
    10. Water Supply Facilities (Level 3)
    11. Amusement and Recreation (Level 4)
    12. Building/Garden Supply and Nurseries (Level 4)
    13. Drive-Through Facilities
    14. Sales of New and Secondhand Property (Level 3)
    15. Flex Space (Level 1)
    16. Research, Development, and Laboratories (Level 1)
C. C1 Zoning District. 
    1. Type 4 & 5 Group Home
    2. Public Safety Services (Level 1/2)
    3. Transportation (Level 3)
    4. Pipelines
    5. Food Stores (Level 3)
    6. Motor Vehicle Sales and Rental (Level 4)
    7. Pet Sales and Service (Level 4)
    8. Storage (Level 2)
    9. Contractor Yards (Level 2)
    10. Warehousing, Distribution, and Freight Movement (Level 3)
D. C2 Zoning District. 
    1. Type 4 & 5 Group Home
    2. Public Safety Services (Level 1/2/3)
    3. Transportation (Level 3/4)
    4. Pipelines
    5. Food Stores (Level 3)
    6. Pet Sales and Service (Level 4)
    7. Contractor Yards (Level 2)
    8. Industrial Services
    9. Warehousing, Distribution and Freight Movement (Level 3)
E. C3 Zoning District. 
    1. Large-Scale Commercial Facilities exceeding 150,000 square feet in cumulative gross floor area. [Ord. 678 § 2, 2018; Ord. 525 § 9, 2010; Ord. 423 § 1, 2006; Ord. 397 § 11, 2005; Ord. 392 § 3, 2005; Ord. 358 § 2, 2004; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.560 Development Standards - Commercial Zoning Districts.
Unless otherwise specifically modified by an adopted development agreement, in addition to the regulations and requirements contained in other sections of this title, the following property development standards apply to all land and buildings in the Commercial zoning districts:
A. Density. The maximum residential density for the Commercial zoning districts is the maximum number of dwelling units allowed per gross acre (dua) and shall be as follows:
    1. TOC/CBD/C3 zoning districts: 54 dua
    2. C1/C2 zoning districts: 35 dua
B. Lot Size. There is no minimum established lot size for the Commercial zoning districts. Proposed uses and their associated densities within these zoning districts, and the applicable community design standards shall be used to establish the minimum lot size for a project.
C. Lot Coverage. All building coverage and impervious surface maximums stated herein for the Commercial zoning districts may be reduced at the time they are applied to individual properties, because of stormwater requirements. The maximum building coverage and impervious surface for the Commercial zoning districts shall be as follows:
    1. TOC/CBD/C1/C2/C3 zoning districts:
        a. Building coverage: 100%
        b. Impervious surface: 100%
D. Setbacks. The minimum distance setbacks for the Commercial zoning districts shall be as follows, except where increased setbacks due to landscaping or building/fire code requirements apply:
    1. Front yard/street setback: 0 feet
    2. Garage/carport setback: 0 feet
    3. Rear yard setback: 0 feet
    4. Interior setback: 0 feet
E. Building Height. The maximum building height, not including any applicable height bonus, for the Commercial zoning districts shall be as follows:
    1. TOC/CBD/C1/C2 zoning districts: 90 feet
F. Large-Scale Commercial Facilities. Large-Scale Commercial Facilities shall meet the additional development and design requirements specified in LMC 18A.50.241(L).
G. Design. Design features shall be required as set forth in LMC 18A.50.200, Community Design.
H. Tree Preservation. Significant tree identification and preservation and/or replacement shall be required as set forth in LMC 18A.50.300, Tree Preservation.
I. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided as set forth in LMC 18A.50.400, Landscaping.
J. Parking. Parking shall conform to the requirements of LMC 18A.50.500, Parking.
K. Signs. Signage shall conform to the requirements of LMC 18A.50.600, Signs. [Ord. 525 § 10, 2010; Ord. 483 § 19, 2008; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.600 Industrial Zoning Districts.

18A.30.610 Purpose - Industrial Zoning Districts.
The Industrial Business Park (IBP) zoning district provides for a coordination of uses and design to facilitate an active integration of employment, services, and business/light industrial uses.
The Industrial 1 (I1) zoning district provides for regional research, light manufacturing, warehousing, concentrated business/employment parks, and other major regional employment uses. These industrial lands are the primary working areas of Lakewood, integrated into the community economically and environmentally while maximizing a regional economic presence based on Lakewood’s geographic position.
The Industrial 2 (I2) zoning district provides for high-intensity or high-impact uses and major regional employers. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.620 Applicability - Industrial Zoning Districts.
The IBP, I1, and I2 zoning districts are applicable to lands designated Industrial in the comprehensive plan. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.630 Primary Permitted Uses - Industrial Zoning Districts.
The following uses are permitted within the Industrial zoning districts, subject to approval of a zoning certification and all applicable development permits:
A. Industrial Business Park (IBP). 
    1. Outdoor Recreation (Level 1/2)
    2. Postal Services (Level 1/3)
    3. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 1/2)
    4. Transportation (Level 1/2/3)
    5. Communication Facilities (Level 1/2/3/4)
    6. Electrical Facilities (Level 1/2)
    7. Natural Gas Facilities (Level 1)
    8. Sewage Collection Facilities
    9. Stormwater Facilities (Level 1/2)
    10. Waste Transfer Facilities (Level 1)
    11. Water Supply Facilities (Level 1/2/3)
    12. Business Services
    13. Convenience Commercial (Level 4)
    14. Drive-Through Facilities, limited to coffee kiosks
    15. Eating and Drinking Establishment (Level 1/2)
    16. Motor Vehicle Service and Repair (Level 3)
    17. Pet Sales and Services (Level 4)
    18. Private Training School (Level 1/2)
    19. Professional Offices (Level 1/2/3)
    20. Rental and Repair Services (Level 1/2)
    21. Sales of General Merchandise (Level 1), limited to that which is accessory and related to on-site manufacturing and production.
    22. Secondary Manufacturing and Major Assembly (Level 1)
    23. Limited Manufacturing/Assembly (Level 1/2/3)
    24. Contractor Yards (Level 1)
    25. Flex Space (Level 1/2/3)
    26. Food and Related Products (Level 1)
    27. Industrial Services
    28. Motion Picture Production Studios
    29. Printing and Publishing (Level 1/2)
    30. Research, Development, and Laboratories (Level 1/2)
    31. Warehousing, Distribution and Freight Movement (Level 1/2)
    32. Commercial Accessory Uses
    33. Industrial Accessory Uses
B. Industrial 1 (I1). 
    1. Outdoor Recreation (Level 1/2)
    2. Postal Services (Level 3)
    3. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 1/2/3)
    4. Public Safety Services (Level 1/2)
    5. Transportation (Level 1)
    6. Communication Facilities (Level 1/2/3)
    7. Electrical Facilities (Level 1/2)
    8. Natural Gas Facilities (Level 1/2)
    9. Sewage Collection Facilities
    10. Stormwater Facilities (Level 1/2)
    11. Waste Transfer Facilities (Level 1/2/3)
    12. Water Supply Facilities (Level 1/2/3)
    13. Bulk Fuel Dealers
    14. Buy-Back Recycling Center
    15. Convenience Commercial (Level 4)
    16. Drive-Through Facilities, limited to coffee kiosks
    17. Eating and Drinking Establishment (Level 1/2)
    18. Funeral Services (Level 2)
    19. Manufactured and Modular Homes Sales
    20. Motor Vehicle Sales and Rental (Level 4)
    21. Motor Vehicle Service and Repair (Level 3/4/5)
    22. Pet Sales and Services (Level 4)
    23. Private Training School (Level 1/2)
    24. Rental and Repair Services (Level 3/4)
    25. Storage (Level 1/2/3)
    26. Primary Manufacturing (Level 1)
    27. Secondary Manufacturing and Major Assembly (Levels 1/2)
    28. Limited Manufacturing/Assembly (Level 1/2/3)
    29. Contractor Yards (Level 1/2)
    30. Flex Space (Level 1/2/3)
    31. Food and Related Products (Level 1/2)
    32. Industrial Services
    33. Motion Picture Production Studios
    34. Outdoor Distribution and Freight Movement
    35. Printing and Publishing (Level 1/2)
    36. Research, Development, and Laboratories (Level 1/2)
    37. Warehousing, Distribution and Freight Movement (Levels 1/2/3)
    38. Commercial Accessory Uses
    39. Industrial Accessory Uses
C. Industrial 2 (I2). 
    1. Outdoor Recreation (Level 1/2)
    2. Postal Services (Level 3)
    3. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 1/2/3)
    4. Public Safety Services (Level 1/2)
    5. Transportation (Level 1)
    6. Communication Facilities (Level 1/2/3)
    7. Electrical Facilities (Level 1/2)
    8. Natural Gas Facilities (Level 1/2)
    9. Sewage Collection Facilities
    10. Stormwater Facilities (Level 1/2)
    11. Waste Transfer Facilities (Level 1/2/3)
    12. Water Supply Facilities (Level 1/2/3)
    13. Bulk Fuel Dealers
    14. Buy-Back Recycling Center
    15. Eating and Drinking Establishments (Level 1/2)
    16. Funeral Services (Level 2)
    17. Manufactured and Modular Homes Sales
    18. Motor Vehicle Sales and Rental (Level 4)
    19. Motor Vehicle Service and Repair (Level 3/4/5)
    20. Private Training Schools (Level 1/2)
    21. Rental and Repair Services (Level 3/4)
    22. Sales of General Merchandise (Level 4)
    23. Storage (Level 2/3)
    24. Primary Manufacturing (Level 1/2)
    25. Secondary Manufacturing and Major Assembly (Levels 1/2)
    26. Limited Manufacturing/Assembly (Level 1/2/3)
    27. Contractor Yards (Level 1/2)
    28. Flex Space (Level 2/3)
    29. Food and Related Products (Level 1/2)
    30. Industrial Services
    31. Motion Picture Production Studios
    32. Outdoor Distribution and Freight Movement
    33. Printing and Publishing (Level 1/2)
    34. Research, Development, and Laboratories (Level 1/2/3)
    35. Warehousing, Distribution and Freight Movement (Levels 2/3)
    36. Commercial Accessory Uses
    37. Industrial Accessory Uses [Ord. 552 § 4, 2012; Ord. 483 § 20, 2008; Ord. 397 § 12, 2005; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.640 Administrative Uses – Industrial Zoning Districts.
The following uses are permitted within the Industrial zoning districts, subject to approval of an administrative use permit and all applicable development permits:
A. Industrial Business Park (IBP). 
    1. Pipelines
    2. Bulk Fuel Dealers
    3. Motor Vehicle Service and Repair (Level 4)
    4. Pet Sales and Services (Level 3)
    5. Secondary Manufacturing and Major Assembly (Level 2)
    6. Research, Development, and Laboratories (Level 3)
    7. Warehousing, Distribution, and Freight Movement (Level 3)
B. Industrial 1 (I1). 
    1. Transportation (Level 2)
    2. Pipelines
    3. Building/Garden Supply and Nurseries (Level 4)
    4. Pet Sales and Services (Level 3)
    5. Primary Manufacturing (Level 2)
    6. Research, Development, and Laboratories (Level 3)
C. Industrial 2 (I2). 
    1. Transportation (Level 2)
    2. Pipelines [Ord. 651 § 22, 2016; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.650 Conditional Uses – Industrial Zoning Districts.
The following uses are permitted within the Industrial zoning districts, subject to approval of a conditional use permit and all applicable development permits:
A. Industrial Business Park (IBP). 
    1. Outdoor Recreation (Level 4)
    2. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 3)
    3. Public Safety Services (Level 1/2)
    4. Transportation (Level 4)
    5. Electrical Generation Facilities
    6. Sewage Treatment Facilities
    7. Stormwater Facilities (Level 3)
    8. Amusement and Recreation (Level 4)
    9. Contractor Yards (Level 2)
B. Industrial 1 (I1). 
    1. Outdoor Recreation (Level 4)
    2. Public Safety Services (Level 3/4)
    3. Transportation (Level 4)
    4. Electrical Generation Facilities
    5. Organic Waste Processing Facilities (Level 1/2/3)
    6. Sewage Treatment Facilities
    7. Stormwater Facilities (Level 3)
    8. Waste Disposal Facilities (Level 1/2/3/4)
    9. Waste Transfer Facilities (Level 4)
    10. Amusement and Recreation (Level 4)
    11. Mineral Extraction
    12. Recycling Processor
    13. Salvage/Wrecking Yards and Vehicle Storage Facilities (Level 1/2)
C. Industrial 2 (I2). 
    1. Public Safety Services (Level 3/4)
    2. Transportation (Level 4)
    3. Electrical Generation Facilities
    4. Organic Waste Processing Facilities (Level 1/2/3)
    5. Sewage Treatment Facilities
    6. Stormwater Facilities (Level 3)
    7. Waste Disposal Facilities (Level 1/2/3/4)
    8. Mineral Extraction
    9. Off-Site Hazardous Waste Treatment and Storage Facilities (Level 1/2/3)
    10. Recycling Processor
    11. Salvage/Wrecking Yards and Vehicle Storage Facilities (Level 1/2) [Ord. 651 § 22, 2016; Ord. 500 § 9, 2009; Ord. 483 § 21, 2008; Ord. 358 §3, 2004; Ord. 277 § 1, 2002; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.660 Development Standards - Industrial Zoning Districts.
Unless otherwise specifically modified by an adopted development agreement, in addition to the regulations and requirements contained in other sections of this title, the following property development standards apply to all land and buildings in the Industrial zoning districts:
A. Lot Size. The minimum lot size for the Industrial zoning districts shall be as follows:
    1. IBP zoning district: One (1) acre
    2. I1/I2 zoning districts: 20,000 gross square feet (gsf)
B. Lot Coverage. All building coverage and impervious surface maximums stated herein for the Industrial zoning districts may be reduced at the time they are applied to individual properties, because of stormwater requirements. The maximum building and impervious surface coverage and impervious surface for the Industrial zoning districts shall be one hundred (100) percent.
C. Setbacks. The minimum distance setbacks for the Industrial zoning districts shall be as follows, except where increased setbacks due to landscaping or building/fire code requirements apply:
    1. Minimum front yard/street setback: 10 feet
    2. Minimum rear yard setback: 0 feet
    3. Minimum interior setback: 0 feet
D. Building Height. The maximum building height, not including any applicable height bonus, for the Industrial zoning districts shall be as follows:
    1. IBP, I1, and I2 zoning districts: 60 feet
E. Design. Design features shall be required as set forth in LMC 18A.50.200, Community Design.
F. Tree Preservation. Significant tree identification and preservation and/or replacement shall be required as set forth in LMC 18A.50.300, Tree Preservation.
G. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided as set forth in LMC 18A.50.400, Landscaping.
H. Parking. Parking shall conform to the requirements of LMC 18A.50.500, Parking.
I. Signs. Signage shall conform to the requirements of LMC 18A.50.600, Signs. [Ord. 483 § 22, 2008; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.700 Military-Related Zoning Districts.

18A.30.710 Purpose - Military-Related Zoning Districts.
The purpose of the Military Lands (ML) zoning district is to formally recognize the autonomy associated with federal and state ownership of the military installations adjacent to and within Lakewood and the unique character of their operations and support structures, which are not typical of civilian land uses and require special consideration by the City as a host community for the installations.
The purpose of the Clear Zone (CZ), Air Corridor 1 (AC1), and Air Corridor 2 (AC2) zoning districts is to promote land use and development that is compatible with the aircraft noise and accident potential associated with the proximity to McChord Air Force Base (AFB) aircraft flight operations. The potential risk to life and property from hazards associated with military aircraft operations necessitate control of the intensity, type, and design of land uses within the air corridor. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.720 Applicability - Military-Related Zoning Districts.
The ML zoning district is applicable to lands designated Military Lands in the comprehensive plan.
The CZ, AC1, and AC2 zoning districts are applicable to lands located within the area designated as Air Corridor 1 and Air Corridor 2 in the comprehensive plan and within the area identified as the Clear Zone in the Air Installation Compatible Use Zone (AICUZ) study (March 1998). The AICUZ study is available for review at the Lakewood Community Development Department or through McChord AFB. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.730 Primary Permitted Uses - Military-Related Zoning Districts.
The following uses are permitted within the Military-Related zoning districts, subject to approval of a zoning certification and all applicable development permits. Uses that are not listed within the Military-Related zoning districts or permitted as an accessory use are not permitted unless specifically provided for elsewhere in this code. Use types are defined in LMC 18A.20, Use Types and Levels.
The unique nature of these areas may invoke additional, specific standards. New uses within the CZ, AC1, and AC2 zoning districts shall be subject to intensity limitations in accordance with LMC 18A.30.770 and performance standards pursuant to LMC 18A.30.780, and structures in those zones shall be subject to noise attenuation requirements pursuant to LMC 18A.30.790. New public assembly uses are expressly prohibited in the CZ, AC1, and AC2 zoning districts.
A. ML Zoning District. 
    1. Communication Facilities (Level 1)
    2. Electrical Facilities (Level 1)
    3. Natural Gas Facilities (Level 1)
    4. Sewage Collection Facilities
    5. Stormwater Facilities (Level 1)
    6. Water Supply Facilities (Level 1)
    7. Military Installations (Level 2)
B. CZ Zoning District. 
    1. Continuation of uses already legally existing within the zone at the time of adoption of this title. Maintenance and repair of existing structures shall be permitted.
    2. Primary permitted uses in the OSR1 and OSR2 zoning districts.
    3. Postal Services (Level 3)
    4. Communication Facilities (Level 1/2)
    5. Electrical Facilities (Level 1)
    6. Natural Gas Facilities (Level 1)
    7. Sewage Collection Facilities
    8. Stormwater Facilities (Level 1/2)
    9. Water Supply Facilities (Level 1/2)
    10. Manufactured and Modular Home Sales
    11. Storage
    12. Limited Manufacturing and Assembly
    13. Contractor Yards
    14. Outdoor Distribution and Freight Movement
    15. Warehousing, Distribution, and Freight Movement
    16. Agriculture (Level 1/2)
C. AC1 Zoning District. 
    1. Continuation of uses already legally existing within the zone at the time of adoption of this title. Maintenance and repair of existing structures shall be permitted.
    2. Primary permitted uses in the I2 zoning district.
    3. Primary permitted uses in the OSR1 and OSR2 zoning districts.
    4. Communication Facilities (Level 1)
    5. Electrical Facilities (Level 1)
    6. Natural Gas Facilities (Level 1)
    7. Sewage Collection Facilities
    8. Stormwater Facilities (Level 1)
    9. Water Supply Facilities (Level 1)
    10. Motor Vehicle Sales and Rental (Level 2/3)
    11. Agriculture (Level 1/2/3)
    12. Residential Accessory Uses, except accessory dwelling units.
D. AC2 Zoning District. 
    1. Continuation of uses already legally existing within the zone at the time of adoption of this title. Maintenance and repair of existing structures shall be permitted.
    2. Primary permitted uses in the I1 zoning district.
    3. Primary permitted uses in the OSR1 and OSR2 zoning districts.
    4. Communication Facilities (Level 1)
    5. Electrical Facilities (Level 1)
    6. Natural Gas Facilities (Level 1)
    7. Sewage Collection Facilities
    8. Stormwater Facilities (Level 1)
    9. Water Supply Facilities (Level 1)
    10. Motor Vehicle Sales and Rental (Level 2/3)
    11. Agriculture (Level 1/2/3)
    12. Residential Accessory Uses, except accessory dwelling units. [Ord. 552 § 5, 2012; Ord. 308 § 2, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.740 Administrative Uses - Military-Related Zoning Districts.
The following uses are permitted within the Military-Related zoning districts, subject to approval of an administrative use permit and all applicable development permits:
A. CZ, AC1, and AC2 Zoning Districts
    1. Alteration or modification of non-conforming existing uses and structures.
B. AC1 Zoning District:
    1. Uses allowed by administrative use permit in the I2 zoning district.
C. AC2 Zoning District:
    1. Uses allowed by administrative use permit in the I1 zoning district. [Ord. 277 § 1, 2002; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.750 Conditional Uses - Military-Related Zoning Districts.
The following uses are permitted within the Military-Related zoning districts, subject to approval of a conditional use permit and all applicable development permits:
A. ML Zoning District. 
    1. Military Installations (Level 1)
B. CZ Zoning District. 
    1. Agriculture (Level 3)
    2. Any permitted or administratively permitted use involving more than incidental levels of hazardous materials or waste.
C. AC1 Zoning District. 
    1. Any permitted or administratively permitted use involving more than incidental levels of hazardous materials or waste.
    2. Uses allowed by conditional use permit in the I2 zoning district.
D. AC2 Zoning District. 
    1. Any permitted or administratively permitted use involving more than incidental levels of hazardous materials or waste.
    2. Uses allowed by conditional use permit in the I1 zoning district. [Ord. 307 § 17, 2003; Ord. 277 § 1, 2002; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.760 Development Standards - Military-Related Zoning Districts.
In addition to the regulations and requirements contained in other sections of this title, the following property development standards apply to all land and buildings in the Military-Related zoning districts:
A. Federal military lands are exempt from local development standards.
B. Development standards for the Military-Related zoning districts shall be determined jointly by the Community Development Director and City Engineer on a case-by-case basis considering the intensity of the proposed use, adjacent uses and zoning, environmental issues, site design, and/or type and construction of buildings.
C. Design. Design features shall be required as set forth in LMC 18A.50.200, Community Design.
D. Tree Preservation. Significant tree identification and preservation and/or replacement shall be required as set forth in LMC 18A.50.300, Tree Preservation.
E. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided as set forth in LMC 18A.50.400, Landscaping.
F. Parking. Parking shall conform to the requirements of LMC 18A.50.500, Parking.
G. Signs. Signage shall conform to the requirements of LMC 18A.50.600, Signs. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.770 Intensity Limits - Military-Related Zoning Districts.
In addition to the other requirements of the chapter, the intensity of use criteria are applicable to all new land uses in the CZ, AC1, and AC2 zoning districts and shall be used to determine compatibility of proposed uses with aircraft operations hazards. The applicant shall bear the burden of proof to demonstrate compliance of a proposed development with the following intensities of uses:
A. Within the CZ zoning district, the total number of people on a site at any time shall not exceed one (1) person per four thousand, three hundred fifty-six (4,356) square feet of gross site area, or ten (10) persons per acre.
B. Within the AC1 zoning district, the total number of people on a site at any time shall not exceed one (1) person per one thousand, seven hundred forty-two (1,742) square feet of gross site area, or twenty-five (25) persons per acre.
C. Within the AC2 zoning district, the total number of people on a site at any time shall not exceed one (1) person per eight hundred seventy-one (871) square feet of gross site area, or fifty (50) persons per acre. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.780 Performance Criteria - Military-Related Zoning Districts.
In addition to other requirements of the code, the following performance criteria shall be used to determine the compatibility of a use, project design, mitigation measures and/or any other requirements of the code with respect to aircraft operation hazards in the CZ, AC1 and AC2 zoning districts. The applicant shall bear the burden of proof to demonstrate compliance of a proposed development with the following performance criteria:
A. Any new use which involves release of airborne substances, such as steam, dust, and smoke that may interfere with aircraft operations is prohibited.
B. Any new use which emits light or direct or indirect reflections that may interfere with a pilot's vision is prohibited.
C. Any new use that creates an undue hazard to the general health, safety and welfare of the community in the event of an aircraft accident in these zoning districts is prohibited.
D. Facilities which emit electrical currents shall be installed in a manner that does not interfere with communication systems or navigational equipment.
E. Any new use which attracts concentrations of birds or waterfowl, such as mixed solid waste landfill disposal facilities, waste transfer facilities, feeding stations, and the growth of certain vegetation, is prohibited.
F. Structures are prohibited within one hundred (100) feet of the aircraft approach-departure or transitional surfaces. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.790 Noise Attenuation - Military-Related Zoning Districts.
Provisions for noise mitigation applies to structures within the CZ, AC1 and AC2 zoning districts which are located within the 65 Ldn Noise Contour for McChord AFB as shown in the AICUZ study.
A. Noise Insulation Required. Those portions of new structures where the public is received or offices are located must be constructed with sound insulation or other means to achieve a day/night interior noise level (Ldn) of no greater than forty-five (45) dB. A remodeling project where the total cost of improvements is twenty-five (25) percent or more of the valuation of the existing building is also subject to these standards.
B. Sound Isolation Construction. A building will generally be considered acceptable by the building official if it incorporates the applicable features described in UBC. Alternate materials and methods of construction may be permitted, if such alternates are demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Building Official to be equivalent to those described. Construction as outlined in this section satisfies the requirements of the UBC and for purposes of this ordinance is considered to meet the interior noise standard specified therein. Each item indicated in this section shall be identified on the project drawings that are submitted with the permit application.
    1. Noise level reduction—25 decibels. For a building located where a noise level reduction of twenty-five (25) decibels is required, the building shall be constructed with the following features:
        a. If wood frame construction is used, all exterior stud walls shall have interior and exterior surfaces of an approved material at least as massive as one-half (1/2) inch gypsum wallboard, and the intervening space (studs) shall contain fibrous thermal insulation having a resistance of R-11 or greater.
        b. Arrangements for any habitable room shall be such that any exterior door or window can be kept closed when the room is in use.
        c. Any air duct or connection out-of-doors must contain an interior sound absorbing lining acoustically equivalent at least to fiberglass duct liner one (1) inch thick and of a length greater than ten (10) feet and be provided with one (1) ninety (90) degree elbow.
        d. Domestic range exhaust ducts connecting the interior space to the outdoors shall contain a self-closing baffle plate across the exterior termination that allows proper ventilation. The duct shall be provided with a ninety (90) –degree bend.
        e. The ceiling below an attic space shall include gypsum board or plaster at least one-half (1/2) inch thick. Fibrous thermal insulation having a resistance of R-19 or greater shall be placed above the ceiling.
        f. There shall be no direct openings, such as mail slots, from the interior to the exterior of the building. All chimneys shall be provided with well-fitted dampers.
        g. All openable windows shall be sound rated assemblies having sound transmission class (STC) of at least twenty-six (26). Fixed windows shall be well-sealed and at least three-sixteenth (3/16) inch thick glass.
        h. All entry doors shall be solid-core constructed, close fitting units with weather-stripping seals incorporated on all edges to eliminate gaps. Air gaps and rattling shall not be permitted.
        i. Masonry walls, if used, shall be at least equivalent in weight to eight (8) inch, lightweight concrete blocks, at least one (1) surface of which is painted or plastered.
        j. The roof deck shall weigh at least seven (7) pounds per square foot with roof sheathing containing a solid core at least one-half (1/2) inch thick.
        k. Rooms, when in use, are expected to contain furniture or other materials that absorb sound equivalent to the absorption provided by wall-to-wall carpeting over a conventional pad.
    2. Noise level reduction—30 decibels. For a building located where a noise level reduction of thirty (30) decibels is required, in addition to the requirements of Section 1 above, the building shall be constructed to incorporate the following features:
        a. Windows, fixed or openable, shall be sound-rated units with a STC of at least thirty-two (32) (double-glazed).
        b. A ceiling or exhaust duct for the forced air ventilation system shall be provided with a bend in the duct such that there is no direct line of sight through the duct from outside to inside. The bend shall be lined with the equivalent of fiberglass duct liner one (1) inch thick.
        c. The top floor-ceiling construction shall consist of plaster or gypsum board at least five-eighths (5/8) inch thick.
        d. The floor of the lowest room or area shall be a concrete slab, or shall be sealed against exterior noise.
        e. Masonry walls, if used, shall be at least equivalent in weight to eight (8) inch, lightweight concrete blocks. At least one (1) surface shall be painted, plastered or covered with gypsum board.
        f. The roof deck shall weigh at least twelve (12) pounds per square foot. Wood roof sheathing shall be continuous (plywood) and at least five-eighths (5/8) inch thick.
    3. Noise level reduction—35 decibels. For a building located where a noise level reduction of thirty-five (35) decibels is required, in addition to the requirements of Sections 1 and 2 above, the building shall be constructed to incorporate the following features:
        a. The use of exposed wood beam ceilings is prohibited unless sound-isolating treatment is provided between the ceiling and roofline. The minimum treatment shall consist of rigid fiberglass board, nominally two (2) inches thick placed over the interior ceiling and under at least one-half (1/2) inch of plywood sheathing. The sheathing shall be nailed only to the beam or major frame members and not to the interior exposed ceiling at points between the beams.
        b. For attic spaces ventilated to the outside, the attic floor shall be decked over with one-half (1/2) inch plywood or equivalent and all cracks caulked. R-11 insulation shall be placed between the floor joists.
        c. Roof deck shall weigh at least twenty (20) pounds per square foot. Roof sheathing shall be continuous, weighing a total of at least four (4) pounds per square foot.
        d. Wood exterior sheathing less than one-half (1/2) inch thick shall be used only over gypsum board of at least five-eighths (5/8) inch thick. Interior gypsum board walls shall consist of two (2) layers of one-half (1/2) inch board nailed directly to the studs.
        e. Fixed or openable windows must be sound rated units with at least a sound transmission class (STC) of thirty-six (36).
C. Acoustical Analysis and Design Report. The applicant may elect to have a qualified architect or engineer examine the noise levels and needed building sound isolation requirements for a specific site. The analysis and design report signed by and prepared under the supervision of a qualified architect or engineer shall be submitted with the application for building permit. The report shall show the topographical relationship of the aircraft noise sources and the building site, identification of noise sources and their characteristics, predicated noise spectra at the exterior of the proposed building structure, basis for the predication (measured or obtained from published data), and effectiveness of the proposed construction showing that the prescribed interior day-night sound level is met.
D. Noise Disclosure Statement. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for new construction or remodeling where the total cost of improvements is twenty-five (25) percent or more of the valuation of the existing building, the property owner shall sign a noise disclosure statement and record the statement with the title of the property. The noise disclosure statement acknowledges that the property is located within the sixty-five (65) Ldn contour, as indicated on Noise Contour Map for McChord AFB as shown in the AICUZ study, and that noise attenuation is required of any new construction or remodeled structure where it meets the threshold. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.800 Public/Institutional Zoning District.

18A.30.810 Purpose - Public/Institutional Zoning District.
The Public/Institutional (PI) zoning district provides for moderate-scale and large-scale activities relating to the purpose of state and local governmental entities, except for military uses which are separately designated and zoned; special districts; and semi-public institutions providing necessary public services. The designation allows for the specialized needs of providing public services to all areas of Lakewood. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.820 Applicability - Public/Institutional Zoning District.
The PI zoning district is applicable to lands designated Public and Semi-Public Institutional in the comprehensive plan. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.830 Permitted Uses - Public/Institutional Zoning District.
A. PI Zoning District. 
    1. The following uses are permitted within the PI zoning district, subject to approval of a discretionary land use permit and all applicable development permits. The unique nature of this zoning district and the uses that may be placed there require flexibility in administration. Therefore, any proposed use, whether new or an expansion or change of an existing use, shall be evaluated individually to determine whether it will be treated as an administrative or conditional use, based on its size, overall functions, and anticipated level of impact, including, but not limited to, such factors as hours of operation, relationship to adjacent land uses, trip generation and parking needs, storage needs, and environmental impact.
        a. Continuation of uses already legally existing within the zone at the time of adoption of this title. Maintenance and repair of existing structures shall be permitted.
        b. Any use that, in the opinion of the Community Development Director, constitutes an essential public facility as defined in LMC 18A.20.400(D), or public and semi-public facilities beyond those specifically identified in state law, including a broad variety of both listed and unlisted uses, which may be liberally interpreted to meet essential community needs. Examples may include, but are not limited to, schools, libraries, and hospitals, including the Western State Hospital campus, but specifically excluding Religious Assembly use types for which adequate provision is made in other zoning districts.
    2. The following uses are allowed in the PI zoning district, without the need for a discretionary land use permit:
        a. Outdoor Recreation (Level 1/2)
        b. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 1)
        c. Transportation Facilities (Level 1)
        d. Communication Facilities (Level 1)
        e. Electrical Facilities (Level 1)
        f. Natural Gas Facilities (Level 1)
        g. Sewage Collection Facilities
        h. Stormwater Facilities (Level 1)
        i. Water Supply Facilities (Level 1) [Ord. 423 § 1, 2006; Ord. 317 § 5, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.840 Development Standards - Public/Institutional Zoning District.
A. Because of the nature of the typical uses characterizing this use type and the high need for flexibility in siting and operating public facilities, general development standards shall be determined jointly by the Community Development Director and City Engineer on a case-by-case basis considering the type and intensity of the proposed use, adjacent uses and zoning, environmental issues, site design, and/or type and construction of buildings.
B. Master-Planned Facilities. Public/institutional uses on properties twenty (20) acres or larger in size which are located within the Public/Institutional zoning district must undertake a public facilities master plan pursuant to LMC 18A.30.850, which must be reviewed and approved prior to issuance of permits for any proposed development, except as provided in LMC 18A.30.850(C). The public facilities master plan for each facility or coherent group of facilities shall specifically state the type and level of uses, as set forth in Chapter 18A.20 LMC, proposed therein.
C. SEPA Lead Agency. Unless specifically released on a case-by-case basis, the City hereby reserves lead agency status for environmental review under the State Environmental Policy Act for any and all uses within Public/Institutional zoning districts.
D. Design. Design features shall be required as set forth in LMC 18A.50.200, Community Design.
E. Tree Preservation. Significant tree identification and preservation and/or replacement shall be required as set forth in LMC 18A.50.300, Tree Preservation.
F. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided as set forth in LMC 18A.50.400, Landscaping.
G. Parking. Parking shall conform to the requirements of LMC 18A.50.500, Parking.
H. Signs. Signage shall conform to the requirements of LMC 18A.50.600, Signs. [Ord. 423 § 1, 2006; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.850 Public Facilities Master Plan Standards - Public/Institutional Zoning District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the public facilities master plan process is to encourage Essential Public Facilities Civic uses on large parcels of land to be developed holistically, with internally compatible uses and physical development and with accommodations made for natural site and environmental conditions, assuring that:
    1. Appropriate provisions are made for water, sanitary sewer, drainage ways, utilities, roadways, emergency services, and any other applicable infrastructure or services;
    2. Critical areas will be protected;
    3. Usable open space will be provided;
    4. Appropriate provisions are made for motorized and nonmotorized transportation circulation, including sidewalks and other planning features that assure safe walking conditions for students who walk to and from school;
    5. Approval criteria and mitigation measures are established which include general design elements and linkage components; and
    6. The safety of the general public as well as workers at and visitors to the facility is ensured.
B. Applicability. A public facilities master plan is required for all Essential Public Facilities Civic uses which utilize contiguous parcels of land totaling twenty (20) acres or more and which are zoned Public/Institutional. A public facilities master plan is not required for installation of portable classrooms as approved by the Community Development Director subject to Process I administrative action; uses and activities listed in LMC 18A.30.830(A)(2); renovations, remodeling and general maintenance, provided there is no expansion in occupiable space greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet of the structure proposed for renovation/remodeling; roof repairs; infrastructure improvements to existing systems (i.e., interior streets; sidewalks; lighting; security equipment; landscaping; and storm water, sewer, water, and power utilities); emergency repairs; and installation of fire/life safety equipment).
C. Uses. Uses not included in an approved public facilities master plan, except those listed in subsection B above, shall not subsequently be allowed upon the site except by review and approval of an amended public facilities master plan following the same process as establishment of an initial public facilities master plan.
When a new Essential Public Facility Civic use is proposed which requires a public facilities master plan or amendment to an existing plan and it is located on the same property or site of an already established Essential Public Facility Civic use, the City shall require the project proponent to prepare a compatibility study which, at minimum, contains the following information on a form prescribed by the City:
    1. The purpose of the proposed Essential Public Facility Civic use;
    2. An operational characteristics description of the proposed Essential Public Facility Civic use and an operational characteristics description of the existing use or uses;
    3. An evaluation of the potential effects of the proposed Essential Public Facility Civic use upon the existing use or uses;
    4. An evaluation of the potential effects of the proposed Essential Public Facility Civic use upon the adjacent properties;
    5. An evaluation of the potential effects of the proposed Essential Public Facility Civic use upon at-risk or special needs populations, including but not limited to children and the physically or mentally disabled; and
    6. Identification of any applicable mitigation measures designed to address any potential effects identified through the evaluation required herein.
D. Previous Permits. A previously adopted public facilities permit issued under Pierce County predating City incorporation, or a previously adopted administrative use or other permit issued pursuant to Title 18 or 18A LMC after City incorporation, may constitute an adopted public facilities master plan for the purposes of fulfilling the requirements herein. Any subsequent amendment(s) sought to an existing public facilities permit shall follow the process for a public facilities master plan.
E. Process. A public facilities master plan shall be reviewed as a Process III permit type under LMC 18A.02.550.
F. Termination and expiration of approval. If a condition of approval is violated, or if any provision of this code is violated, the Community Development Director may, in his sole discretion, initiate a revocation of the public facilities master plan which shall require a public hearing before and decision by the hearing examiner. Nothing in this section shall limit or affect the revocation of building permits, issuance of stop orders or other similar proceedings authorized by this code.
Recognizing that the nature of essential public facilities often requires approval of significant capital appropriations and that the appropriations process may be unpredictable, a public facilities master plan typically would not expire unless and until the slate of projects to be completed thereunder has been substantially completed, and new projects that are not included in the scope of the public facilities master plan are proposed. In such case, the proponent shall undertake an update which shall follow the same process as an initial public facilities master plan. [Ord. 423 § 1, 2006.]

18A.30.900 Open Space/Recreation Zoning Districts.

18A.30.910 Purpose - Open Space/Recreation Zoning Districts.
The Open Space and Recreation 1 (OSR1) and Open Space and Recreation 2 (OSR2) zoning districts provide for open space and public or semi-public recreational activities throughout the City. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.920 Applicability - Open Space/Recreation Zoning Districts.
The OSR1 and OSR2 zoning districts are applicable to lands designated Open Space and Recreation in the comprehensive plan.
Unless otherwise shown on the official zoning map, all open bodies of water, including, but not limited to, American Lake, Lake Steilacoom, Gravelly Lake, Lake Louise, Waughop Lake, Wards Lake, Seeley Lake, Boyles Lake, Carp Lake, Lost Lake, Mud Lake and Barlow Pond, shall be considered to be within the OSR1 zoning district.
In addition, the OSR1 and OSR2 zoning districts are considered compatible with and may be applied to areas within all other comprehensive plan land-use designations. The OSR1 zoning district may be applied to publicly or privately owned or controlled property used for natural open space and passive recreation. The OSR2 zoning district may be applied to privately and publicly owned active recreational uses and cemeteries. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.930 Primary Permitted Uses - Open Space/Recreation Zoning Districts.
The following uses are permitted within the Open Space/Recreation zoning districts, subject to approval of a zoning certification and all applicable development permits:
A. OSR1 Zoning District. 
    1. Outdoor Recreation –(Level 1/2)
    2. Residential Accessory Uses
    3. Civic Accessory Uses
B. OSR2 Zoning District. 
    1. Outdoor Recreation (Level 1/2)
    2. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 1)
    3. Transportation (Level 1)
    4. Communication Facilities (Level 1)
    5. Electrical Facilities (Level 1)
    6. Stormwater Facilities (Level 1)
    7. Residential Accessory Uses
    8. Civic Accessory Uses [Ord. 307 § 18, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.940 Administrative Uses - Open Space/Recreation Zoning Districts.
The following uses are permitted within the Open Space/Recreation zoning districts, subject to approval of an administrative use permit and all applicable development permits:
A. OSR1 Zoning District. 
    1. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 1)
    2. Transportation (Level 1)
    3. Communication Facilities (Level 1)
    4. Electrical Facilities (Level 1)
    5. Natural Gas Facilities (Level 1)
    6. Sewage Collection Facilities
    7. Stormwater Facilities (Level 1/2)
    8. Water Supply Facilities (Level 1)
B. OSR2 Zoning District. 
    1. Community and Cultural Services (Level 1)
    2. Outdoor Recreation (Level 3)
    3. Public Maintenance Facilities (Level 2)
    4. Transportation (Level 2)
    5. Communication Facilities (Level 2)
    6. Electrical Facilities (Level 2)
    7. Natural Gas Facilities (Level 1)
    8. Sewage Collection Facilities
    9. Stormwater Facilities (Level 2)
    10. Water Supply Facilities (Level 1) [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.950 Conditional Uses - Open Space/Recreation Zoning Districts.
The following uses are permitted within the Open Space/Recreation zoning districts, subject to approval of a conditional use permit and all applicable development permits:
A. OSR1 Zoning District. 
    1. Outdoor Recreation (Level 3/4)
    2. Transportation (Level 2)
    3. Communication Facilities (Level 2)
    4. Electrical Facilities (Level 2)
    5. Pipelines
    6. Stormwater Facilities (Level 3)
B. OSR2 Zoning District. 
    1. Community and Cultural Services (Level 2)
    2. Outdoor Recreation (Level 4)
    3. Pipelines
    4. Stormwater Facilities (Level 3)
    5. Amusement and Recreation (Level 2/3/4)
    6. Funeral Services (Level 3)
    7. Lodging (Level 2) [Ord. 483 § 23, 2008; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.30.960 Development Standards - Open Space/Recreation Zoning Districts.
In addition to the regulations and requirements contained in other sections of this title, the following property development standards apply to all land and buildings in the Open Space/Recreation zoning districts:
A. Lot Coverage. All building coverage and impervious surface maximums stated herein for the Open Space/Recreation zoning districts may be reduced at the time they are applied, because of stormwater requirements. The maximum building and impervious surface coverage for the Open Space/Recreation zoning districts shall be as follows:
    1. OSR1 and OSR2 Zoning Districts
        a. Maximum building coverage: 20%
        b. Maximum impervious surface coverage: 30%
B. Setbacks. The minimum distance setbacks for the Open Space/Recreation zoning districts shall be as follows, except where increased setbacks due to landscaping or building/fire code requirements apply:
    1. OSR1 and OSR2 Zoning Districts
        a. Front yard/street setback: 25 feet
        b. Principal arterial and state highway setback: 35 feet
        c. Rear yard setback: 20 feet
        d. Interior setback: 20 feet
C. Building Height. The maximum building height, not including any applicable height bonus, for the Open Space/Recreation zoning districts shall be forty (40) feet.
D. Design. Design features shall be required as set forth in LMC 18A.50.200, Community Design.
E. Tree Preservation. Significant tree identification and preservation and/or replacement shall be required as set forth in LMC 18A.50.300, Tree Preservation.
F. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided as set forth in LMC 18A.50.400, Landscaping.
G. Parking. Parking shall conform to the requirements of LMC 18A.50.500, Parking.
H. Signs. Signage shall conform to the requirements of LMC 18A.50.600, Signs. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

Chapter 18A.40 OVERLAY DISTRICTS

Sections:
18A.40.100   Flood Hazard Overlay.
18A.40.110   Purpose - Flood Hazard Overlay.
18A.40.120   Applicability – Flood Hazard Overlay.
18A.40.130   Administration - Flood Hazard Overlay.
18A.40.140   Alteration of Watercourses - Flood Hazard Overlay.
18A.40.150   Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries.
18A.40.160   Variances - Flood Hazard Overlay.
18A.40.170   Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
18A.40.180   Allowable Activities Within the Regulatory Floodplain.
18A.40.300   Senior Housing Overlay.
18A.40.310   Purpose - Senior Housing Overlay.
18A.40.320   Applicability - Senior Housing Overlay.
18A.40.330   Provisions - Senior Housing Overlay.
18A.40.340   Monitoring - Senior Housing Overlay.
18A.40.400   Sexually Oriented Business Overlays.
18A.40.410   Findings and Legislative Record.
18A.40.415   Purpose and Intent.
18A.40.420   Sexually Oriented Business Overlays Created.
18A.40.430   Applicability - Sexually Oriented Business land uses.
18A.40.435   Notice to Noncoforming SOB Land Uses.
18A.40.440   Processing of Applications for Licenses and Permits.
18A.40.445   Regulations Within SOBO.
18A.40.450   Expiration of Nonconforming Status.
18A.40.455   Notice and Order - Sexually Oriented Businesses.
18A.40.460   Definitions - Sexually Oriented Businesses.
18A.40.470   Prohibition and Public Nuisance.
18A.40.480   Provision for Conformance - Sexually Oriented Businesses.
18A.40.500   Planned Development District.
18A.40.510   Purpose – Planned Development District.
18A.40.520   Application for a Planned Development District (PDD).
18A.40.530   Public Hearing – Planned Development District.
18A.40.540   Required Findings – Planned Development District.
18A.40.550   Action of Hearing Examiner – Planned Development District.
18A.40.560   Minimum Size.
18A.40.570   Permitted Modifications.
18A.40.580   Permitted Residential Density and Lot Sizes.
18A.40.590   Required Open Space and Recreation Facilities.
18A.40.600   Multiple Zoning Districts.
18A.40.620   Phased Development.
18A.40.630   Required Certificates and Approvals.

18A.40.100 Flood Hazard Overlay.

18A.40.110 Purpose - Flood Hazard Overlay.
The Flood Hazard overlay (FHO) is intended to identify and recognize those areas of the City subject to the hazards of periodic flooding and to establish special standards and regulations to guide development and reduce personal injury, property damage and loss of life from flooding in those areas. This overlay shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the incorporated areas of the City of Lakewood as identified on Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Boundary Maps, and Floodway Maps. In advancing these principles and the general purposes of the comprehensive plan, the specific objectives are to:
A. Promote the general health, welfare and safety of the City’s residents, and protect human life, and property from the dangers of flooding.
B. Prevent the establishment of certain structures and land uses unsuitable for human habitation because of the danger of flooding, unsanitary conditions or other hazards.
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding.
D. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for sound use and development in flood-prone areas and to minimize prolonged business interruptions, and future blight areas.
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities located in flood hazard areas.
F. Ensure that potential home and business buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
G. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood relief, damage repair and flood control projects.
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions.
I. Qualify the City of Lakewood for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program, thereby giving citizens and businesses the opportunity to purchase flood insurance.
J. Maintain the quality of water in rivers, streams, and lakes and their floodplains so as to protect public water supplies, areas of the Public Trust, and wildlife habitat protected by the Federal Endangered Species Act.
K. Retain the natural channel, shoreline, and floodplain creation processes and other natural floodplain functions that protect, create, and maintain habitat for threatened and endangered species.
L. Prevent or minimize loss of hydraulic, geomorphic, and ecological functions of floodplains and stream channels. [Ord. 630 § 12, 2015; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.40.120 Applicability – Flood Hazard Overlay.
A. Establishment of Flood Zones. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for Pierce County, and Incorporated Areas” dated March 7, 2017, and any revisions thereto, with an accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and the FIRM are on file at the City of Lakewood, 6000 Main Street SW, Lakewood, WA. The Flood Insurance Study shall be kept on file by the City Engineer.
B. Noncompliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be developed, converted, altered, constructed, or located without full compliance with the terms of this section and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this section are subject to the penalties identified in this title.
C. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This section is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this section and other code, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
D. Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. The Community Development Director shall make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards. In the interpretation and application of this section, all provisions shall be:
    1. Considered to constitute minimum requirements.
    2. Liberally construed in favor of the public trust.
    3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. A party contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretations as provided in this code.
E. Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on occasion. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This section does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This section shall not create liability on the part of the City of Lakewood, or any officer or employee thereof, or FEMA for any flood damages that result from reliance on this section or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. [Ord. 659 § 1, 2017; Ord. 630 § 13, 2015; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.40.130 Administration - Flood Hazard Overlay.
A. Establishment of Building Permit and Land-Use Permit. A building permit and zoning certification shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this section for all structures including manufactured homes and all other development including fill and other activities.
A certificate of occupancy or final inspection approval for a new or substantially improved structure or an addition shall not be issued until:
    1. The applicant provides a completed, signed and sealed Elevation or Floodproofing Certificate showing finished construction data in accordance with this ordinance.
    2. If a mitigation plan is required, all work identified in the plan has been completed according to the plan’s schedule.
    3. The applicant provides copies of all required Federal, State and local permits as noted in the application.
    4. All provisions of this ordinance have been met.
B. A floodplain development permit shall be obtained before any construction or development begins within the Regulatory Floodplain. Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made on forms prescribed by the City and shall include:
    1. A site plan, drawn to scale, showing:
        a. The nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the property in question.
        b. Names and location of all lakes, water bodies, water ways and drainage facilities within 300 feet of the site.
        c. The elevations of the 10, 50, 100 and 500 year floods, where the data are available.
        d. The boundaries of the Regulatory Floodplain, SFHA, floodway, riparian habitat zone, and channel migration area delineated in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
        e. The proposed drainage system including, but not limited to, storm sewers, overland flow paths, detention facilities and roads.
        f. Existing and proposed structures, fill, pavement and other impervious surfaces, and sites for storage of materials.
        g. All wetlands.
        h. Designated fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas.
        i. Existing vegetation and proposed vegetation.
        j. Description of the extent to which any water course will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
    2. If the proposed project involves regrading, excavation or filling, the site plan shall include proposed post-development terrain at one foot contour intervals.3. If the proposed project includes a new structure, substantial improvement, or repairs to a substantially damaged structure that will be elevated, the application shall include the flood protection elevation (FPE) for the building and site and the proposed elevations of the following:
        a. The top of bottom floor (including basement, crawlspace or enclosure floor)
        b. The top of the next higher floor.
        c. The top of the slab of an attached garage.
        d. The lowest elevation of machinery or equipment servicing the structure.
        e. The lowest adjacent (finished) grade next to the structure.
        f. The highest adjacent (finished) grade next to structure.
        g. The lowest adjacent grade at the lowest elevation of a deck or stairs, including structural support.
    4. If the proposed project includes dry floodproofing of a new structure, substantial improvement, or repairs to a substantially damaged nonresidential structure, the application shall include the flood protection elevation (FPE) for the building site. The elevation shall be noted in relation to the datum of the effective FIRM and the applicant shall provide certification by a registered professional engineer or licensed architect that the dry floodproofing methods meet the criteria in accordance with this ordinance.
    5. If there has been no start of construction, a floodplain development permit shall expire one year after the date of issuance. Where the applicant documents a need for an extension beyond this period due to circumstances beyond the applicant’s control, the Community Development Director may authorize one or more extensions.
C. Administrative Officials. The Community Development Director, the City Engineer and the Building Official shall jointly administer and implement this section by granting or denying permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
D. Duties and Responsibilities. The duties of the administrative officials shall include, but not be limited to the following:
    1. Review all permit and land-use applications to determine that the requirements of this section have been satisfied.
    2. Review all applications to insure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
    3. Review all applications in the area of special flood hazard to determine if the proposed development adversely affects the flood-carrying capacity of the area.
    4. Review all applications to determine if the proposed development is located in the special flood hazard area or protected area and ensure that the provisions of this ordinance are met.
E. Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been established, the City shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or other development in Zone A comply with LMC 18A.40.170(B)(1), Residential Construction, LMC 18A.40.170(B)(2), Non-Residential Construction, and LMC 18A.40.170(B)(3), Manufactured Homes.
F. Information to be Obtained and Maintained. 
    1. Where base flood elevation data is provided by FEMA or required by this section, obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures and whether or not the structure contains a basement.
    2. For all new or substantially improved flood-proofed structures:
        a. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure was floodproofed; and
        b. Maintain the flood-proofing certifications required in LMC 18A.40.170, Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction.
    3. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this section.
    4. The Floodplain Administrator shall submit reports to include the projects for which they issue floodplain development permits, including effects to flood storage, fish habitat and all indirect effects of development and mitigation provided, to FEMA as required for the National Flood Insurance Program. [Ord. 630 § 14, 2015; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.40.140 Alteration of Watercourses - Flood Hazard Overlay.
A. The floodplain administrator shall notify adjacent jurisdictions and the state Department of Ecology or successor agency prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA.
B. Require that maintenance be provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished. If the maintenance program does not call for cutting of native vegetation, the system shall be oversized at the time of construction to compensate for said vegetation growth or any other natural factor that may need future maintenance.
C. An applicant for a project that will alter or relocate a watercourse shall submit a request for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) where required by FEMA. The City shall not grant any permit unless FEMA issues the CLOMR and the provisions of the letter are made a part of the permit requirements. [Ord. 630 § 15, 2015; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.40.150 Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries.
A. The City Engineer shall interpret the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions.
B. Any person contesting a flood area boundary may appeal the interpretation as provided in this title.
C. An appeal of the location of a flood area boundary shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this title, and:
    1. The danger that material may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others.
    2. The danger potential to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
    3. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
    4. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community.
    5. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable.
    6. The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
    7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
    8. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area.
    9. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
    10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site.
    11. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water systems, streets and bridges.
D. The City may attach such conditions to the granting of variances hereunder as deemed necessary to further the purposes of this section.
E. The City shall maintain records of all appeal actions and report any variances to FEMA upon request.
F. All requests to FEMA to revise or change the flood hazard data, including requests for a Letter of Map Revision and a Conditional Letter of Map Revision shall be reviewed by the Administrative Officials prior to submittal to FEMA.
    1. The Administrative Officials shall not sign any Community Acknowledgment Form for any requests based on filling or other development, unless the applicant for the letter documents that such filling or development is in compliance with this ordinance.
    2. The Administrative Officials shall not approve a request to revise or change a floodway delineation until FEMA has issued a Conditional Letter of Map Revision that approves the change.
G. If an applicant disagrees with the regulatory data prescribed by this ordinance, he/she may submit a detailed technical study needed to replace existing data with better data in accordance with FEMA mapping guidelines. If the data in question are shown on the published FIRM, the submittal must also include a request to FEMA for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision.
H. All new hydrologic and hydraulic flood studies conducted pursuant to this section shall consider future conditions and the cumulative effects from anticipated future land use changes. This review shall be in accordance with Regional Guidance for Hydrologic and Hydraulic Studies in Support of the Model Ordinance for Floodplain Management under the National Flood Insurance Program and the Endangered Species Act, FEMA Region X, 2012. [Ord. 630 § 16, 2015; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.40.160 Variances - Flood Hazard Overlay.
A. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in this section.
B. Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if the proposed development would result in any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
C. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
D. Variances shall only be issued upon:
    1. A showing of good and sufficient cause.
    2. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
    3. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
E. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice of the required lowest floor elevation stated in feet below the base flood elevation. Applicants shall be made aware that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the risk resulting from the reduced lowest flood elevation.
F. Variance Time Limit. Authorization of a variance shall be void after six (6) months unless the new construction, substantial improvement or approved activity has taken place. However, the Community Development Director may, at his discretion, extend authorization for one (1) additional six (6) month period upon request. [Ord. 630 § 17, 2015; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.40.170 Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
A. General Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards shall apply for all new construction and substantial improvements or other development:
    1. Anchoring. 
        a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
        b. All manufactured homes must be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors. Specific requirements shall be that:
            1. Over-the-top ties provided at each end of the manufactured home, with two (2) additional ties per side at intermediate locations and manufactured homes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring one (1) additional tie per side.
            2. Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five (5) additional ties per side at intermediate points and manufactured homes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring four (4) additional ties per side.
            3. All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds; and
            4. Additions to the manufactured home shall be similarly anchored.
        c. An alternative method of anchoring may involve a system designed to withstand a wind force of ninety (90) miles per hour or greater. Certification by a registered architect or engineer must be provided to the Building Official that this standard has been met.
    2. Construction Materials and Methods. 
        a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
        b. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
        c. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
    3. Utilities. 
        a. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
        b. Water wells shall be located on high ground that is not in the floodway.
        c.New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and
        d. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
    4. Use of Openings in Enclosures Below a Structure's Lowest Floor. All new construction and substantial improvements, which have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters in those areas. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
    5. Subdivision Proposals. 
        a. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
        b. All public utilities and facilities serving subdivision proposals, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
        c. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
        d. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments that contain more than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is less.
        e. The final recorded subdivision plat shall include a notice that part of the property is in the SFHA, riparian habitat zone and/or channel migration area, as appropriate.
    6. Review of Building Permits. Where elevation data is not available either through Flood Insurance Study or from another authoritative source, applications for building and land use permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonable safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to elevate at least two (2) feet above grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates.
    7. Encroachments. It must be demonstrated that the cumulative effect of any proposed development, where combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point.
B. Specific Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided, the following provisions apply:
    1. Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall elevate the lowest floor, including basement, at least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation.
    2. Non-Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other non-residential structure shall either elevate the lowest floor, including basement, at least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
        a. Be flood-proofed so that below one (1) foot above the base flood level the structure is watertight, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
        b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
        c. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with the standards of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to the City for review and approval.
        d. Non-residential structures that are elevated and are not flood-proofed must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in this section.
        e. Applicants flood-proofing non-residential buildings shall be advised that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one (1) foot below the flood-proofed level (e.g., a building flood-proofed to the base flood level will be rated as one (1) foot below).
    3. Manufactured Homes. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-A30, AH, and AE shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated at least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation.
        a. Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system so that:
            1. The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated at least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation; or
            2. The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately designed foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
        b. New manufactured home parks and subdivisions. The following provisions apply for expansions to existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions. They also apply to existing manufactured home parks and subdivision where the repair, reconstruction or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before repair, reconstruction or improvement has commenced. The same provisions apply to manufactured homes not placed in a manufactured home park or subdivision:
            1. Pads or lots are elevated on compacted fill to or above the base flood level (insurance can be waived).
            2. Stands or lots are elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the mobile home will be at or above the base level (insurance required).
            3. Adequate surface drainage and access for hauler are provided; and
            4. In the instance of elevation on piers or pilings where:
                (a) lots are large enough to permit steps.
                (b) pier and piling foundations are placed in stable soil no more than ten (10) feet apart.
                (c) reinforcement is provided for piers and pilings more than six (6) feet above the ground level.
    4. Accessory Structures and Uses. 
        a. New construction and substantial improvement of residential accessory structures in special flood hazard areas are not subject to the requirements of this section, provided that:
            1. The floor area of all floors of the accessory structure totals one thousand (1,000) square feet or less.
            2. The accessory structure shall not be used for human habitation.
            3. The accessory structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential.
            4. The accessory structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
            5. The accessory structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation that may result in damage to other structures.
            6. All service facilities, such as electrical and heating equipment associated with the accessory structure, shall be elevated or floodproofed. b. If it is determined that the accessory structure may cause significant flood risk, all requirements of this section shall be satisfied.
        c. When accessory structures built under the provisions of this section exceed a value greater than ten (10) percent of the value of the principal residential structure, substantial increases in insurance rates may result.
    5. Critical Facilities. Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the greatest extent possible, located outside the limits of the special flood hazard area. Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the one hundred (100) year floodplain if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the one hundred (100) year floodplain shall have the lowest floor elevated three (3) feet or more above the level of the one hundred (100) year base flood elevation at the site. Flood-proofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. All access routes to critical facilities shall be elevated to at least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, to the greatest extent possible.
    6. Floodways. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential. The following provisions apply:
        a. Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development, shall be prohibited, except for:
            1. Repairs, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure which do not increase the ground floor area.
            2. Repairs, reconstruction or improvements to a structure, the cost of which does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the fair market value of the structure either before the repair, or reconstruction is started, or if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred.
            3. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications, which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions.
            4. Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places that do not increase the building's dimensions.
            5. Repairs, replacement, reconstruction or improvement to existing farmhouses located in designated floodways and on designated agricultural lands that do not increase the building's total square footage of encroachment and are consistent with all requirements of WAC 173-158-075.
            6. Repairs, replacement, reconstruction or improvements to substantially damaged residential dwellings other than farmhouses that do not increase the building’s total square footage of encroachment and are consistent with all requirements of WAC 173-158-075.
            7. Prior to the repair or replacement of a substantially damaged residential structure located within a floodway a recommendation shall be obtained from the Washington Department of Ecology in accordance with WAC 173-158-076.
            8. The applicant shall provide a certification by a registered professional engineer demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed development would not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
        b. All new construction and substantial improvements permitted pursuant to LMC 18A.40.170(B)(6)(a), Specific Standards, Floodways., shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of LMC 18A.40.170(B), Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction, Specific Standards.
        c. In areas with base flood elevations (but a regulatory floodway has not been designated), no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.
    7. Shallow Flooding Areas (AO Zones). Shallow flooding areas appear on FIRM as AO zones with depth designations. The base flood depths in these zones range from one (1) to three (3) feet above ground where a clearly defined channel does not exist, or where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is usually characterized as sheet flow. In all areas of special flood hazards designated as areas of shallow flooding, the following provisions shall apply:
        a. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures and manufactured homes shall have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated one (1) foot above the highest grade adjacent to the building site or above the depth number specified on the FIRM; at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified.
        b. All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall:
            1. Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one (1) foot above the highest adjacent grade of the building site or above the depth number specified on the FIRM, at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified, or;
            2. Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely flood proofed to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. If this method is used, compliance shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect.
        c. Require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
    8. Recreational Vehicle (RV) Parks. 
        a. All new RV park proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
        b. All public utilities and facilities serving RV parks, such as sewer, electrical, and water systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
        c. All RV park proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
        d. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for any RV park that is five (5) acres or greater in size.
        e. Recreational vehicles placed on sites shall be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days. To be allowed for longer periods recreational vehicles must be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on their wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or meet the requirements of Section 18A.40.170(B)(3).
    9. Site Design. 
        A. Structures and other development shall be located to avoid flood damage.
            1. If a lot has a buildable site out of the Regulatory Floodplain, all new structures shall be located in that area.
            2. If a lot does not have a buildable site out of the Regulatory Floodplain, all new structures, pavement and other development must be sited in the location that has the least impact on habitat by locating the structures as far from the water body as possible or placing the structures on the highest land and lot.
            3. A minimum setback of 15 feet from the Protected Area shall be required for all structures.
        B. All new development shall be designed and located to minimize the impact on flood flows, flood storage, water quality and habitat.
            1. Stormwater and drainage features shall incorporate low impact development techniques that mimic pre-development hydrologic conditions. Such methods include stormwater infiltration, rain gardens, grass swales, filter strips, disconnected impervious areas, permeable pavement and vegetative roof systems.
            2. If the proposed project will create new impervious surfaces so that more than 10 percent of the portion of the parcel in the Regulatory Floodplain is covered by impervious surface, the applicant shall demonstrate that there will be no net increase in the rate and volume of stormwater surface runoff that leaves the site or that the adverse impact is mitigated.
    10. Hazardous Materials. No new development shall create a threat to public health, public safety, or water quality. Chemicals, explosives, gasoline, propane, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other materials that are hazardous, toxic, or a threat to water quality are prohibited from the Regulatory Floodplain. This prohibition does not apply to small quantities of these materials kept for normal household use. [Ord. 630 § 18, 2015; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.40.180 Allowable Activities Within the Regulatory Floodplain.
A. Activities that do not meet the definition of “development” are allowed in the Regulatory Floodplain without the need for a floodplain development permit under this ordinance, provided all other Federal, State and local requirements are met. Activities include, but are not limited to, the following.
    1. Routine maintenance of landscaping that does not involve grading, excavation or filling.
    2. Removal of noxious weeds and hazard trees and replacement of non-native vegetation with native vegetation.
    3. Normal maintenance of structures, such as re-roofing and replacing siding, provided that such work does not qualify as a substantial improvement.
    4. Normal maintenance of above ground public utilities and facilities, such as replacing downed power lines.
    5. Normal street and road maintenance, including filling potholes, repaving, and installing signs and traffic signals, but not expansion of paved areas.
    6. Normal maintenance of a levee or other flood control facility prescribed in the operations and maintenance plan for the levee or flood control facility.
    Plowing and other normal farm practices (other than structures or filling) on farms in existence as of the effective date of this ordinance.
B. The following activities are allowed in the Regulatory Floodplain without the analysis required in Sec. 18A.40.170.B.6(5) or the habitat impact assessment required under LMC 14.154.050(C), providing all other provisions of this ordinance are met, including obtaining a floodplain development permit:
    1. Repairs or remodeling of an existing structure, provided that the repairs or remodeling are not a substantial improvement or a repair of substantial damage.
    2. Expansion of an existing structure that is no greater than ten percent beyond its existing footprint, provided that the repairs or remodeling are not a substantial improvement or a repair of substantial damage. This measurement is counted cumulatively from the effective date of this ordinance or September 22, 2011, whichever is earlier. If the structure is in the floodway, there shall be no change in the dimensions perpendicular to flow.
    3. Activities with the sole purpose of creating, restoring or enhancing natural functions associated with floodplains, streams, lakes, estuaries, marine areas, habitat, and riparian areas that meet Federal and State standards, provided the activities do not include structures, grading, fill or impervious surfaces.
    4.Development of open space and recreational facilities, such as parks, trails and hunting grounds, that do not include structures, grading, fill, impervious surfaces or removal of more than 5% of the native vegetation on that portion of the property in the Regulatory Floodplain. [Ord. 630 § 19, 2015.]

18A.40.300 Senior Housing Overlay.

18A.40.310 Purpose - Senior Housing Overlay.
In order to provide opportunities for housing elders in areas of the City where the greatest level of services are available, the comprehensive plan creates an overlay area in which senior housing is to be focused. This section carries forward the comprehensive plan’s intent in creating regulatory incentives for senior housing within the Senior Housing overlay (SHO). [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.40.320 Applicability - Senior Housing Overlay.
This section applies, at the developer’s option, to land-use applications for senior housing within the SHO, except for the construction of a single-family dwelling on one (1) lot that can accommodate only one (1) dwelling based upon the density of the underlying zoning designation. This section shall not apply to congregate care and group living facilities. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.40.330 Provisions - Senior Housing Overlay.
A. All of the provisions and requirements of the City’s housing incentives program set forth in LMC 18A.50.700, Housing Incentives Program, shall be equally applied to senior housing developed within the SHO.
B. An additional fifteen (15) percent density bonus, over the maximum allowable additional density afforded by the Housing Incentives Program, shall be afforded in return for the provision of low-income or market-rate senior housing within the SHO, regardless of zoning district. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.40.340 Monitoring - Senior Housing Overlay.
In conjunction with monitoring required for the housing incentives program, the Community Development Department shall maintain a list of all senior units created within the SHO using the additional incentives herein. In conjunction with evaluation of the housing incentives program required as part of comprehensive plan review and amendment processes, the level and type of senior housing production under these terms shall likewise be reviewed and evaluated. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.40.400 Sexually Oriented Business Overlays.

18A.40.410 Findings and Legislative Record.
Prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, the City of Lakewood City Council enacted legislation related to Sexually Oriented Businesses (SOBs) based upon information and findings relevant to this Ordinance. These prior legislative actions included City of Lakewood Ordinances No. 171 and 258.
Lakewood Ordinance No. 171, adopted in May of 1998, provided for the licensing of and regulation of conduct within adult cabarets. Ordinance No. 171 based these regulations in part upon the City’s lack of a clearly demarked commercial/business district, the location of commercial and business land uses near residential neighborhoods, and the need to protect citizens - especially children - from criminal and unlawful activities and impacts associated with SOBs. These impacts are known as, and are generally referred to herein as, the harmful secondary effects of SOBs.
Ordinance No. 258, adopted in February of 2001, regulated the location and zoning of SOBs within the City. Ordinance 258 cited a detailed review of the national record regarding the harmful secondary effects of SOBs, as well as studies from cities such as New York, Indianapolis, San Diego and Los Angeles. Ordinance 258 found convincing documented evidence based upon that record to find that SOBs have detrimental effects upon nearby businesses and residential neighborhoods.
The legislative record and findings of Ordinances No. 171 and 258 are incorporated herein by this reference as if set forth fully herein, and such records and findings are cited hereby as support for the zoning regulations created in this Ordinance.
Prior to adoption of this Ordinance, the PAB held public meetings to consider relevant amendments to the City’s comprehensive plan. During a public hearing held on October 15, 2003, approximately 35 people testified and many written comments were submitted in response to the City’s proposed amendments, which at that time contemplated concentrating all SOBs within the City into a single defined overlay area. The comments were overwhelmingly negative and cited citizen perceptions regarding the adverse effects that adult entertainment and SOBs have upon the community, neighborhoods and families exposed to such land uses. Citizens resoundingly stated their belief that concentrating SOBs into a single zone would irreparably harm a thriving business community located near the proposed overlay.
The PAB then recommended to the City Council that the comprehensive plan goals and policies related to SOBs be deleted to allow flexibility to implement the changes shown in this Ordinance, because, by state statute, amendments to the City’s comprehensive plan can be made only once per year. The City Council adopted this amendment to the comprehensive plan on December 1, 2003. Thereafter, public meetings were held and the PAB worked with a variety of stakeholders in formulating SOB zoning regulations that fit the specific needs, community and conditions of the City. The stakeholder groups included representatives from businesses, educational institutions, community leaders, and representatives from the adult entertainment industry.
After amendment of the City’s comprehensive plan, the PAB commenced studying alternative SOB zoning proposals. The PAB’s research and study resulted in the specific findings listed below. Based upon these findings the PAB recommended to the Lakewood City Council that the harmful secondary effects of SOBs be minimized through regulations upon the zoning, operating and locating of SOBs as specified in this Ordinance. The PAB found that through creation of overlay areas within the City wherein SOBs could locate, the City could control the locations where SOBs exist and minimize the harmful secondary effects SOBs have upon business districts, neighborhoods and residential areas. Further, by creation of two or more overlay areas where SOBs will be allowed, the City can minimize the impact SOBs have upon any individual neighborhood or district within the City.
The City Council, through the passage of this Ordinance, does hereby adopt the specific findings of the PAB in regard to zoning SOBs, stated as follows:
A. Materials submitted to the PAB demonstrated that SOBs can create harmful secondary effects upon the communities they are located in, are detrimental to and conflict with the peace and tranquility of neighborhoods and residential land uses, and if left unregulated can cause deterioration of property values and increased crime and public disturbances in the areas in which they are located.
B. Citizens and business owners within the City have publicly expressed their fear of the harmful secondary effects SOBs cause and have testified that they strongly oppose SOB land uses. Citizens have expressed that they believe SOB land uses are harmful to neighborhoods and negatively impact families and children. Business owners have expressed concern that SOB land uses may impact commercial areas and business districts, increasing incidents of crime and decreasing property values.
C. Based upon a review of land use patterns, zoning and demographics throughout Lakewood, the PAB found that some areas are entirely unsuitable for and incompatible with SOB land uses. Such areas include residential neighborhoods and locations in close proximity to churches and schools. The PAB also found that the harmful effects of SOBs may be minimized if SOBs are limited to the areas where they currently exist; to areas that contain no residential land uses or only nonconforming residential land uses; and areas separated topographically and/or geographically from residential neighborhoods, churches and schools.
D. The PAB found that the creation of overlay areas wherein Sexually Oriented Businesses may locate is in the best interests of the City of Lakewood and necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Protecting, preserving and improving the quality of its residential neighborhoods is sufficient to justify zoning regulations upon SOBs, as shown in the Washington State Supreme Court’s opinion in Northend Cinema, Inc. v. City of Seattle, 90Wn.2d 709, 585 P.2d 1153 (1978).
E. The PAB reviewed police incident reports that documented the occurrence of crimes within adult cabarets in the City. Since adoption of the City’s adult entertainment standards of conduct and violations in 1998, three adult entertainment cabarets have offered or allowed entertainment that violated City regulations. These adult cabarets are Lipstix (now known as Stilettos), the New Players Club, and the Déjà vu Nightclub. Police incident reports and court records regarding these violations are contained within the legislative record for this Ordinance.
F. The PAB has reviewed the administrative actions City officials have taken against the business licenses issued to adult entertainment cabarets. These administrative actions have included revocation of the New Players Club’s business license, a thirty (30) day suspension of Lipstix’ business license, and a pending action to revoke Stiletto’s business license for one year. The specific facts, violations and crimes that form the basis for these administrative actions are contained within the legislative record.
G. The PAB has reviewed records that indicate that improperly operated SOBs can be the focal point for a variety of crimes. These crimes were documented in the case of Heesan Corp. v. City of Lakewood, 118 Wn.App. 341, 75 P.3d 1003 (2003), wherein it was shown that entertainers at the New Players Club, a SOB located in the Ponders neighborhood of Lakewood, engaged in many illegal practices. These practices included entertainers offering to perform and engaging in sexual conduct in exchange for money, entertainers performing at less than four feet from the audience, and entertainers engaging in improper physical contact with customers. Additionally, the decision in Heesan Corp. v. City of Lakewood contained documentation that the premises of the New Players Club was used for the unlicensed consumption of alcohol, for illegal smoking of marijuana, and for the sale of other illegal drugs.
H. The PAB reviewed records that indicated that the harmful secondary effects of an improperly operated SOB can constitute a public or moral nuisance. Such a nuisance would impact the community as a whole, although the impact would be particularly burdensome to the employees and patrons of the business, and to property owners and persons residing and working in close proximity to the offending SOB land use.
I. The PAB concurred with the findings of the City of Lacey in the rationale for the adoption of City of Lacey Ordinances No. 11422 and 11274, regarding Urban Growth Area Zoning and adult entertainment facilities. When adopting these Ordinances in 1996 and 1997, the City of Lacey found that studies in Austin, Texas, and in the state of Michigan provided convincing evidence that crime increased in areas close to adult businesses. The City of Lacey also cited to a Detroit, Michigan, report and to evidence gathered from Seattle and Tacoma, Washington, that demonstrated that cities and metropolitan areas experienced harmful secondary effects related to adult entertainment activities. These harmful secondary effects can cause a detrimental impact upon residential land uses leading to destabilization of residential areas and depressed property values.
J. The PAB concurred with the findings contained in City of Spokane Ordinances No. 32778 and 33001, where the Spokane Planning Services Department documented evidence that adult bookstores and adult entertainment establishments create harmful secondary effects including negative health, safety, economic and aesthetic impacts upon neighboring properties and the community as a whole. The PAB cited to World Wide Video v. City of Spokane, No. 02-35936 (9th Cir. 2004), as documenting evidence of the harmful secondary effects of adult entertainment and as further support for the belief that reducing the undesirable effects of adult entertainment and SOBs is a substantial governmental interest that can be achieved with time, place and manner restrictions upon where such businesses may locate within a City.
K. The PAB reviewed studies that indicated that adult bookstores generate harmful secondary effects upon neighborhoods, families and the community. The PAB also reviewed police incident reports that indicated that crimes involving indecent exposure can occur at adult bookstores that contain panoram devices. [Ord. 358 § 6, 2004.]

18A.40.415 Purpose and Intent.
Based upon the findings of the PAB, the City Council for the City of Lakewood does hereby adopt this Ordinance for the purpose of minimizing the harmful secondary effects of SOB land uses within the City. It is the intent of this Ordinance to protect Lakewood’s citizens, persons who own property within the City, and people who travel through the City from crime, blight and other harmful secondary effects associated with SOBs.
By limiting the areas in which SOBs are allowed to operate, the Lakewood City Council intends to protect families, children and residential neighborhoods from crimes, nuisances and disturbances of the public peace and safety; to protect residential neighborhoods and business districts from blight and deterioration of property values; and to protect, foster and support the goals and ideals of schools, religious and public service organizations serving the Lakewood community.
It is not the intent of this Ordinance to suppress any constitutionally protected speech or expression. This Ordinance is intended as a content neutral regulation to diminish and control crime and the harmful secondary effects associated with SOBs, while allowing the existence of constitutionally protected expression. [Ord. 358 § 6, 2004.]

18A.40.420 Sexually Oriented Business Overlays Created.
There are hereby created Sexually Oriented Business Overlays (SOBOs) within the geographic areas of the City as identified and depicted on “Exhibit A (SOBOs),” attached hereto and by this reference incorporated herein. Sexually oriented businesses as defined within this title may locate only within the SOBOs identified in “Exhibit A.” [Ord. 358 § 6, 2004.]
Code reviser’s note: Exhibit D of Ordinance No. 358 is on file in the City Clerk’s Office.

18A.40.430 Applicability - Sexually Oriented Business land uses.
A. This section shall apply to all SOB land uses, as defined herein or as may be hereafter defined, located within the City of Lakewood.
B. Any SOB that lawfully existed, held all valid and necessary business licenses, and operated within the boundaries of any SOBO identified in “Exhibit A” as of the effective date of this Ordinance shall be considered a conforming land use.
C. Any SOB that lawfully existed, held all valid and necessary business licenses, and operated within the City in a location or parcel of property not completely within the boundaries of a SOBO as of the date of passage of this Ordinance shall be considered a vested but nonconforming land use.
D. All new applications for SOB business licenses shall be denied unless the application clearly identifies a business location and premises located within a SOBO and the application is in compliance with all requirements stated in this title.
E. If a new application for a SOB business license shows a SOB business location or premises address upon a parcel of land partially within a SOBO, the application shall be approved if the application conforms in all other ways with the requirements of this title and at least 75 percent of the square footage of the parcel upon which the SOB is proposed is located within a SOBO. [Ord. 358 § 6, 2004.]

18A.40.435 Notice to Noncoforming SOB Land Uses.
A. All SOBs made nonconforming upon the effective date of this Ordinance shall be notified in writing of such nonconforming status pursuant to LMC 18A.40.455.
B. The City Manager or the designee thereof shall determine whether SOBs lawfully existing on the effective date of this Ordinance are within SOBO zone boundaries. This determination shall be made within forty-five (45) days after the effective date of this Ordinance. This determination of zoning compliance shall be based upon the boundaries of the SOBOs and the location of each SOB as determined by a review of business licensing information and public records available to the City.
C. Determinations of nonconformity under this section shall be subject to appeal as provided in LMC 18A.02.500 through 18A.02.575 and LMC 18A.02.740 as a process one administrative action. Appeal of the hearing examiner’s decision on a determination of nonconformity shall be to superior court as provided in LMC 18A.02.755. [Ord. 358 § 6, 2004.]

18A.40.440 Processing of Applications for Licenses and Permits.
A. Upon receipt of an application for a permit or license for a SOB, the City Manager or the designee thereof shall determine within 28 days whether the application is complete. Whether an application is complete shall be determined as specified in LMC 18A.02.152 for permits, as specified in LMC 5.16.040 for adult cabaret licenses, as specified in LMC chapter 5.02 for SOB bookstores, and as specified in LMC 5.20.070 for SOBs applying for panoram, preview, picture arcade or peep show license. Should an application for a SOB license or permit be determined to be incomplete, the City Manager or designee shall notify the applicant in writing within the twenty-eight (28) day time frames stated above and describe the specific information necessary to complete the application. Should the City fail to request additional information or determine that an application is incomplete within the time frames specified in this section, the application shall be deemed complete and processed, accepted, denied, modified or conditioned within the time periods set forth in sub-sections (B) and (C) below.
B. Upon receipt of a completed application for a new SOB business license, the City Manager or designee thereof shall determine whether the application complies with all requirements of the Lakewood Land Use and Development Code, LMC Title 5 and this chapter. The City Manager or Designee shall determine compliance within thirty-five (35) days after receiving a completed application.
C. Upon receipt of a completed application for a permit related to a SOB land use, the City manager or designee thereof shall determine whether the permit application complies with all requirements of the Lakewood Land Use and Development Code and this title. The City Manager or designee shall determine compliance within one hundred and twenty (120) days of the receipt of the completed application based upon information contained within the application, the boundaries of the SOBO zone, and public records available to the City at the time of receipt of the application. Determinations related to SOB permit applications shall be processed in the same manner as any other completed permit application received by the City, however determinations regarding completed SOB permit applications must be made within one hundred and twenty (120) days of the receipt of the completed application.
D. Should the City fail to make a determination of zoning compliance or fail to specifically approve, condition, modify or deny a completed application for an SOB-related license or permit within the time frames set forth above, the SOB application will be assumed to be in conformity with all applicable zoning requirements. This presumption shall have the effect of making the application or permit a lawful and vested land use even if the City erred by failing to make a determination or by failing to deny, accept, condition or modify a license or permit.
E. Should a SOB that obtained a de facto license or permit as described above be found not to comply with applicable zoning or development regulations, the SOB land use shall obtain nonconforming status through the vested permit or application. [Ord. 358 § 6, 2004.]

18A.40.445 Regulations Within SOBO.
Newly established or created SOBs shall be allowed to locate anywhere within a SOBO except that all new SOBs must be located at least 1000 feet away from any SOB that lawfully existed prior to the receipt of the new application. New SOBs shall be required to locate at least 1000 feet away from existing conforming and existing nonconforming SOBs without regard to whether any nonconforming SOB is located within a SOBO. The 1000 foot distance separation shall be measured from the nearest building used for an existing SOB to the nearest portion of any building proposed to be used for a new SOB land use. [Ord. 358 § 6, 2004.]

18A.40.450 Expiration of Nonconforming Status.
A. Nonconforming SOBs shall be discontinued upon the occurrence of any one or more of the following:
    1. Upon abandonment of a nonconforming SOB land use for six months or longer. For the purposes of this section, abandonment shall mean voluntary discontinuance or closure of the SOB land use or failure to apply for required permits to rebuild, remodel and/or reopen the business after it has been damaged or destroyed due to an involuntary event of fire, natural disaster or other casualty. For the purposes of this section, business license suspension or revocation shall not constitute a voluntary discontinuance or closure of a SOB.
    2. Upon a change in use of the business to a use not defined as an SOB.
B. Nonconforming SOB land uses may apply for permits to make renovations or repairs as necessary or required for safety and health purposes. Applications for permits to perform renovations or repairs shall be processed, approved, modified, conditioned or denied in compliance with LMC 18A.02.835 and 18A.40.440.
C. To determine issues regarding whether a SOB has nonconforming status or has maintained nonconforming status pursuant to this section, the City Manager or designee shall rely upon the process and types of evidence listed in LMC 18A.02.845. [Ord. 358 § 6, 2004.]

18A.40.455 Notice and Order - Sexually Oriented Businesses.
A. Any SOB that becomes nonconforming upon the effective date of this Ordinance shall be given written notice of such nonconforming status by notice and order issued by the City Manager or designee pursuant to LMC 18A.40.435 and this section.
B. Whenever a completed application for a new SOB license or for a permit related to a SOB is denied, conditioned or modified, written notice shall be given to the applicant by notice and order issued by the City Manager or designee pursuant to this section.
C. A notice and order, and any amended or supplemental notice and order, shall be served upon the owner of the SOB either personally, by posting upon the property and personal service upon the manager or person responsible for the business during business hours, or by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested and addressed to the business owner at the address which appears on the most current license or permit application on file with the City.
D. Notice and orders issued pursuant to this section shall contain the following information:
    1. The street address, when available, and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the nonconforming business is located.
    2. A statement clearly informing the applicant that an administrative determination has been made in regard to the SOB.
    3. A description of or specific statement as to the reason(s) justifying the administrative determination.
    4. A statement advising the SOB owner that an appeal may be made from the notice and order or from any action of the City Manager or designee to the City’s Hearing Examiner. Appeals shall be governed by the provisions of chapter 1.36 LMC. Failure to appeal shall constitute a waiver of all rights to an administrative hearing and appeal of the matter.
E. Timely Hearing of Appeals. Within forty-five (45) days of the receipt of a properly perfected appeal, the City Clerk shall set an appeal hearing before the Hearing Examiner and send notice of such hearing in writing to the SOB that requested the appeal. The Hearing Examiner hearing must be held within ninety (90) days after the receipt of an appeal under this chapter, unless the party, entity or person seeking appeal waives this requirement in writing. Upon closing of the record in such an appeal, the Hearing Examiner shall have ten (10) days within which to render a written decision upon the appeal.
F. General Business Licensing Provisions Referenced. The provisions of chapter 5.02 LMC shall apply to issues of licensing, zoning, development regulation, and notice and orders issued under this chapter to the extent that the provisions of chapter 5.02 LMC are not in specific conflict with the provisions set forth in this chapter. [Ord. 585 § 34, 2014; Ord. 358 § 6, 2004.]

18A.40.460 Definitions - Sexually Oriented Businesses.
The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
A. ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. Any entertainment that includes the following:
    1. Any public exhibition, performance, dance or conduct of any type where such exhibition, performance, or dance involves a person who is unclothed or in such costume, attire, or clothing as to expose any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, or wearing any device or covering exposed to view which simulates the appearance of any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
    2. Any public exhibition, performance, dance or conduct of any type that is distinguished or characterized by a predominant emphasis on the depiction, description, simulation or relation to the following specified sexual activities:
        a. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
        b. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
        c. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast.
        d. Any exhibition, performance, dance or conduct which is intended to sexually stimulate any member of the public. This includes, but is not limited to, any such exhibition, performance, dance or conduct performed for, arranged with or engaged in with fewer than all members of the public for which payment is made, either directly or indirectly, for such performance, exhibition, dance or conduct.
        Provided, however, that for the purposes of this chapter, adult entertainment activities do not include the following: plays, operas, musicals, or other dramatic works that are not obscene; classes, seminars and lectures which are held for serious scientific or educational purposes and which are not obscene; or exhibitions, performances, expressions or dances that are not obscene. Provided, however, that the exemptions listed above shall not apply to sexual conduct defined in LMC 5.16.010(O), or the sexual conduct described in RCW 7.48A.010(2)(b)(ii) and (2)(b)(iii).
B. ADULT-ORIENTED MERCHANDISE. Any goods, products, commodities, or other wares, including but not limited to, videos, CD-ROMs, DVDs, magazines, books, pamphlets, posters, cards, periodicals or non-clothing novelties, which depict, describe or simulate the anatomical areas or sexual activities described under the definition of Adult Entertainment listed above.
C. ADULT RETAIL USE. A retail establishment which, for money or any other form of consideration, either:
    1. Has, as a primary part of its business, the purpose or function of selling, exchanging, renting, loaning, trading, transferring, and/or providing for viewing or using, off the premises, any adult oriented merchandise; or
    2. Provides for, as its substantial stock in trade, the sale, exchange, rental, loan, trade, transfer, and/or provide for viewing or use, off the premises, any adult-oriented merchandise.
    For the purposes of this chapter, a “primary part of its business” includes, but is not limited to, instances where a business provides or has advertising displays, merchandise, or product information reasonably visible to customers and other persons within the business facilities that shows, displays, or otherwise depicts adult-oriented merchandise or other sexually oriented business activities. Provided, however, that it shall not be considered a “primary part of its business” if such display, merchandise, or product information is only reasonably visible from within a limited portion of the business facility screened from general view, taking up not more than twenty (20) percent of the customer floor space, and where the access to the limited portion can be controlled to prevent accidental or incidental viewing of the display, merchandise, or product information by customers and other persons outside the limited portion of the business facilities.
    Also, for the purposes of this chapter, a “substantial stock in trade” refers to, but is not limited to, instances where twenty (20) percent or more of the revenue generated by the business is derived from the sale, exchange, rental, loan, trade, transfer, and/or provision of adult-oriented merchandise; twenty (20) percent or more of the inventory of the business is adult-oriented merchandise; or twenty (20) percent or more of the customers of the business buy, exchange, rent, borrow, trade, transfer, and/or shop for adult-oriented merchandise in or from the business.
D. PANORAM. Any device which, for payment of a fee, membership fee, or other charge, is used to view, exhibit, or display a film, videotape, or videodisc. All such devices are denominated in this chapter by the terms “panoram” or “panoram device.” The terms panoram and panoram device as used in this chapter do not include games which employ pictures, views, or video displays; or state-regulated gambling devices.
E. SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. A business that includes any one (1) or more of the following as defined herein: “adult entertainment facility,” “adult-oriented merchandise,” “adult retail use,” and/or “panoram”; or a similar facility, merchandise, or entertainment. [Ord. 358 § 6, 2004.]

18A.40.470 Prohibition and Public Nuisance.
All SOBs within the City of Lakewood shall be operated and maintained in compliance with this Ordinance. Any SOB not conducted and maintained in compliance with the SOBO requirements set forth in this Chapter is hereby declared a public nuisance subject to abatement and removal. [Ord. 358 § 6, 2004.]

18A.40.480 Provision for Conformance - Sexually Oriented Businesses.
If any portion of this section is deemed to be in conflict or inconsistent with any other provisions of the Lakewood Municipal Code, including, but not limited to other sections of this title, such other provisions shall be construed in conformity herewith; provided, that if such other provisions cannot be so construed, then the provisions of this section shall control, and such other provisions shall be deemed modified to conform herewith, for the purposes of this section only. [Ord. 358 § 6, 2004.]

18A.40.500 Planned Development District.

18A.40.510 Purpose – Planned Development District.
A planned development district is a mechanism by which the City may permit a variety in type, design, and arrangement of structures; and enable the coordination of project characteristics with features of a particular site in a manner consistent with the public health, safety and welfare. A planned development district allows for innovations and special features in site development, including the location of structures, conservation of natural land features, protection of critical areas and critical area buffers, the use of low impact development techniques, conservation of energy, and efficient utilization of open space. [Ord. 651 § 25, 2016.]

18A.40.520 Application for a Planned Development District (PDD).
A. Process III. A PDD is a process III application type and subject to all the procedural requirements applicable to this application type.
B. PDD Applications. An application for approval of a PDD shall be submitted to the Community Development Department on forms provided by the Department along with established fees.
    1. PDD with Subdivision. For those planned development districts that include the division of land, a PDD application shall only be accepted as complete if it is submitted concurrent with an application for preliminary plat approval that includes all information required pursuant to LMC Title 17 and other applicable City regulations. Seven copies of all associated application materials must be submitted in hard copy format. Digital application materials (e.g., CD copies) may fulfill a portion of the required hard copy applications as approved by the City.
    2. PDD with No Subdivision. A binding site plan is required for all planned development districts that do not require the subdivision of land and associated preliminary plat. Requirements for the binding site plan shall include:
        a. Existing Plat. All information recorded on the existing plat;
        b. Structures. The location of all proposed structures;
        c. Landscaping. A detailed landscape plan indicating the location of existing vegetation to be retained, location of vegetation and landscaping structures to be installed, the type of vegetation by common name and taxonomic designation, and the installed and mature height of all vegetation;
        d. Schematic. Schematic plans and elevations of proposed buildings with samples of all exterior finish material and colors, the type and location of all exterior lighting, signs and accessory structures;
        e. Conditions. Inscriptions or attachments setting forth the limitations and conditions of development, as well as an outline of the documents of the owners’ association, bylaws, deeds, covenants and agreements governing ownership, maintenance and operation of the planned development district shall be submitted with the binding site plan. Planned development district covenants shall include a provision whereby unpaid taxes on all property owned in common shall constitute a proportioned lien on all property of each owner in common. The City may require that it be a third party beneficiary of certain covenants with the right but not obligation to enforce association-related documents; and
        f. Conformity with Site Plan and Final Plat. Provisions ensuring the development will be in conformance with the site plan and shall include all the required certificates of a final plat.
    3. PDD with a Site-Specific Rezone. For those planned development districts that include a site-specific rezone, a PDD application shall only be accepted as complete if it is submitted concurrent with an application for a site-specific rezone that includes all information required pursuant to Chapters 1.36 and 1.38 LMC, LMC 18A.02.502, and other applicable City regulations.
C. All PDD Applications. An applicant for a PDD shall submit the following items to the City, unless the Director finds in writing that one or more submittals are not required due to unique circumstances related to a specific development proposal:
    1. Narrative. A detailed narrative that includes:
        a. Improvement. A description detailing how the proposed development will be superior to or more innovative than conventional development methods as allowed under the City’s land use regulations and how the approval criteria set forth in LMC 18A.40.540 have been satisfied;
        b. Public Benefit. A description of how the proposed PDD will benefit the public in a manner greater than that achieved if the project was to be developed using conventional land use regulations;
        c. Density Table. A table illustrating the density and lot coverage of the overall development, with the proportion of the site devoted to open space clearly indicated;
        d. Uses. A description of the types and numbers of dwelling units proposed and the overall land use density and intensity;
        e. Open Space and Recreation. A description of the proposed open space and recreation areas including any proposed improvements, including specific details regarding the ownership and maintenance of such areas;
        f. Landscaping. Detailed information regarding all proposed landscaping that is not included on an associated landscaping plan;
        g. Modifications. A description of the specific City standards as set forth in the underlying zoning district that the applicant is proposing for modification in accordance with Chapter 18A.30 LMC; and
        h. Impacts. A description of potential impacts to neighboring properties and how impacts have been mitigated through site design, screening, buffering and other methods;
    2. Site Plan. A site plan with the heading “Planned Development District Site Plan” that includes any additional information that is not included on the standard preliminary plat map, including building footprints, proposed landscaping, open space and parks and/or recreational areas including trails and proposed setbacks;
    3. Drawings. Elevation drawings illustrating facade and building design elements, including height, overall bulk/mass and density and proposed residential design features that will provide for a superior development;
    4. Landscape Plan/Map. A conceptual landscape plan/map showing the proposed location and types of vegetation and landscaping. The landscape plan may also be incorporated into the PDD site plan and narrative;
    5. Phases. A phasing plan, if the development will occur in distinct phases with a written schedule detailing the timing of improvements;
    6. Development Agreement. A draft development agreement, if proposed by the applicant or as required by the City; and
    7. Conditions. A draft of proposed covenants, conditions and restrictions demonstrating compliance with this chapter.
D. An applicant shall provide sufficient facts and evidence to enable the Hearing Examiner to make a decision. The established fee shall be submitted at time of application.
E. Notice of application shall be provided pursuant to LMC 18A.02.670. [Ord. 704 § 2, 2019; Ord. 651 § 26, 2016.]

18A.40.530 Public Hearing – Planned Development District.
A. The Hearing Examiner shall hold an open record public hearing on any proposed conditional use and shall give notice thereof in accordance with the procedures established pursuant to LMC 18A.02.700.
B. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of LMC 18A.02.720. [Ord. 651 § 27, 2016.]

18A.40.540 Required Findings – Planned Development District.
A PDD shall only be granted after the Hearing Examiner has reviewed the proposed use and has made written findings that all of the standards and criteria set forth below have been met or can be met subject to conditions of approval:
A. The PDD is consistent with the comprehensive plan; and
B. The PDD, by the use of permitted flexibility and variation in design, is a development practice that results in better urban design features than found in traditional development. Net benefit to the City may be demonstrated by one or more of the following:
    1. Placement, type or reduced bulk of structures, or
    2. Interconnected usable open space, or
    3. Recreation facilities, or
    4. Other public facilities, or
    5. Conservation of natural features, or
    6. Conservation of critical areas and critical area buffers beyond, or
    7. Aesthetic features and harmonious design, or
    8. Energy efficient site design or building features, or
    9. Use of low impact development techniques;
C. The PDD results in no greater burden on present and projected public utilities and services than would result from traditional development and the PDD will be served by adequate public or private facilities including streets, fire protection, and utilities; and
D. The perimeter of the PDD is compatible with the existing land use or property that abuts or is directly across the street from the subject property. Compatibility includes but is not limited to size, scale, mass and architectural design of proposed structures; and
E. Landscaping within and along the perimeter of the PDD is superior to that required by LMC 18A.50.425 and 18A.50.430, and landscaping requirements applicable to specific districts contained in LMC 18A.50.430, and enhances the visual compatibility of the development with the surrounding neighborhood; and
F. At least one major circulation point is functionally connected to a public right-of-way; and
G. Open space within the PDD is an integrated part of the project rather than an isolated element of the project; and
H. The design is compatible with and responds to the existing or intended character, appearance, quality of development and physical characteristics of the subject property and immediate vicinity; and
I. Roads and streets, whether public or private, within and contiguous to the site comply with guidelines for construction of streets; and
J. Streets and sidewalks, existing and proposed, are suitable and adequate to carry anticipated traffic within the proposed project and in the vicinity of the proposed project; and
K. Each phase of the proposed development, as it is planned to be completed, contains the required parking spaces, open space, recreation space, landscaping and utility area necessary for creating and sustaining a desirable and stable environment. [Ord. 651 § 28, 2016.]

18A.40.550 Action of Hearing Examiner – Planned Development District.
A. In addition to demonstrating compliance with the criteria as determined by the Hearing Examiner, the applicant shall accept those conditions that the Hearing Examiner finds are appropriate to obtain compliance with the criteria.
B. In permitting a PDD, the Hearing Examiner may impose any or all of the following conditions:
    1. Limit the manner in which the use is conducted, including restricting the time an activity may take place and restraints to minimize such environmental effects as noise, vibration, air pollution, glare and odor.
    2. Establish a special yard or other open space or lot area or dimension.
    3. Limit the height, size or location of a building or other structure.
    4. Designate the size, number, location or nature of vehicle access points.
    5. Increase the amount of street dedication, roadway width or improvements within the street right-of-way.
    6. Designate the size, location, screening, drainage, surfacing or other improvement of parking or truck loading areas.
    7. Limit or otherwise designate the number, size, location, and height of lighting of signs.
    8. Limit the location and intensity of outdoor lighting or require its shielding.
    9. Require screening, landscaping or another facility to protect adjacent or nearby property and designate standards for installation or maintenance of the facility.
    10. Design the size, height, location or materials for a fence.
    11. Protect existing trees, vegetation, water resources, wildlife habitat or other significant natural resources.
    12. Require provisions for public access, physical and visual, to natural, scenic and recreational resources.
    13. Require provisions for stormwater drainage including designating the size, location, screening, or other improvements of detention ponds and other facilities.
    14. Impose special conditions on the proposed development to ensure that development is in conformance with the surrounding neighborhood and the intent and purpose of the zoning district classification.
    15. Require such financial guarantees and evidence that any applied conditions will be complied with.
C. The decision of the Hearing Examiner is considered final and conclusive by the City. [Ord. 651 § 29, 2016.]

18A.40.560 Minimum Size.
Planned development districts may be located on lots of two acres or greater; when necessary, the applicant must demonstrate the preservation of a significant natural feature (examples: wetlands, tree preservation, creeks and steep slopes), enhanced urban design, or amenity by the use of the planned development district process. [Ord. 651 § 30, 2016.]

18A.40.570 Permitted Modifications.
A. All zoning, site development, and subdivision requirements may be modified in a planned development district in the interest of the expressed purposes above except:
    1. Permitted uses, administrative, and conditional uses;
    2. Street setbacks on exterior streets in residential zones;
    3. Surveying standards; and
    4. Engineering design and construction standards of public improvements but not including street right-of-way width. [Ord. 651 § 31, 2016.]

18A.40.580 Permitted Residential Density and Lot Sizes.
A. The number of dwelling units permitted in a planned development district may exceed the development standards found in LMC 18A.30.160. The permitted density shall be the maximum number of dwelling units allowed per gross acre (dua) and shall be as follows:
    1. R1 zoning district: 2 dua;
    2. R2 zoning district: 4 dua;
    3. R3 zoning district: 7 dua;
    4. R4 zoning district: 9 dua.
B. The minimum lot sizes for the residential zoning districts subject to the planned development district overlay shall be as follows:
    1. R1 zoning district: 20,000 gsf;
    2. R2 zoning district: 10,000 gsf;
    3. R3 zoning district: 6,000 gsf;
    4. R4 zoning district: 4,800 gsf.
C. The residential density and lot size standards of all other zoning districts are not subject to change. [Ord. 651 § 32, 2016.]

18A.40.590 Required Open Space and Recreation Facilities.
In planned development districts, 20 percent of the net development area shall be established as open space and/or planned development district community recreation facilities. Upon approval of the Hearing Examiner, up to five percent of the unbuildable land may be considered for inclusion in the required open space land upon a showing that such lands can and will be used for a specified recreational purpose. [Ord. 651 § 33, 2016.]

18A.40.600 Multiple Zoning Districts.
If a planned development district is proposed within two or more zoning districts, the maximum number of dwelling units will be the total allowed in each zone combined. The permitted land uses of the more restrictive zone shall apply to the entire planned development district. [Ord. 651 § 34, 2016.]

18A.40.620 Phased Development.
If a planned development district is planned to be completed in more than two years from the date of preliminary plat/site plan approval, the planned development district will be divided into phases or divisions of development, numbered sequentially in the order construction is to occur. The binding site plan for each phase shall be approved separately. Each division of development in a multiphase planned development district shall meet all the requirements of a planned development district independently. [Ord. 651 § 36, 2016.]

18A.40.630 Required Certificates and Approvals.
Binding site plans shall include all the required certificates of a final plat. PDDs shall be subject to design review in accordance with LMC 18A.50.200 through 18A.50.241. [Ord. 651 § 37, 2016.]

Chapter 18A.50 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

Sections:
18A.50.100   General Standards.
18A.50.105   Purpose.
18A.50.110   Applicability.
18A.50.115   General Standards.
18A.50.120   Building Transition Area.
18A.50.125   Density Standards.
18A.50.130   Height Standards.
18A.50.135   Streetscapes.
18A.50.140   Residential Accessory Buildings.
18A.50.145   Outdoor Storage of Recreational, Utility and Sporting Vehicles Accessory to Residential Uses.
18A.50.150   Parking of Commercial Vehicles Accessory to Residential Uses.
18A.50.155   Vehicle Service and Repair Accessory to Residential Uses.
18A.50.160   Animals in Residential Districts.
18A.50.165   Commercial Uses in the Multifamily 3 Zone within the Lakewood Station District.
18A.50.170   Outdoor Storage and Commercial Yard Surfacing Standards.
18A.50.175   Type 3, 4, and 5 Group Home Placement Standards.
18A.50.180   Manufactured Homes on Individual Lots.
18A.50.182   Amusement Establishment.
18A.50.185   Concession/Vending Services in City Parks.
18A.50.190   Standards for Uses and Accessory Uses Not Otherwise Listed.
18A.50.195   Concurrency.
18A.50.200   Community Design.
18A.50.211   Purpose - Community Design.
18A.50.221   Applicability - Community Design.
18A.50.231   Specific Uses Design Standards.
18A.50.241   General and Special Uses Design Standards.
18A.50.251   Administration.
18A.50.300   Tree Preservation.
18A.50.305   Purpose - Tree Preservation.
18A.50.310   Applicability - Tree Preservation.
18A.50.320   Significant Tree Preservation.
18A.50.400   Landscaping.
18A.50.405   Purpose - Landscaping.
18A.50.410   Applicability - Landscaping.
18A.50.415   Exceptions - Landscaping.
18A.50.420   Landscaping Standards.
18A.50.425   Landscaping Types.
18A.50.430   Landscaping Regulations by Zoning Districts.
18A.50.435   Landscaping Design.
18A.50.440   Street Tree Standards.
18A.50.445   Plan Requirements - Landscaping.
18A.50.450   Landscaping Installation.
18A.50.455   Water Conservation and Suggested Plant Materials.
18A.50.460   Maintenance - Landscaping.
18A.50.465   Guarantee - Landscaping.
18A.50.500   Parking.
18A.50.510   Purpose - Parking.
18A.50.520   Applicability - Parking.
18A.50.530   Parking Standards.
18A.50.540   Loading and Unloading.
18A.50.550   Use and Site Specific Standards.
18A.50.560   Parking Space Standards by Use Type.
18A.50.600   Sign Regulations.
18A.50.605   Purpose - Sign Regulations.
18A.50.607   Sign Definitions.
18A.50.610   Administration - Sign Regulations.
18A.50.615   Permanent Sign Permits.
18A.50.620   Prohibited Signs.
18A.50.625   Sign Permit Exemptions.
18A.50.630   General Provisions.
18A.50.635   Billboards.
18A.50.640   Provisions for Signs That are Permanent or Continuous Displays.
18A.50.665   Signs for Temporary Display.
18A.50.675   Nonconforming Signs.
18A.50.680   Sign Definitions.
18A.50.700   Housing Incentives Programs.
18A.50.710   Purpose - Housing Incentives Program.
18A.50.720   Applicability - Housing Incentives Program.
18A.50.730   General Provisions - Housing Incentives Program.
18A.50.740   Inclusionary Density Bonuses - Housing Incentives Program.
18A.50.750   Development Standard Modifications.
18A.50.760   Fee Reduction - Housing Incentives Program.
18A.50.770   Review Process - Housing Incentives Program.
18A.50.780   Monitoring - Housing Incentives Program.
18A.50.790   Definitions - Housing Incentives Program.
18A.50.800   Performance Standards.
18A.50.810   Purpose - Performance Standards.
18A.50.820   Applicability - Performance Standards.
18A.50.830   Nonconforming Uses - Performance Standards.
18A.50.840   Location.
18A.50.850   Restrictions on Dangerous and Objectional Elements.
18A.50.860   Performance Standards Procedures.

18A.50.100 General Standards.

18A.50.105 Purpose.
This section, in conjunction with other chapters and sections of the Land Use and Development Code of the Lakewood Municipal Code (LMC), provide specific minimal development standards and the methodologies used in applying those development standards. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.110 Applicability.
Unless otherwise specifically modified by an adopted development agreement, these development standards are applicable to all land development and uses, including improvements, intensification, changes in use, project permits, and land use approvals and actions. [Ord. 483 § 24, 2008; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.115 General Standards.
A. Legally Created Lots. 
    1. Development shall be permitted only on a legally created lot.
    2. To establish that a lot has been legally created, the applicant shall provide one (1) of the following:
        a. A copy of a recorded formal plat, short plat, or subdivision approved by Pierce County or the City of Lakewood pursuant to RCW 58.17 or RCW 58.16 separately describing the lot.
        b. A copy of the recorded boundary line adjustment or lot combination approved by Pierce County or the City of Lakewood separately describing the lot.
        c. Documentation that the creation of the lot was exempt from the provisions of the Pierce County or City of Lakewood Subdivision Regulations.
        d. A deed, contract of sale, mortgage, recorded survey, or tax segregation executed prior to August 13, 1974 that separately describes the lot.
    3. Where two (2) or more lots are used as a building site, the lots shall be legally combined to form a single lot prior to issuance of a building permit. No building permit shall be issued where the subject building, associated accessory buildings, or required improvements, other than shared access or parking facilities, cross a property line.
    4. The minimum width for all lots shall be fifty (50) feet.
    5. The minimum street frontage for all lots shall be fifty (50) feet, except flag lots and irregular lots as specified elsewhere in this section.
    6. There shall be a maximum length to width ratio of four (4) to one (1) for all new lots. The Director may waive this requirement where lot configurations are limited by the circumstances of the original parcel.
    7. The shape of the new lot shall conform to the general lot shapes described in this section unless the City determines that a specific topographic feature makes a standardized lot shape not feasible. In such cases, variations of general lot shapes shall be the minimum necessary to accommodate the topographic feature and shall not create extra long lots, lots with extended projections, excluding flag lots, or unusual lot shapes which make meeting development standards difficult. The presence of a topographic feature does not require the City to consider or approve variances to lot shape.
    8. No land may be so reduced in area that it would be in violation of minimum lot size, yard provisions, lot coverage, off-street parking or any other requirements of the zoning district or use.
    9. On a corner lot in any district, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede vision between a height of three (3) feet and nine (9) feet above the grade of the centerline of each intersecting street, and a line joining points along the street lines twenty (20) feet from the point of the intersection.
    [IMAGE: <18A.50.115_001.png>]
B. Setbacks and Lot Lines. Setbacks shall be measured from the property line of a lot to the wall line of a building or the exterior perimeter of a structure. A property line is a line of record bounding a lot that divides one (1) lot from another lot or from a public or private street right-of-way or any other private or public space.
    1. Front lot line shall be that portion of a lot line abutting a street right-of-way.
    2. Interior lot line shall be any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
    3. Rear lot line shall be that lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line, and which runs most parallel to the front lot line.
    4. Where the zoning district has a Garage/Carport setback requirement, that portion of the structure that acts as the vehicle entrance to the garage or carport portion of the structure, shall be setback from the property line as required by the zoning district to allow for vehicle parking and maneuvering.
    5. All lots shall contain at least one (1) front yard setback, except flag lots. A front yard setback shall be required abutting each right-of-way on corner lots and through lots. All lots shall contain one (1) rear yard setback except for through and flag lots. All other setbacks will be considered interior yard setbacks.
    6. Standard Lots. A standard lot is a lot that has only one (1) front lot line and one (1) rear lot line, and two (2) interior lot lines.
    7. Corner Lots. If a lot abuts the intersection of two (2) or more street rights-of-way, a front yard setback is required abutting each right-of-way. This requirement is also applicable to a lot fronting a single right-of-way that simulates a corner lot. The minimum setbacks shall be the applicable front yard setback requirement on all sides with street frontage and the applicable interior setback on all remaining sides without street frontage.
    [IMAGE: <18A.50.115_002.png>]
    [IMAGE: <18A.50.115_003.png>]
    [IMAGE: <18A.50.115_004.png>]
    8. Through Lots. In the case of a through lot, a front yard setback is required abutting each street right-of-way.
    9. Flag Lots. A flag lot shall have setbacks of a minimum of ten (10) feet from all property lines for both principal and accessory structures, except in R1 and R2 zoning districts where the minimum setbacks shall be fifteen (15) feet.
        a. Flag lots in residential zones (R1, R2, R3, R4, M R1, MR2, MF1, MF2, MF3) shall have a minimum frontage of twenty (20) feet on a public road or street from which access is taken. If such frontage does not exist, an easement to a public road or street shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width.
        b. Flag lots in non-residential zones (ARC, NC1, NC2, C1, C2, TOC, CBD, IBP, I1, I2, AC1, AC2, OSR1, OSR2) shall have a minimum frontage of twenty-four (24) feet on a public road or street from which an accessway is taken. If such frontage does not exist, an easement to a public road or street shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet in width.
    10. Irregular Lots. Where the shape of a lot does not generally conform to the types of lots described above, the City shall make a determination on the location of front, rear, and interior lot line, applicable setbacks and the applicable development standards for the lot.
        a. In the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, a line at least ten (10) feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line may be considered to the “rear lot line” at the City’s discretion.
        b. In the case of an interior or “landlocked” lot or other irregular lot that does not meet the minimum frontage required for access, the street frontage width standards shall be the same as those required for flag lots. Minimum setbacks shall be the setbacks of the zoning district in which the lot is located.
    11. Projection Exception. 
        a. Fireplace structures, cornices, eaves, canopies, sunshades, gutters, chimneys, sills, lintels, bay or garden windows, ornamental features or similar architectural elements may project into any setback, provided such projections are:
            1. Not wider than ten (10) feet for each wall projection.
            2. Not more than two (2) feet into an interior, front, or rear yard setback.
        b. Porches, decks, and other structures which do not exceed thirty (30) inches height from the finished lot grade may project into any setback, provided such projections do not extend more than three (3) feet into a front, rear, or interior yard setback.
        c. Steps may project into any setback, provided such projections do not extend more than three (3) feet into the setback.
        d. A wheelchair ramp may project up to half of the distance into any required setback, provided that it does not obstruct the sight distance of a driveway or a street.
    12. Fences Within the Required Setbacks. Fences to enclose, screen, or separate areas may be erected within required yard setbacks, provided that fences or other barriers:
        a. Do not obstruct the sight distance of a driveway, private street, or public street.
        b. Do not exceed a maximum height of six (6) feet within the interior and rear yards.
        c. Do not exceed a maximum height of four (4) feet within the front yard;
            1. Except that within the back half of a front yard setback on a corner lot, the rear lot line and the rear of the structure may be enclosed with a maximum six (6) foot high fence, and
            2. Except that within the required front yard setback of a lot fronting on a Principal Arterial Street, the maximum height shall be six (6) feet.
        d. Are not constructed of barbed wire, razor wire, embedded glass, or other similar materials, construction, or anti-entry techniques that may cause injury, except as provided for in LMC 18A.50.200, Community Design.
    13. Bulkheads and Retaining Walls. Any structure constructed and erected between lands of different elevations which is used to resist the lateral displacement of any material, control erosion, or protect structures may be placed within required yard setbacks to a maximum height of four (4) feet on front property lines and eight (8) feet on side and rear property lines, provided all applicable site distance requirements and building permit requirements are met. If more than one retaining wall is used to terrace a slope, the minimum horizontal distance between the back edge of a lower wall and the front edge of a upper wall shall be two (2) feet.
    14. Setbacks from ingress/egress easements. No additional setback is required from easements.
C. Access Control. 
    1. Access control shall be applied, at the discretion of the City Engineer, to all street frontages to minimize traffic conflicts and where appropriate, to preserve on-street parking and promote non-motorized modes of transportation.
    2. Areas for ingress and egress for automobiles shall be designed in such a manner that adequate visibility is ensured.
    3. Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street, or with access to an approved private street, and all structures shall be located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing and required off-street parking.
D. Residential Uses. 
    1. Adequate paved vehicular maneuvering area shall be provided in front of any residential garage or carport. The minimum depth of paving shall be twenty (20) feet from the front of the garage or carport and the minimum width shall be the total width of the garage or carport vehicular access opening(s).
    2. A stormwater control plan shall be required for all residential development with a slope in excess of ten (10) percent on any portion of the lot that will be developed.
    3. An erosion control plan shall be required for all residential development with a slope in excess of ten (10) percent on any portion of the lot that will be developed.
    4. A geotechnical assessment shall be required for all residential development with a slope in excess of twenty (20) percent on any portion of the lot that will be developed.
E. Shoreline Uses. 
    1. For new developments and additions that are adjacent to a shoreline or a shoreline buffer, the following information shall be submitted as part of the project permit application:
        a. A professional survey that contains and illustrates:
            1. The lot boundaries.
            2. The ordinary high water mark.
            3. The applicable shoreline setbacks.
            4. The topographic lines at two (2) foot contours.
            5. The location of building footprint.
            6. The elevation of all corners of the proposed structure.
            7. The location of any proposed docks/ramps and bulkheads.
            8. The location of all other existing and proposed structures on the site.
            9. The limits of proposed grading activity, soil disturbance and vegetation removal.
        b. Sketch(es) showing proposed excavation, fill, and post-construction grade changes in relation to pre-construction grades.
        c. An erosion control plan.
        d. A stormwater control plan.
        e. A tree survey for entire lot and the location of all existing vegetation within the applicable shoreline setback, including riparian buffers.
    2. Erosion control measures shall be in place and inspected prior to any grading activity on the site.
    3. The shoreline setback for buildings, retaining walls, rockeries, stairways, and all other structures, except bulkheads, docks, boat ramps, and other in-water uses permitted under the shoreline regulations, shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet horizontal distance from the ordinary high water mark, and this distance shall not be averaged.
    4. No vegetation removal, excavation, fill, or landscaping shall be undertaken within the shoreline setback without first obtaining the appropriate shoreline permit(s) or a shoreline exemption letter from the Community Development Department.
F. Prohibited Uses and Development. 
    1. No more than one (1) dwelling shall be permitted per lot in all single family residential zoning districts, except as provided in LMC 18A.70.300, Accessory Living Quarters, or as may be allowed by the specific use regulations of a particular district.
    2. Except as provided in Sections 18A.70.430 and 440, recreational and sporting vehicles shall not be used for dwelling purposes in any zoning district, and shall be subject to the requirements of LMC 18A.50.145, Outdoor Storage of Recreational and Sporting Vehicles.
    3. Tents, yurts, membrane or rigid canopies, or other similar structures shall not be placed or maintained in any commercial or industrial zoning district, except with the written authorization of the Community Development Director. The Community Development Director shall evaluate any such proposal against the development standards and community design guidelines pertinent to the applicable zoning district.
    4. No motor vehicle, which is advertised for sale, shall be parked in any location for more than 24 hours in a manner intended to facilitate that sale, except on residential property where the registered owner resides, or in conjunction with a permitted Motor Vehicle Sales and Rental use type.
    5. Outdoor commercial activities shall be prohibited except for those uses and activities that are allowed as a primary permitted use or by discretionary permit under this title. [Ord. 500 § 10, 2009; Ord. 483 § 25, 2008; Ord. 307 § 19, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.120 Building Transition Area.
A. The Building Transition Area limits the bulk of the multi-family dwelling and non-residential use type structures along property lines that abut the Residential (R1, R2, R3, R4) and Mixed Residential (MR1, MR2) zoning districts.
B. Buildings, or portions of buildings, located within a building transition area shall not exceed forty (40) feet in height. Buildings, or portions of buildings, that exceed forty (40) feet in height shall be setback twenty (20) feet from any property line abutting a R1, R2, R3, R4 zoning district, plus an additional foot of setback for each additional foot of building height. The maximum set back under this provision is thirty-five (35) feet.
[IMAGE: <18A.50.120_001.png>]
[Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.125 Density Standards.
A. The maximum density of each zoning district shall be the maximum number of dwelling units allowed per gross area of an acre, excluding accessory dwelling units. Maximum density shall be expressed as a ratio, i.e., three (3) dwelling units per acre. The minimum lot size shall not determine maximum density. Maximum density shall not be exceeded, except as allowed by the provisions of LMC 18A.02.235(B).
B. Gross area is the total sum area of the lot, including easements, and wetlands, streams, shorelines, and other critical areas. The required critical area buffers and all legally recorded private access easements shall not be subtracted from the gross acre for the purpose of dwelling unit calculations. See Figure 6 below for reference.
[IMAGE: <18A.50.125_001.png>]
[Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.130 Height Standards.
A. Height Measurement. The height of a structure is measured from the average elevation of the undisturbed natural topography or pre-existing grade on a site to the highest point of the structure (see Figure 7). The average elevation is determined by averaging the elevations of the undisturbed natural topography or the pre-existing grade at all corners or change in wall plane of the proposed structure (see Figure 8). A elevation benchmark shall be set on the lot, outside of the construction area, where it will remain undisturbed to allow verification of vertical elevation (See Figure 8).
B. Exceptions. Height standards shall not apply to religious assembly spires, flagpoles, belfries, and domes; chimneys, household antennas, ventilation stacks, or similar appurtenances that are required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy.
C. Fence Heights. The height of a fence located on a rockery, retaining wall, or berm shall be measured from the top of the fence to the ground on the high side of the rockery, retaining wall, or berm. Net fences, such as those used on golf courses and/or driving ranges shall not be higher than thirty-five (35) feet and shall meet the setbacks required for structures.
D. Flag Poles. Flag poles shall not exceed the maximum height allowed by the zone in which it is located. All such poles shall be placed so as to neither obstruct nor obscure adjacent property owners’ lines of vision.
[IMAGE: <18A.50.130_001.png>]
[IMAGE: <18A.50.130_002.png>]
[Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.135 Streetscapes.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide standards for the minimum improvements to meet the goals of providing sidewalks and other means of non-motorized circulation, controlling vehicle access, protecting living areas from traffic, unhealthy conditions and incompatible uses, and to continue to remedy potential groundwater contamination.
B. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be located along all arterial streets contiguous to the property line and shall serve to provide a pedestrian right-of-way and prevent interference or encroachment by fencing, walls, hedges, and other incompatible plantings and structures. Sidewalks of no less than five (5) feet in width shall be constructed with curb, gutter, and adjacent landscape strip, and shall meet the standards of LMC Title 12, Streets Sidewalks and Public Thoroughfares.
    1. Sidewalks shall be constructed by the developer of any new industrial, commercial, and multifamily development; non-residential change of use, or major tenant improvement; commercial, non-residential or multi-family residential remodel; or residential subdivision, where the new development, change of use, or remodel will increase vehicular or pedestrian traffic to and from the site, or otherwise impact the local street system as determined by the City Engineer.
    2. In all subdivisions, in addition to sidewalks along arterial streets, sidewalks shall be installed by the developer on all interior streets as follows:
        a. For subdivisions with one to nine (1-9) dwelling units, sidewalks shall be required on one (1) side of the interior streets only.
        b. For subdivisions of ten (10) or more dwelling units, sidewalks shall be required on both sides of the interior streets.
C. Utilities. Utilities shall be placed underground wherever possible, as determined by the City Engineer.
D. Sanitary Sewers. At the time of new development, expansion, or major tenant improvement which will increase the amount of wastewater generated, property owners are required to hook up to existing and available sewers lying within three hundred (300) feet of the property at the property owner’s expense.
    1. If connecting to the existing sewer requires the property owner to obtain an easement across private property but the property owner is unable to do so and can provide evidence that a reasonable attempt to obtain such easement was made, and providing further that hookup to any existing and available sewer requires the property owner to extend a line greater than one thousand (1,000) feet, a waiver from this requirement can be granted. This waiver provision does not apply to new subdivisions of five (5) or more lots.
E. Access. Multifamily, commercial and industrial development shall have access located on arterial streets or have access to arterial streets. All newly created residential lots shall access off internal plat roads, except as authorized by the City Engineer.
F. Lighting. Street lighting shall be provided in conjunction with new industrial, commercial, and multifamily development, major tenant improvements, or subdivisions. Street lighting shall be provided along arterial streets in accordance with specification and standards approved by the City Engineer.
    1. In commercial and industrial developments, including major tenant improvements, lighting and glare shall be shielded or directed away from residential uses. New multi-unit developments shall provide shielding or direct lighting and glare away from all other residential uses.
G. Equipment and Outdoor Activities. Mechanical equipment or outdoor activities such as but not limited to storage, loading, utilities, and waste disposal shall be integrated into the design of the building(s) or development and screened from view.
H. Streetscapes shall be improved for all new developments as specified in this section, LMC 12.10, Site Development Provisions, LMC 18A.50.200 Community Design, LMC 18A.50.400 Landscaping, LMC 12.02, Streets Sidewalks and Public Thoroughfares, and LMC 18A.50.500 Parking.
I. The City Engineer and the Community Development Director may modify the streetscape improvements requirements of this section in accordance with LMC 18A.50.400 Landscaping, LMC 18A.50.500 Parking, LMC 18A.50.200 Community Design, LMC 18A.10.400, Design Review, and the following:
    1. The City Engineer and the Community Development Director may permit modification of streetscape improvements requirements and standards when development of the required improvement(s) is not, in the opinion of the City Engineer and the Community Development Director, practical due to physical limitations of the site which are no fault of the applicant.
    2. The City Engineer and the Community Development Director may permit modification of streetscape improvement standards where the required streetscape is not, in the opinion of the City Engineer and the Community Development Director, roughly proportionate to the impact, type, scale, and cost of the proposed development action.
    3. The streetscape design alternatives shall be documented as an administrative determination. Mailing of notice to adjacent property owners potentially affected by the development regulation modifications is required. [Ord. 317 § 6, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.140 Residential Accessory Buildings.
A. The maximum height for residential accessory buildings shall be twenty-four (24) feet.
B. Detached residential accessory structures which are less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet in size and not higher than ten (10) feet, including garden sheds or greenhouses or combination of both; children’s play equipment; arbors; and gazebos, when placed in a rear half of the lot shall have a minimum three (3) foot setback. Attached accessory structures shall meet the same setbacks as the main building.
C. Pools, hot tubs, and similar accessory structures may not be located in the rear or interior yard setbacks.
D. Vehicle covers and other storage structures that are composed of pipes or poles with a fabric, plastic or other type of cover on the top of the framework are required to meet the development standards for the applicable zoning district, including lot coverage limitations and setback requirements. If the covering on such a structure is metal, wood, hard plastic or other rigid material and the structure exceeds 120 square feet in size, a building permit is required for the structure. If the structure is used for recreational, sporting or utility vehicle stiorage, the storage requirements of LMC 18A.50.145, including a parking pad and screening must be met. Fabric, vinyl, flexible plastic or other membrane material may be utilized to enclose the sides of the structure only if the structure is specifically designed and used for vehicle storage. Such enclosed structures are not exempt from the screening requirements of LMC 18A.50.145. Except as noted above, general storage is prohibited in tents, yurts or other tent-like structures.
E. Railroad cars, shipping containers, and semi-truck trailers shall not be placed or maintained in any single-family residential, mixed residential, or multi-family residential zoning district. [Ord. 307 § 20, 2003; Ord. 277 § 1, 2002; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.145 Outdoor Storage of Recreational, Utility and Sporting Vehicles Accessory to Residential Uses.
The storage or parking of a recreational vehicle, utility vehicle or a sporting vehicle accessory to a residential use may be permitted subject to the following standards:
A. Recreational, utility and sporting vehicles shall not be stored on a lot where no residential use exists.
B. No more than two (2) recreational, utility and/or sporting vehicles as defined in LMC 18A.90.200, Definitions, or equipment shall be stored outside of an enclosed building or structure on any residential property. Multi-family residential complexes and zero lot line developments may allow the storage of additional recreational and sporting vehicles provided that the outdoor storage meets the requirements of LMC 18A.50.170, Outdoor Storage and Commercial Yard Surfacing Standards.
C. Recreational, utility and sporting vehicles and equipment placed for storage purposes on property upon which the owner resides, shall not be occupied for continuous periods, except for short-term, temporary purposes by a friend or relative for not more than twenty-one (21) days in any ninety (90) day period, whether it be in storage by the property owner or brought to said property by the friend or relative. Such temporary occupancy shall be permitted only with the prior written authorization of the Community Development Director for time periods as permitted in this section. Occupancy of the recreational, utility or sporting vehicle outside of the specific time periods referenced in the Director’s written authorization shall constitute conclusive evidence of a violation of this section. No electrical hookup shall be permitted to a vehicle other than during the time period said vehicle(s) are occupied or for humidity control purposes. No other utility hook-ups shall be permitted at any time.
D. Recreational, utility and sporting vehicles shall be stored on a parking pad or in the driveway of the residence. No portion of the vehicle shall be stored within the public right-of-way, even if a portion of the driveway extends into the public right-of-way.
E. The parking pad shall have an all-weather surface such as asphalt or concrete, paver stones, grasscrete or a minimum of three (3) inches gravel, which shall be maintained in such condition.
F. The parking pad shall be located at the side or rear of the dwelling, whenever feasible.
G. The parking pad shall be screened, to the maximum extent feasible, from the public street and neighboring properties by fencing and/or landscaping. [Ord. 307 § 21, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.150 Parking of Commercial Vehicles Accessory to Residential Uses.
A. No more than one (1) commercial vehicle of a type commonly referred to as a utility van, step van, box van, flatbed pickup, tow truck, utility vehicle, emergency vehicle, semi-truck cab, or other similar vehicle, may be parked on a residential lot or one (1) per dwelling unit on a multi-family property, as an residential accessory use. if parked in accordance with the requirements of LMC 18A.50.500, Parking and the following standards:
    1. The commercial vehicle shall be stored on a parking pad or in the driveway of the residence. No portion of the vehicle shall be parked within the public right-of-way, even if a portion of the driveway extends into the public right-of-way.
    2. The parking pad shall have an all-weather surface such as asphalt or concrete, paver stones, grasscrete or a minimum of three (3) inches gravel, which shall be maintained in such condition.
    3. The parking pad shall be located at the side or rear of the dwelling, whenever feasible.
B. In residential zoning districts, the parking of buses, semi-truck trailer units attached to a semi-truck cab or detached, dump trucks, and other similar commercial vehicles or any commercial vehicles over ninety-six (96) inches in width or thirty (30) feet in length is prohibited as an accessory use. Unloading of shipping containers and semi-truck trailers may occur in residential zoning districts for periods not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours.
C. Commercial vehicles shall not be parked on, adjacent to, or abutting property zoned OSR1 or OSR2. [Ord. 307 § 22, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.155 Vehicle Service and Repair Accessory to Residential Uses.
The repair, service, restoration, modification, assembly, disassembly, construction, reconstruction, or other work on a motor vehicle, recreational vehicle or a sporting vehicle on any residential premises in any zone that allows residential uses shall be subject to the following standards:
A. Work shall be limited to the non-commercial repair and maintenance of motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, sporting vehicles and vehicular equipment that is currently registered to a resident of the premises or a member of the residents’ family, which shall be limited to parents, grandparents, spouse, or children related by blood, marriage or adoption.
B. Such work is prohibited in multi-family residential complexes of three (3) or more dwelling units on a parcel, unless totally within an enclosed garage.
C. Such work shall be conducted on no more than one (1) vehicle at any one time.
D. Such work shall be conducted only between the hours of 7:00 AM and 10:00 PM on weekdays and 9:00 AM and 10:00 PM on weekends.
E. Assembly, disassembly or bodywork shall only be conducted within a fully enclosed garage or accessory building. Minor service and repair work may only be performed in a fully enclosed building, an open accessory structure, on a parking pad or in the driveway directly adjacent to the garage or carport. Such work shall not be performed in the public right-of-way nor shall vehicles be stored in the public right-of-way, even if a portion of the driveway extends into the public right-of-way. Nor shall any vehicle be stored in violation of LMC 8.24.100, Storage of Certain Vehicles and Components Prohibited.
F. The parking pad shall be located at the side or front of the dwelling, whenever feasible and shall have an all-weather surface such as asphalt or concrete, paver stones, grasscrete or a minimum of three (3) inches gravel, which shall be maintained in such condition as to act as an impervious surface.
G. Parts, equipment, debris, excess materials or other supplies needed for the repair of a vehicle on the premises shall be stored within a fully enclosed structure such as a garage or accessory building.
H. The performance of such work shall not create a nuisance to the neighbors.
I. Upon completion of any work allowed by this section, the property shall be cleaned of all debris, oil, grease, gasoline, cloths or rags, and all other equipment or material used in the work, and the property shall be left in such a condition that no hazard to persons or property shall remain.
J. Storage, containment, and disposal of all hazardous materials shall be in accordance with state and local regulations.
K. Disposal of all waste products shall be in accordance with state and local regulations.
L. Painting of vehicles is prohibited. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.160 Animals in Residential Districts.
A. Peacocks, roosters, turkeys, ostriches, emus, other similar birds, wild, undomesticated or exotic mammals, and cows, sheep, llamas, goats, swine, and other livestock, but excluding horses, shall be prohibited in all zoning districts in the City except AC1 and AC2. Horses and equestrian facilities shall be permitted only as allowed by LMC 18A.30, Zoning Districts.
B. Poultry, pigeons, ducks, and similar birds, and rabbits and similar mammals, except as prohibited in Subsection 18A.50.160(A). above, raised for domestic, noncommercial use shall be permitted as an accessory use to a dwelling unit on any lot, provided:
    1. A minimum setback of ten (10) feet from all property lines shall be required for all hutches and twenty (20) feet for all pens, coups, aviaries, similar enclosures, and free-range areas.
    2. No more than sixteen (16) poultry, birds or rabbits and similar mammals shall be permitted per acre.
    3. Aviaries or lofts shall provide a minimum of one (1) square foot for each pigeon or similar bird and shall not exceed one thousand (1000) square feet. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.165 Commercial Uses in the Multifamily 3 Zone within the Lakewood Station District.
A. Requirements. Within that portion of the MF 3 zoning district located within the Lakewood Station District as designated in the comprehensive plan, and solely in conjunction with the Multifamily Dwelling, Level 2 use, the following standards shall be required:
    1. The commercial use is only permitted on the ground floor of the development.
    2. A minimum ratio of four (4) square feet of multifamily use to one (1) square foot of commercial use.
    3. The commercial uses shall be of a type and level as specified in LMC 18A.30.340(B). Multifamily Zoning Districts. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.170 Outdoor Storage and Commercial Yard Surfacing Standards.
A. Outdoor Storage Areas and Yards. 
    1. Outdoor storage areas and yards shall be paved with asphalt or concrete, including contractor storage yards and areas where vehicles or heavy equipment will be parked, stored, or regularly maneuvered. Areas where unattached trailers; shipping containers; vehicles without engines, transmissions, oil and/or gasoline tanks; or where other inert materials or items are stored may be exempted from paving requirements at the discretion of the Community Development Director where it is determined that such storage does not pose a soil contamination hazard. A hydrogeologic assessment per the City’s critical areas regulations may be required to assist the Director in making this determination.
    2. No hazardous materials shall be stored or utilized in storage areas, except as permitted under the Uniform Fire Code and any conditions of site development required by the City.
    3. All storage areas shall be screened and fenced pursuant to LMC 18A.50.400, Landscaping.
B. Salvage Yards, Vehicle Storage Facilities, Vehicle Impound Yards, and Wrecking Yards shall be paved with asphalt or concrete, fenced and landscaped pursuant to LMC 18A.50.400, Landscaping. [Ord. 317 § 7, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.175 Type 3, 4, and 5 Group Home Placement Standards.
A. Intent. Although Type 3, 4 and 5 Group Homes are regulated as Residential use types under LMC 18A.20.300, it is found and declared that they also constitute essential public facilities as described in LMC 18A.20.400, which provide a needed community service. However, the public interest dictates that Type 3, 4, and 5 Group Homes shall be subject to regulations and distance separation requirements designed to reduce their incompatibility with established neighborhoods, schools and other sensitive land uses; to encourage equitable regional and statewide distribution of such essential public facilities; and to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare.
B. Applicability. Type 3, 4, and 5 Group Homes are permitted subject to the zoning regulations contained in Chapters 18A.20 and .30 LMC. All Type 3, 4, and 5 Group Homes are further subject to the terms and conditions of this section.
C. Conditional use permit required. A conditional use permit is required for siting or expanding Type 3, 4, or 5 Group Homes in the zoning districts in which they are permitted.
D. Application and review. Conditional use permit application and review requirements are set forth in LMC 18A.10.100 (generally) and LMC 18A.02.550. In addition, the applicant shall:
    1. Provide a written statement justifying the need for location of the Type 3, 4, or 5 Group Home in Lakewood based upon forecasted needs, including an analysis of alternative sites considered both within and outside of the City;
    2. Submit specific and detailed information demonstrating that, prior to and as an integral part of selecting the site at which the use is proposed, the facility siting requirements set forth in RCW 72.65.220 and WAC 137-57-050 or successor requirements have been fulfilled;
    3. Provide a fiscal analysis of the facility’s impact on City finances and public service levels, and the methods or conditions of mitigation that would be required to address significant adverse financial and/or operational impacts;
    4. Perform a compatibility study which, at minimum, contains the following information on a form prescribed by the City:
        a. The purpose of the proposed Type 3, 4, or 5 Group Home;
        b. An operational characteristics description of the proposed use;
        c. An evaluation of the potential effects of the proposed Essential Public Facility Civic use upon the adjacent properties; and
        d. Identification of any applicable mitigation measures designed to address any potential effects identified through the evaluation required herein.
E. SEPA Lead Agency. Unless specifically released on a case-by-case basis, the City hereby reserves lead agency status for environmental review under the State Environmental Policy Act for any and all Type 3, 4, and 5 Group Home uses within any zoning district.
F. Standards and Conditions. 
    1. Location requirements. Any new or expanding Type 3, or 4 Group Home shall be located 1,000 feet or more from any day care center or church with a day care center, any state-licensed family day care, any public or private school, or any public park. The City shall determine whether a proposed facility meets the buffer requirement from GIS data showing the location of existing day care centers, churches with day care centers, state-licensed family day cares, public and private schools, and public parks. The City shall maintain up-to-date information as to the location of such uses using siting and licensing information.
    2. Pre-screening. Prior to placing any residents within a Type 3 or 4 Group Home, the sponsoring state agency shall enter into an enduring interlocal agreement with the City which delineates a pre-screening process for residents proposed to be placed at the facility.
    3. Annual report. For Type 4 Group Homes, and no later than January 31st of each calendar year, the state agency and/or operator shall submit to the Community Development Director reports on recidivism rates and escapes.
    The report on recidivism, as defined herein, shall include both summary and detail information. At the summary level, the report shall list the recidivism rate for all offenders who, at any time in the past five years, resided in any Type 4 Group Home located within Lakewood. Separate recidivism rates shall be calculated for offenders with six months, one year, two years, and five years at-risk time in the community, as defined herein.
    At the detail level, the report will list each recidivating event occurring in the previous calendar year by any offender who was housed, however briefly, in a Type 4 Group Home within Lakewood at any time in the previous five years. For each event, the report shall include: a) the name of the offender; b) the offender’s criminal history; c) the date and time the incident occurred; d) the City and county where the incident took place; e) the name of the county in which the offender was originally convicted; and f) a summary of the incident including any criminal or administrative sanctions imposed.
    The report on escapes, as defined herein, shall list each escape that took place at the Type 4 Group Home during the previous calendar year. For each escape, the report shall include: a) the name of the offender; b) the manner in which the escape took place (i.e., failure to return from work, left the facility without authorization, etc.); c) the time and date the escape took place; d) the date, time and location where the offender was captured (if apprehended); e) the offender’s criminal history; f) a summary of any administrative or criminal sanctions imposed as a result of the escape; and g) a summary of any criminal offenses (other than escape) the DOC or operator has cause to believe the offender may have committed while an escapee.
    If the reports are not submitted timely, the facility shall be deemed to be out of compliance with this condition of operation, and the Community Development Director may initiate a revocation of the conditional use permit for the facility.
    4. Added conditions. If the required annual report demonstrates a level of recidivism and/or escape activity that is unacceptable to the City, and at the sole discretion of the Community Development Director, the City may initiate amendments to the CUP to enable the hearing examiner to consider and place additional conditions intended to mitigate recidivism and/or escape activity associated with the use.
G. Criteria. A CUP may only be granted for a Type 3, 4, or 5 Group Home after the hearing examiner has reviewed the proposed use and has made written findings that all of the standards and criteria set forth herein, as well as the general criteria set forth in LMC 18A.10.150, have been met or can be met as conditions of approval:
    1. That, prior to and as an integral part of selecting the site at which the use is proposed, the facility siting requirements set forth in RCW 72.65.220 and WAC 137-57-050 or successor requirements have been fulfilled. Compliance with this condition shall include written evidence satisfactory to the hearing examiner demonstrating that early and continuous public participation opportunities have been provided, that all public notifications and local public meetings have been conducted in compliance with state law, that a search committee and advisory committee were duly established and, further, that the advisory committee properly evaluated the site selection factors set forth in WAC 137-57-050 or successor requirements.
    2. That mitigation measures have been developed that ensure community safety. The components of such a program may include such things as, but are not limited to, the opportunity for the neighborhood to meaningfully participate in the pre-screening process for incoming residents and a process to address any public safety problems which may be demonstrated as resulting from the facility’s siting.
    3. The extent to which the applicant can demonstrate that the site size and building size is adequate to house the intended number of residents.
    4. The extent to which the facility is served by public transportation in order to provide residents of the facility with a means of travel.
H. Legally established Type 3 Group Homes located in the PI zoning district. Continuation of Type 3 Group Homes, located in the PI zoning district, already legally established and permitted by the City, and in operation at the time of adoption of this section, are exempt from the standards listed herein. [Ord. 423 § 1, 2006; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.180 Manufactured Homes on Individual Lots.
A manufactured home that is placed on an individual lot pursuant to this section shall be considered a Single Family, Detached Dwelling, Level 1. No manufactured or modular home shall be placed on an individual lot except as provided for in this section or as otherwise provided for in this Title. Such manufactured home shall:
A. Be placed on a permanent foundation as specified by the manufacturer, and the space from the bottom of the home to the ground shall be enclosed by concrete or an approved concrete product which can be either load bearing or decorative, and set up in accordance with building code requirements.
B. Comply with all local design standards applicable to all other homes within the neighborhood in which the manufactured home is to be located, including the development standards of the zoning district.
C. Be comprised of at least two (2) fully enclosed parallel sections each not less than twelve (12) fee wide by thirty-six (36) feet long.
D. The manufactured home shall be a new manufactured home or otherwise meet all requirements for a designated manufactured home as defined in RCW 35.63.160.
E. The manufactured home shall be thermally equivalent to the state energy code. [Ord. 412 § 13, 2006; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.182 Amusement Establishment.
A commercial amusement establishment may be authorized after consideration of the following factors:
A. Adequacy of access from principal streets, together with the probable affect on traffic volumes of abutting and nearby streets.
B. Adequacy of off-street parking.
C. Adequacy of building and site design provisions to meet performance standards pursuant to LMC 18A.50.800, Performance Standards. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.185 Concession/Vending Services in City Parks.
On all public parks and public park property within the corporate limits of the City, the operator of a food concession or vending service shall enter into an agreement for use of park property for concession/vending purposes, or shall submit to the City a copy of such a lease or other agreement executed by the owner of the property, if not owned by the City, for City approval. The agreement shall include standards pursuant to 18A.50.241(I), Design Elements for Vendors. [Ord. 397 § 13, 2005; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.190 Standards for Uses and Accessory Uses Not Otherwise Listed.
For permitted accessory uses, principal uses, administrative uses, and conditional uses that are not specifically listed in this section, the following development standards shall apply:
A. Parking Requirements. Parking requirements shall be provided in the manner set forth in LMC 18A.50.500, Parking.
B. Landscaping Requirements. Landscaping requirements shall be provided for in LMC 18A.50.400, Landscaping.
C. Tree Preservation. Significant tree identification, preservation, and replacement shall be provided for in LMC 18A.50.300, Tree Preservation.
D. Community Design. Community design shall be provided in LMC 18A.50.200, Community Design Guidelines.
E. Signs. Sign requirements shall be provided for in LMC 18A.50.600, Signs.
F. Stormwater Management. Storm drainage control as provided in 12.10.010, Storm drainage.
G. Streetscapes. Streetscapes as required by LMC 18A.50.135, Streetscapes.
H. For standards and requirements that are not identified within a specific zoning district or within this chapter, the Community Development Director may make a determination and/or adjustment of the development standards using the following criteria, in addition to the appropriate discretionary permit review approval criteria:
    1. Consistency. The development standards shall provide consistency with the intent, scale and character of the zoning district involved.
    2. Impacts. The determination and/or adjustment of the development standard(s) does not negatively impact:
        a. The adjacent property owners.
        b. The safety of the general public.
        c. The visual character, scale and design compatibility of the surrounding area.
    3. The determination and/or adjustment of the development standard(s) shall be equal to, or superior in, fulfilling the intent and purpose of the original requirement. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.195 Concurrency.
A. All new development and improvements, expansion, or intensification of an existing use shall be connected, at applicant expense, to a public primary infrastructure system to support the use.
B. If primary infrastructure is not available to the site or the existing infrastructure does not contain sufficient capacity to support the proposed development, the City may not:
    1. Issue development permits which would allow for an increase in the amount of infrastructure demand generated from the site.
    2. Permit the division of the property that provides for increased potential for development or demand for infrastructure. All new subdivisions, including short plats, preliminary/final plats, binding site plans and condominium conversions shall require connection to the public sewer system prior to recordation of the subdivision instrument.
C. Primary infrastructure includes, but is not limited to:
    1. Sanitary sewer.
    2. Water.
    3. Transportation and transit facilities.
    4. Stormwater.
    5. Electrical.
    6. Police, fire, and emergency medical.
D. The use of septic systems shall be limited to system replacement or as otherwise permitted by the Pierce County Health Department and approved by the City Engineer. [Ord. 591 § 79, 2015; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.200 Community Design.

18A.50.211 Purpose - Community Design.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish design guidelines in order to enhance the general appearance of the City, provide for development that enhances the established character of Lakewood and reflects the lifestyle values of Lakewood citizens. This chapter is intended to help maintain and protect property values in a community that is safe, attractive, and prosperous. This chapter also endeavors to create a pedestrian-friendly environment by improving and expanding pedestrian circulation, public open space, and pedestrian amenities in the City. This chapter is intended to provide clear objectives for those embarking on the planning and design of projects and encourage creativity in building and site design, by assuring quality development balanced with administrative flexibility to consider the individual merits of proposals. [Ord. 277 § 1, 2002.]

18A.50.221 Applicability - Community Design.
This chapter shall apply to all new development, except single-family dwellings notassociated with a Planned Development District (PDD), in any zoning district in the City. Additions and exterior remodels associated with existing buildings and site redevelopment projects are subject to those provisions of this chapter that are determined by the Community Development Director to be reasonably related and applicable to the development project. Projects that modify parking and landscaping areas shall be subject to site design standards for pedestrian access, safety and landscaping standards. The Community Development Director may, at his sole discretion, determine which, if any, additional design standards apply to projects that modify an existing building or site. Proposals that will not modify a building exterior or the site, such as interior tenant improvements and interior remodels, are exempt from the community design standards. [Ord. 704 § 2, 2019; Ord. 277 § 1, 2002.]

18A.50.231 Specific Uses Design Standards.
A. Commercial Uses and Zones. These standards are intended to create an attractive and functional environment for commercial uses, improve vehicular and pedestrian circulation, and upgrade the City’s visual appearance in commercial zones.
    1. Site Design Objectives. 
        a. Streets in commercial zones should provide sidewalks and pedestrian amenities, but also accommodate vehicular access to businesses. Buildings should be pedestrian-oriented with ground floor retail sales or service uses, and should orient major entrances, display windows and other pedestrian features to the right-of-way. A consistent and unified setback pattern is desired. Commercial buildings in the Central Business District, the Lakewood Station District and Tillicum should be sited as close to the primary street frontage as possible with consideration given to the location and context of other buildings in the immediate vicinity to create consistent street walls at a scale appropriate to the district. Setback exceptions may be made for public spaces adjacent to a building that provide for pedestrian amenities such as a special entry, pedestrian plaza, outdoor dining, or a garden space associated with residential uses. The setback area should not be used for parking.
        b. Surface parking should be provided in courtyards, to the side, or behind buildings.
        c. Natural amenities such as views, significant or unique trees, creeks, riparian corridors, and similar features unique to the site shall be preserved and incorporated into the design. Natural topography shall be emphasized, rather than obscured or eliminated. Siting or massing of buildings should preserve public views of Mount Rainier and/or other significant natural features of the landscape.
        d. Pedestrian-oriented spaces, amenities and corridors should be incorporated in the overall site design. Pedestrian areas shall be easily accessible, clearly visible and located to take advantage of surrounding features such as building entrances, open spaces, significant landscaping, unique topography or architecture, and solar exposure.
        e. Provide pedestrian walkways connecting all business entries within a business complex or on the same development site. Pedestrian connections should be provided between properties to establish pedestrian links to adjacent buildings, parking, pedestrian areas and public streets.
        f. Multiple buildings on the same site should incorporate public spaces, formal or informal. The buildings should be integrated with site elements such as plazas, walkways and landscaping with pedestrian pathways, to provide clear view to destinations and to create a unified campus-like development.
        g. Provide pedestrian walkways through parking lots. Pedestrian pathways and pedestrian areas shall be delineated using a variation in pavement texture and color and protected from abutting vehicle circulation areas with landscaping or by being raised above the driving surface level. Paint striping on asphalt as a method of delineation is not encouraged. Approved methods of delineation include: stone, brick or granite pavers; exposed aggregate; or stamped and colored concrete. The pathway shall be at least 6 feet wide exclusive of bumper overhangs. Pedestrian routes through parking lots shall be distinctively marked using vertical and/or horizontal design elements, such as special paving of brick, colored stamped concrete, cobblestone and/or raised sidewalks. Crosswalk designs shall include caution signs for motorists. Include pedestrian amenities such as benches, trash containers, and planters where appropriate. In large parking lots, a pedestrian walkway shall be provided at least every one hundred fifty (150) feet. All walkways shall be integrated with the landscape plan and provide adequate sight distance to ensure a clear view of pedestrians and vehicles. Separate service vehicle access and loading zones from pedestrian areas where possible.
        h. Service and loading areas shall be designed in accordance with the general criteria outlined in Section 18A.50.241(B).
        i. Grocery stores and large retailers shall provide shopping cart collection areas within the parking areas. The collection areas shall be evenly spaced and shall provide easy access and safety features.
        j. Weather protection for pedestrians shall be provided as outlined in Section 18A.50.241(C).
        k. Blank walls shall be treated as described in Section 18A.50.241(D)
        l. Drive through facilities shall be designed in accordance with Section 18A.50.241(G).
        m. A bicycle rack shall be provided in a convenient location for all commercial developments over four thousand (4,000) square feet of gross floor area.
    2. Building Design. The intent of this section is to encourage building design that is appropriate to the site and that becomes a positive element in the architectural composition of the City.
        a. Architectural Consistency. Project designers shall strive for overall design continuity by using similar elements throughout the project such as architectural style and features, materials, colors, and textures. Buildings should be of appropriate height, scale, and design so as to be generally consistent with those existing permanent neighboring developments that are consistent with the Land Use and Development Code. An effort should be made to provide architectural and site design elements that help the building or development relate to broader architectural themes and design elements of the surrounding area and the City in general. Adjacent structures that are not in conformance with this Code shall be considered to be transitional.
        b. Architectural Scale. To create a commercial height and appearance, the minimum floor-to-floor height should be fourteen (14) to fifteen (15) feet for ground floor retail/office/service uses. Large buildings must provide design elements to reduce the appearance of bulk as required by Section 18A.50.241(A), Large Buildings. Building forms on structures two (2) stories in height or greater shall incorporate a base, a middle, and a top. The base should contain the greatest amount of architectural detail, the middle should have relatively fewer details and forms, and the top should have a cornice or other distinctive form.
        c. Building Design Details. Use of architectural details and high-quality materials upgrade the visual attractiveness of new development both close up and at a distance. Decorative elements should be suitably scaled and related to the building concept. The following guidelines shall apply:
            1. High-quality compatible building materials shall be used. Use of metal plastic, plywood, sheet wood products or fiberglass as an exterior siding material is discouraged.
            2. If metal siding is permitted, the building design should include visible window and door trim painted or finished in a complementary color, corner and edge trim that cover exposed edges of the metal panels, accent bands to provide visual relief to the wall plane, and significant trim elements (Such as wainscoting or corner quoins) of natural materials such as brick, stone, or wood.
            3. If concrete blocks, such as concrete masonry units or “cinder blocks”, are used for walls, the block construction shall be architecturally treated in one or more of the following ways:
                (a) Textured blocks with surfaces such as split face or grooved.
                (b) Colored mortar and use of several colors of block.
                (c) Other masonry types such as brick, glass block or tile in conjunction with concrete blocks.
            4. The following materials are prohibited in locations visible from a public street or residential zone.
                (a) Mirrored, darkly tinted, or reflective glass on the ground floor.
                (b) Corrugated fiberglass or metal.
                (c) Chain-link fencing without a colored coating of plastic, vinyl or a decorative finish other than paint, except for a temporary purpose such as a construction site.
            5. Roof mounted service equipment shall be screened from view. Screening used should ensure that the roofscape is an integral part of the design concept with respect to form, materials and color. Special attention shall be given in those areas where the roofs can be seen from adjacent roadways.
    3. Landscape Design. The intent of this section is to encourage landscape design that will enhance the pedestrian environment and complement building and site design using plant species that are of low maintenance, resistant to drought and otherwise appropriate for conditions within the zoning district. Landscaping must comply with the specific requirements of LMC 18A.50.400.
        a. Landscape Components. Landscape plans for commercial development should provide for:
            1. Streetscape landscaping. This includes the landscaping integrated with streetscape improvements including street trees, “splash strips” between the curb and sidewalk, and landscape areas around pedestal signs.
            2. Perimeter landscaping. This includes landscape strips required around the perimeter of the commercial property.
            3. Building base landscaping. Landscaping around the base of a commercial building to soften the building elevation, provide a visual base to the building, and to provide shade to address solar gain issues.
            4. Parking lot landscaping. Landscaping to provide visual relief and shade to parking areas. This includes landscape islands and other landscaping within parking areas.
            5. Screen landscaping. Special landscaped areas to visually screen loading areas, activity areas, garbage collection areas, etc.
        b. Landscape Design Objectives. The applicant should consider the following design objectives when creating a landscape plan for commercial projects:
            1. Landscaping should be used to beautify the project site and provide a more inviting and attractive environment for potential customers. Healthy and well-kept landscaping projects an image of well-being, permanence, commitment to the community, and a sense of place.
            2. Significant trees shall be retained within the landscape buffer perimeter around the site, pursuant to LMC 18A.50.320(B)(1), Tree Preservation. Significant trees shall be retained and incorporated into the landscaping and open space areas on the site, whenever possible.
            3. All walkways should be integrated with the landscape plan. Landscaping shall provide adequate sight distances and visibility for vehicles and pedestrians.
            4. Highlight significant site features and define the function of the site, including parking, circulation, entries, open space, and activity areas.
            5. Highlight principal entrances to sites with seasonal plantings arranged in a gateway effect. Consider containers planted with seasonal flowers. Use landscaping to accentuate signage.
            6. Use building foundation plantings to provide visual softening of those portions of the building visible to the public, and a transition between the vertical planes of structures and the horizontal planes of the site.
            7. Landscaping shall generally be located on the outside of any fencing that is otherwise provided so that the public view of the fence is softened by the landscaping.
            8. Landscape patterns and themes should be used to unify different areas within a single or multi-tenant project site.
            9. All areas not covered by buildings should be paved or landscaped, including areas of the road right-of-way between the property line and the traveled roadway. Gravel is only permitted where it is shown to be the most appropriate surface material for the proposed use of an area.
    4. Site Furnishings. Incorporate outdoor furniture, fixtures, and streetscape elements into the site design that enhances and complements the commercial functions of the site. Miscellaneous structures and street furniture should be designed to be part of the architectural design and landscape. The following guidelines shall apply:
        a. Utilize lighting, free standing signs, trellises, arbors, raised planters, benches and other forms of seating, trash receptacles, bus stops, phone booths, fencing, or other outdoor furniture or streetscape fixtures in the site design to create and define public spaces.
        b. Utilize high-quality, durable and easily maintained materials in site furnishings and features that discourage defacement. Furnishings that are easily removed or do not portray an image of care invite vandalism and misuse.
        c. Use safety materials, such as non-slip walkway surfaces.
        d. Locate site furnishings to maximize visual surveillance of the area by residents, pedestrians and passing vehicles to minimize covert activities in the space and lessen risks to public safety.
    5. Lighting. Provide adequate lighting levels in commercial areas for safety and to project a feeling of activity at night. Special attention should be given to building entries, along walkways, parking areas, and other public areas. Provide a lighting plan that demonstrates compliance with the following principles:
        a. Provide an overlapping pattern of light and lighting levels designed to allow pedestrians to identify a face fifteen (15) yards away, generally at least three (3) footcandles. Adequate lighting reduces anonymity and gives pedestrians an opportunity to choose another route.
        b. Lighting standards along pedestrian pathways and in other pedestrian areas shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height and shall be spaced no greater distance than two (2) times the height of the lighting standards used. Lighting poles and standards in parking lots and in other areas may be up to twenty-five (25) feet in height, provided that all other lighting requirements are met. High pressure sodium lights are preferred for general outdoor lighting purposes in the City.
        c. Provide lighting at consistent lumens with a gradual transition to unlighted areas. Avoid highly contrasting pools of light and dark that can be temporarily blinding.
        d. Floodlighting of building elevations is encouraged, particularly to emphasize buildings with strong architectural form. Building lights should be ground mounted within landscaped settings, or mounted on the building itself. Colored and/or decorative lighting is encouraged to accentuate architectural and commercial themes.
        e. Provide adequate lighting at all building entrances, exits and corridors between buildings, generally at least three (3) footcandles during active use, especially where doors are recessed. Appropriate lighting levels shall be provided in all loading, disposal, storage, and circulation areas.
        f. Confine site lighting to the project site. Use shields or other methods to eliminate glare on adjacent properties or towards the sky.
        g. Place light posts and standards so that they do not create hazards for pedestrians or vehicles.
        h. Indicate specific lighting levels in each lighted area.
B. Industrial Uses and Zones. These standards are intended to create an attractive and functional environment for industrial uses, improve vehicular circulation and upgrade the City’s visual appearance in industrial areas.
    1. Site Design Objectives. Industrial development shall present a neat and orderly facade to the street with appropriate and potentially separate provisions for pedestrian, visitor and passenger automobile traffic. Truck and service vehicle traffic shall be directed away from pedestrian and passenger automobile traffic to an area screened from the general public. Operational and storage components of the use shall also be screened from the general public.
        a. Streets in industrial zones should provide pedestrian-oriented amenities, but primarily accommodate vehicular access to businesses. Street frontage improvements should be designed to specifically provide for large trucks and service vehicles.
        b. Facility frontages should be developed to improve the visual image of the industrial areas of the City. Landscaping and streetscape improvements should be constructed so as to provide a pleasing visual presentation, identify the general boundaries of the property and direct different types of traffic onto the site. Streetscape plantings should allow for sightlines to view the main facade of the building while screening parking areas and loading areas.
        c. Storage, fleet parking and operational activities on the site should be screened from the public right-of-way by the building if possible. Such areas should otherwise be screened from the right-of-way and other properties by fencing and landscaping.
        d. Access driveways at property lines should be separated from the interior side lot line by a minimum 5-foot wide landscape buffer. If a larger planter strip is required by another section of this code, then the larger planter width shall be required.
        e. Service and loading areas shall be designed in accordance with the general criteria outlined in LMC 18A.50.241(B)
        f. Weather protection for pedestrians shall be provided as outlined in LMC 18A.50.241(C).
        g. Blank walls shall be treated as described in LMC 18A.50.241(D)
    2. Building Design. The intent of this section is to encourage building design that is appropriate to the site and that becomes a positive element in the architectural composition of the City.
        a. Architectural Consistency. Individual buildings should have a distinct corporate identity and quality architectural appearance. Both office portions and industrial plants should be unified by the architectural treatment. Where this is not possible, the office portion should be designed as an architectural focal point with a neutral background of industrial architecture. An effort should be made to provide architectural and site design elements that help the building or development relate to broader architectural themes and design elements of the surrounding area and the City in general. Adjacent structures that are not in conformance with the Land Use and Development Code should be considered to be transitional.
        b. Architectural Scale. Large buildings should provide design elements to reduce the appearance of bulk. Specific requirements for large building articulation are contained in Section 18A.50.241(A).
        c. Building Design Details. Use of architectural details and high-quality materials upgrade the visual attractiveness of new development both at close range and at a distance. Decorative elements may be quite simple provided they are suitably scaled and related to the building concept. The following guidelines shall apply:
            1. High-quality compatible building materials shall be used. Use of metal, plastic, plywood, sheet wood products or fiberglass as an exterior siding material is discouraged.
            2. If metal siding is permitted, the building design should include visible window and door trim painted or finished in a complementary color, corner and edge trim that cover exposed edges of the metal panels, and accent bands to provide visual relief to the wall plane.
            3. If concrete blocks, such as concrete masonry units or “cinder blocks”, are used for walls, the block construction shall be architecturally treated in one or more of the following ways:
                (a) Textured blocks with surfaces such as split face or grooved.
                (b) Colored mortar and use of several colors of block.
                (c) Other masonry types such as brick, glass block or tile in conjunction with concrete blocks.
            4. The following materials are prohibited in locations visible from a public street or residential zone.
                (a) Mirrored, darkly tinted, or reflective glass on the ground floor.
                (b) Corrugated fiberglass or metal.
                (c) Chain-link fencing without a colored coating of plastic, vinyl or a decorative finish other than paint, except for a temporary purpose such as a construction site.
            5. Roof mounted service equipment shall be screened from view. Screening used should ensure that the roofscape is an integral part of the design concept with respect to form, materials and color. Special attention should be given in those areas where the roofs can be seen from adjacent roadways.
    3. Landscape Design. The intent of this section is to encourage landscape design that will provide for a positive visual image to the public and screen operational activities from public view. Industrial facilities should utilize plant species that are low maintenance, resistant to drought and otherwise appropriate for conditions within the zoning district. Landscaping must comply with the specific requirements of Section 18A.50.400.
        a. Landscape Components. Landscape plans for industrial development should provide for:
            1. Streetscape landscaping. This includes the landscaping integrated with streetscape improvements including street trees, “splash strips” between the curb and sidewalk, and landscape areas around pedestal signs.
            2. Perimeter landscaping. This includes landscape strips required around the perimeter of the industrial property. This landscaping should provide an effective visual screen where appropriate to block views of storage, loading, fleet parking and operational activities.
            3. Building base landscaping. Landscaping around the base of the public facade to soften the building elevation, provide a visual base to the building, and to provide shade to address solar gain issues.
            4. Parking lot landscaping. Landscaping to provide visual relief and shade to parking areas. This includes landscape islands and other landscaping within parking areas.
            5. Landscape Screening. Special landscaped areas to visually screen loading areas, activity areas, garbage collection areas, etc. Landscape screening elements are particularly important for industrial projects.
        b. Landscape Design Objectives. The applicant should consider the following design objectives when creating a landscape plan for industrial projects:
            1. Landscaping should be used to beautify the project site and provide a more inviting and attractive environment for employees and customers. Healthy and well-kept landscaping projects an image of well-being, permanence, commitment to the community, and a sense of place.
            2. Significant trees shall be retained within the landscape buffer perimeter around the site, pursuant to LMC 18A.50.320(B)(1), Tree Preservation. Significant trees shall be retained and incorporated into the landscaping and open space areas on the site, whenever possible.
            3. Landscaping shall provide adequate sight distances and visibility for vehicles and pedestrians.
            4. Highlight significant site features and define the function of the site, including parking, circulation, entries, open space, and activity areas.
            5. Highlight principal entrances to sites with seasonal plantings arranged in a gateway effect. Consider containers planted with seasonal flowers. Use landscaping to accentuate signage.
            6. Use building foundation plantings to provide visual softening of those portions of buildings visible to the public.
            7. Landscape screening is required to block industrial activities, storage areas, fleet parking areas and other unsightly elements from public view. Landscape screening should be both tall enough and robust enough to effectively block visual access to these areas of the site.
            8. Landscaping shall generally be located on the outside of any fencing that is otherwise provided so that the public view of the fence is softened by the landscaping.
            9. Landscape patterns and themes should be used to unify different areas within a single or multi-tenant project site.
            10. All areas not covered by buildings should be paved or landscaped, including areas of the road right-of-way between the property line and the traveled roadway. Gravel is only permitted where it is shown to be the most appropriate surface material for the proposed use of an area.
    4. Lighting. Provide adequate lighting levels in industrial areas for safety and security. Special attention should be given to building entries, along walkways, parking areas, and other public areas. Provide a lighting plan with:
        a. An overlapping pattern of light and lighting levels should be provided in parking lots and other public areas to allow pedestrians to identify a face fifteen (15) yards away, generally at least three (3) footcandles. Lighting standards in such areas should not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height and shall be spaced no greater distance than two (2) times the height of the lighting standards used. Adequate lighting reduces anonymity and gives pedestrians an opportunity to choose another route.
        b. Lighting poles and standards in loading and operational areas may be up to thirty-five (35) feet in height, provided that all other lighting requirements are met. Shielded downlighting shall be used to prevent light trespass onto other properties. High-pressure sodium lights are preferred for general lighting purposes in the City.
        c. Lighting at consistent lumens with a gradual transition to unlighted areas. Highly contrasting pools of light and dark can be temporarily blinding and should be avoided.
        d. Floodlighting of building elevations to emphasize buildings with strong architectural form is encouraged. Building lights should be ground mounted within landscaped settings, or mounted on the building itself.
        e. Adequate lighting at all building entrances, exits and corridors between buildings, generally at least three (3) footcandles during active use, especially where doors are recessed. Appropriate lighting levels shall be provided in all loading, disposal, storage, and circulation areas.
        f. Place light posts and standards so that they do not create hazards for vehicles.
C. Multi-Family Residential Uses and Zones. These standards are intended to create an attractive and enjoyable environment for multi-family residential uses, improve vehicular circulation and upgrade the City’s visual appearance in high-density residential areas.
    1. Required Site Design and Building Design Elements. These standards are in addition to other development standards applicable under this chapter or other chapters of the Lakewood Municipal Code.
        a. Significant trees shall be retained within the landscape buffer perimeter around the site, pursuant to LMC 18A.50.320(B)(1), Tree Preservation. Significant trees shall be retained and incorporated into the landscaping and open space areas on the site, whenever possible.
        b. Buildings shall be designed to have a distinct “base,” “middle,” and “top.” The base, typically the first floor, shall contain the greatest number of architectural elements such as windows, materials, details, overhangs, cornice lines, and masonry belt courses. The midsection by comparison may be simple. Single-story buildings have no middle, but do have a base and a top. The top shall avoid the appearance of a flat roof and include distinctive roof shapes including but not limited to pitched, vaulted or terraced roof lines, etc. Rooflines shall be varied on individual buildings and among buildings in a multifamily residential complex.
        c. The longest dimension of any building shall not exceed one hundred sixty (160) feet. Buildings on the same site may be connected by covered pedestrian walkways.
        d. Horizontal building modulation. The stepping back or projecting forward of portions of a building facade within specified intervals of a building width and depth lessens the apparent bulk of the exterior wall of the structure. Multifamily residential buildings shall meet the following design standards:
            1. The maximum width, as measured horizontally along the building exterior, without building modulation shall be fifty (50) feet.
            2. The facade modulation shall have a minimum depth of ten (10) feet and a minimum width of ten (10) feet.
            3. Balconies may be considered to contribute to building modulation if each individual balcony has a floor area of one hundred (100) square feet and a projection of at least five (5) feet from the building wall.
            4. Alternative methods to shape a building such as angled or curved facade elements, offset planes, wing walls and terracing, will be considered, provided the intent of this section is met.
            5. Enhance building articulation with a change in materials or colors with each change in building plane. Emphasize trim details with compatible contrasting colors.
        e. Modulated roof line. The rooflines shall be modulated according to the following standards:
            1. Provide gable, hipped or shed roofs with a slope of at least three (3) feet vertical to twelve (12) feet horizontal. Change the roofline by alternating dormers, stepped roofs, gables, or other roof elements to reinforce the modulation or articulation interval.
            2. Other roof forms such as arched, vaulted, dormer or saw-toothed may satisfy this regulation if the individual segments of the roof without a change in slope or discontinuity are less than sixty (60) feet in width.
            3. For existing flat roofs or facades with a horizontal eave, fascia, or parapet, change the roofline so that no unmodulated segment of roof exceeds sixty (60) feet, measured horizontally.
        f. Residential design features, including but not limited to entry porches, projecting window bays, balconies or decks, individual windows instead of strip windows, offsets and cascading or stepped roof forms shall be incorporated into all buildings. Window openings shall have visible trim material or painted detailing that resembles trim. Use design elements in the following manner to accent building articulation, providing the interval does not exceed sixty (60) feet:
            1. Repeat distinctive window patterns at intervals less than or equal to the articulation interval.
            2. Provide a porch, patio, deck, or covered entry for each interval.
            3. Provide a balcony or bay window for each interval.
            4. Provide a lighting fixture, trellis, tree or other landscape feature within each interval.
        g. Dwelling units on the ground floor level shall have private outdoor spaces adjacent to them to allow those exterior portions of the site to be controlled by individual households.
        h. Buildings in the development should be oriented to provide for privacy of residents.
        i. Dwelling units should be constructed so that windows are not located at ground level, below grade in window wells or below adjacent sidewalks, stairways, landscape areas or parking areas.
        j. Lighting fixtures should not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height and shall include luminaire shields.
        k. Provide substantial landscaping and/or pedestrian oriented open spaces near building entrances and along the building facade. Principal entries to buildings shall be highlighted with plaza or garden areas containing planting, lighting, seating, trellises and other features. Such areas should be located and designed so windows overlook them.
        l. All new buildings, including accessory buildings, such as carports and garages shall have a roof pitch ranging from at least three (3) feet vertical to twelve (12) feet horizontal.
        m. The site plan should accommodate vehicular access and parking in a manner which is convenient, yet does not allow the automobile to dominate the site.
        n. Carports and garages in front yards are discouraged. Parking areas should be beside or behind buildings that front upon streets. Subterranean parking is encouraged. Parking lots should be broken up into rows containing no more than sixteen (16) adjacent stalls, separated by planting areas and pedestrian walkways. If parking is located along a right-of way, a landscaped berm at least three (3) feet higher than the finished grade of the parking lot shall be located between the parking lot and the right-of-way.
        o. Provide an open space network that is accessible to all units and that will accommodate a wide variety of activities, public and private, in the following manner:
            1. Provide at least thirty (30) square feet per unit of common open space in addition to individual balconies or patios and that area required by landscaping, recreation, building setbacks, critical area buffers and other code requirements.
            2. Common open space shall be an open air area intended for use by all residents, guests, employees or patrons of a site and may include lawns, gardens, squares, plazas, courtyards, terraces, barbecue and picnic areas, games court or multi-use recreational areas, and other types of built space. Common open space shall meet the following standards:
                (a) Linear dimensions of no less than twenty (20) feet.
                (b) No more than thirty (30) percent of the area covered by a structure.
                (c) Provide ample exposure to natural sunlight and fresh air.
                (d) Provide direct pedestrian connection to other parts of the site.
                (e) May include multi-use stormwater detention facilities, if the Community Development Director determines that the facilities are designed to function as common open space by providing an enhanced nature or visually aesthetic design.
            3. Ensure that the open space network provides privacy for the residents while allowing for security and surveillance from residential units. Common recreational spaces shall be located and arranged to allow windows to overlook them.
            4. Provide adequate lighting in the open space network, but place and shield lighting so that it does not glare into housing units.
            5. Provide landscaping that defines the open space and provides shade and wind protection where needed but permits surveillance from units and roads.
            6. Design the residential open space network with specific uses in mind. In each multifamily residential or combined uses buildings, private open space shall be provided in addition to common open space areas.
                (a) Private open space shall be a partially or fully screened or enclosed open-air area that is strictly intended for use by the residents of the dwelling unit.
                (b) Private open space may include yards, gardens, patios, courtyards, porches, balconies, terraces, rooftop gardens, decks or verandahs. Private open space shall not have a dimension less than six (6) feet in length.
        p. Provide one (1) or more furnished play areas for children. Provide a minimum of two hundred (200) square feet or fifty (50) square feet per unit, whichever is greater. Game courts, bike tracks and other recreational facilities may be included as play areas, provided that at least one (1) play area for children ages seven (7) and under has been provided. “Adult only” housing that prohibits children as residents is exempt from providing a children’s play area but shall provide equal area for recreational uses appropriate to the age of residents.
    2. Site Design Objectives.
        a. Streets in multi-family residential areas should be strongly pedestrian-oriented, with effective transitions onto the private sidewalk systems of individual properties.
        b. For multifamily residential complexes, no residential building over six (6) units in size may be located within fifty (50) feet of the property line abutting single-family residential development in a single family residential zone. Buildings containing the rental office, recreation and sports facilities and other community facilities may be located within this setback. Landscaped yards shall be provided between building(s) and public street(s).
        c. Individual properties should provide private open space areas in accordance with the requirements of this section. Private open space for individual units should orient towards pedestrian routes to provide opportunities for casual surveillance by residents.
        d. Natural amenities such as views, significant or unique trees, creeks, riparian corridors, and similar features unique to the site shall be preserved and incorporated into the design. Natural topography shall be emphasized, rather than obscured or eliminated. Multi-family residential projects should take advantage of unique opportunities to incorporate natural assets into project designs.
        e. Pedestrian-oriented spaces, amenities and corridors should be incorporated in the overall site design. Pedestrian areas should be easily accessible, clearly visible and located to take advantage of surrounding features such as building entrances, open spaces, significant landscaping, unique topography or architecture, and solar exposure.
        f. Residential amenities (such as swimming pools, clubhouses, sports courts, etc.) should be integrated into the architectural concept of the design.
        g. Garbage collection areas should be conveniently located, and located in enclosures constructed of durable materials, preferably concrete block walls and metal gates. Appropriate landscaping shall be installed around collection areas.
        h. Internal vehicular circulation routes should be designed to easily accommodate large vehicles such as moving vans and emergency/service vehicles. Separate but integrated pedestrian routes shall be provided. Vehicular entrances onto the property should be controlled to the greatest extent possible. Efficient loading areas for school buses must be provided.
    3. Building Design. The intent of this section is to encourage residential building design that is appropriate to the site and that becomes a positive element in the architectural composition of the City. Multi-family residential designs should focus on providing high quality residential environments. Separate complexes should develop their own “sense of place”, while providing linkages with other developments.
        a. Architectural Consistency. Buildings should be of appropriate height, scale, and design to be compatible with existing permanent neighboring developments that are consistent with the Land Use and Development Code. Individual buildings should have a distinct identity and quality architectural appearance. Complexes consisting of multiple buildings should be unified by the architectural treatment. The management office should be located in a logical and easily identified location. An effort should be made to provide architectural and site design elements that help the building or development relate to broader architectural themes and design elements of the surrounding area and the City in general. Adjacent structures that are not in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan should be considered to be transitional.
        b. Architectural Scale. Large buildings must provide design elements to reduce the appearance of bulk. Building massing should respect the pattern and rhythm of the existing streetscape. Specific requirements for building articulation in multi-family residential developments are contained in LMC 18A.50.231(C)(1)
    4. Landscape Design. The intent of this section is to encourage landscape design that will enhance the pedestrian environment and complement building and site design using plant species that are low maintenance, resistant to drought and which enhance the residential quality of the development. Landscaping must comply with the specific requirements of LMC 18A.50.400.
        a. Landscape Components. Landscape plans for multi-family residential development should provide for:
            1. Streetscape landscaping. This includes the landscaping integrated with streetscape improvements including street trees, “splash strips” between the curb and sidewalk, and landscape areas around pedestal signs.
            2. Perimeter landscaping. This includes landscape strips required around the perimeter of the property.
            3. Building base landscaping. Landscaping around the base of the building(s) to soften the building elevation, provide a visual base to the building, and to provide shade to address solar gain issues.
            4. Residential open space, both common and private. Garden areas, active use areas and other landscape amenities are encouraged.
            5. Parking lot landscaping. Landscaping to provide visual relief and shade to parking areas. This includes landscape islands and other landscaping within parking areas.
            6. Screen landscaping. Special landscaped areas to visually screen loading areas, activity areas, garbage collection areas, etc.
        b. Landscape Design Objectives. The applicant should consider the following design objectives when creating a landscape plan for multi-family residential projects:
            1. Landscaping should be used to beautify the project site and provide a more inviting and attractive environment for residents. Healthy and well-kept landscaping projects an image of well-being, permanence, commitment to the community, and a sense of place.
            2. Highlight significant site features and define the function of the site, including parking, circulation, entries, open space, and activity areas.
            3. Landscaping shall provide adequate sight distances and visibility for vehicles and pedestrians.
            4. Highlight principal entrances to sites with seasonal plantings arranged in a gateway effect. Consider containers planted with seasonal flowers. Use landscaping to accentuate signage.
            5. Use building foundation plantings to provide a transition between the vertical planes of structures and the horizontal planes of the site.
            6. Use landscaping to improve the residential experience on the site. Use landscaping to screen unsightly views, provide shade, provide privacy, and provide color and fragrance.
    5. Site Furnishings. Incorporate outdoor furniture, fixtures, and streetscape elements into the site design that enhances and complements the residential functions of the site. Miscellaneous structures and street furniture should be designed to be part of the architectural design and landscape. The following guidelines shall apply:
        a. Lighting, free standing signs, trellises, arbors, raised planters, benches and other forms of seating, trash receptacles, bus stops, phone booths, fencing, or other outdoor furniture or streetscape fixtures should be utilized in the site design to create and define public spaces.
        b. Utilize high-quality, durable and easily maintained materials in site furnishings and features that discourage defacement. Furnishings that are easily removed or do not portray an image of care invite vandalism and misuse.
        c. Use safety materials, such as non-slip walkway surfaces.
        d. Locate site furnishings to maximize visual surveillance of the area by residents, pedestrians and passing vehicles to minimize covert activities in the space and lessen risks to public safety.
    6. Lighting levels. Provide adequate lighting levels in multi-family residential areas for safety and security, to provide for activity at night. Special attention should be given to building entries, along walkways, parking areas, and other public areas. Provide a lighting plan with:
        a. An overlapping pattern of light and lighting levels designed to allow pedestrians to identify a face fifteen (15) yards away, generally at least three (3) footcandles. Adequate lighting reduces anonymity and gives pedestrians an opportunity to choose another route.
        b. Lighting standards along pedestrian pathways and in other pedestrian areas shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height and shall be spaced no greater distance than two (2) times the height of the lighting standards used. Lighting poles and standards in parking lots and in other areas may be up to twenty (20) feet in height, provided that all other lighting requirements are met. Lighting should be provided at consistent lumens with a gradual transition to unlighted areas. Highly contrasting pools of light and dark can be temporarily blinding and should be avoided.
        c. Floodlighting of building elevations is encouraged, particularly to emphasize buildings with strong architectural form. Building lights should be ground mounted within landscaped settings, or mounted on the building itself. Colored and/or decorative lighting is encouraged to accentuate architectural and residential themes.
        d. Adequate lighting at all building entrances, exits and corridors between buildings, generally at least three (3) footcandles during active use, especially where doors are recessed. Appropriate lighting levels shall be provided in all loading, disposal, storage, and circulation areas.
        e. Confine site lighting to the project site. Use shields or other methods to eliminate glare on adjacent properties or towards the sky.
        f. Place light posts and standards so that they do not create hazards for pedestrians or vehicles.
        g. Indicate specific lighting levels in each lighted area.
D. Public Uses and Zones. Any proposed public and semi-public uses in the PI zoning district are subject to the requirement for an administrative or conditional use permit. (See Section 18A.30.830, Permitted Uses in the PI Zoning District). Development standards for these uses are deliberately flexible. (See Section 18A.30.840, Development Standards in the PI Zoning District). In the consideration of any proposed public or institutional use in the PI or other zoning district, the Community Development Director or Hearing Examiner shall consider and apply the general standards of this chapter as applicable. Specific concepts identified for commercial, industrial, and multi-family residential uses may be applied if found to be pertinent to a particular public use. [Ord. 277 § 1, 2002.]

18A.50.241 General and Special Uses Design Standards.
The standards of this section apply generally to development in all zoning districts.
A. Large Buildings. New buildings three (3) or more stories in height or over eight thousand (8,000) feet of gross floor area shall provide at least two (2) of the following features on those facades visible from public rights-of-way:
    1. Upper story setback. To reduce the perception of bulk, one (1) or more upper stories shall be set back from the ground floor at least ten (10) feet.
    2. Horizontal building modulation. The stepping back or projecting forward of portions of a building facade within specified intervals of a building width and depth lessens the apparent bulk of the exterior wall of the structure. Buildings within four hundred (400) feet of a public right-of-way or park and visible from that right-of-way or park shall meet the following design standards:
        a. The maximum width, as measured horizontally along the building exterior, without building modulation shall be one hundred (100) feet for commercial buildings.
        b. The facade modulation shall have a minimum depth of ten (10) feet and a minimum width of twenty (20) feet.
        c. Balconies may be considered to contribute to building modulation if each individual balcony has a floor area of one hundred (100) square feet and a projection of at least five (5) feet from the building wall.
        d. Alternative methods to shape a building such as angled or curved facade elements, offset planes, wing walls and terracing, will be considered, provided the intent of this section is met.
        e. Enhance building articulation with a change in materials or colors with each change in building plane. Emphasize trim details with compatible contrasting colors.
        f. Canopies or arcades may be used along a facade as modulation only if the facade is visible from a right-of-way and the length of the canopy or arcade is at least fifty (50) percent of the length of the facade on which it will be located.
    3. Modulated roofline. Rooflines shall be modulated by one (1) or more of the following standards:
        a. Provide gable, hipped or shed roofs with a slope of at least three (3) feet vertical to twelve (12) feet horizontal. Change the roofline by alternating dormers, stepped roofs, gables, or other roof elements to reinforce the modulation or articulation interval.
        b. Other roof forms such as arched, vaulted, dormer or saw-toothed may satisfy this regulation if the individual segments of the roof without a change in slope or discontinuity are less than one hundred (100) feet in width.
        c. For flat roofs or facades with a horizontal eave, fascia, or parapet, change the roofline so that no unmodulated segment of roof exceeds one hundred (100) feet, measured horizontally for commercial buildings.
    4. Building articulation with design elements such as the following, providing the interval does not exceed sixty (60) feet:
        a. Repeat distinctive window patterns at intervals equal to the articulation interval.
        b. Provide a porch, patio, deck, or covered entry for each interval.
        c. Provide a balcony or bay window for each interval.
        d. Change the roofline by alternating dormers, stepped roofs, gables, or other roof elements to reinforce the modulation or articulation interval.
        e. Change materials or colors with a change in building plane.
        f. Provide a lighting fixture, trellis, tree or other landscape feature within each interval.
        g. Clustering of smaller uses and activities around entrances on street-facing facades.
        h. Massing of substantial landscaping and/or pedestrian oriented open spaces along the building facade.
        i. A pedestrian pass-through that would access the rear of the lot through buildings over two hundred (200) feet in length.
        Other design methods proposed by the project applicant subject to approval by the City. The proposed methods must satisfy the intent of the design principles in this section.
B. Siting and Screening of Service and Parking Facilities. Minimize the impacts of incompatible uses, reduce the visibility of unsightly uses and create compatible edges between business and residential uses among adjacent properties by encouraging more thoughtful siting of trash containers, service areas, private utilities apparatus and parking facilities, while balancing the need for these service uses with the desire to screen negative impacts.
    1. Locate incompatible uses and intrusive site elements away from neighboring properties to reduce conflicts with adjacent uses. Service yards and loading areas shall be designed and located for easy access by service vehicles and tenants and shall not displace required landscaping, impede other site uses, or create a nuisance for adjacent property owners.
    2. Landscape buffers or another form of screening shall be provided along property lines adjacent to incompatible uses. If changes in topography between the properties are sufficient to reduce impacts, then modification to some of the screening/buffer options may be allowed.
    3. When visible from public streets or adjacent residential uses, chain link fencing may only be used if the chain link fencing posts, gates, couplings and fasteners are coated with a colored plastic, vinyl or decorative finish, other than paint. Barbed wire may be utilized on the top of a fence, for security purposes only. Concertina or razor wire shall not be used.
    4. Integrate outdoor storage areas and loading facilities into the site design to reduce visual impact and obstruction of pedestrian and vehicular movement. Commercial services relating to loading, storage, trash and recycling should be located in such a manner as to optimize public circulation and minimize visibility into such facilities. Trash and recycling receptacles shall be located within enclosures and shall include covers to prevent odor and wind blown litter.
    5. Service yard walls, enclosures, and similar accessory site elements shall be consistent with the primary building(s) relative to architecture, materials and colors.
    6. Locate and/or screen utility meters, electrical conduit, and other public and private utilities equipment and apparatus, including transformers, fire standpipes and engineered retention ponds, except biofiltration swales, so as not to be visible from the street or adjacent properties. Building utility equipment such as electrical panels and junction boxes should be located in an interior utility room. If site utilities must be located in a front yard, they shall be either underground or screened by walls and/or landscaping, and shall not obstruct views of tenant common spaces, public open spaces, monument signs, and/or driveways.
    7. Locate and/or screen roof-mounted mechanical equipment so that it blends with the architecture of the building and is not visible from the street or adjacent properties.
C. Pedestrian Weather Protection. Provide pedestrian weather protection on building entrances as follows:
    1. At each primary building entry, provide weather protection in the form of an awning, canopy, marquee, building overhang or other feature that creates a covered pedestrian space that extends at least four (4) feet on either side of the entrance doors of the building and at least four (4) feet from the building wall.
    2. Canopies or awnings should not extend higher than fifteen (15) feet above ground level or lower than eight and one-half (8 1/2) feet at the lowest point. Vertical height of the overhead clearance for the bottom of an awning should not be more than ten (10) feet.
    3. The material and configuration of the pedestrian covering shall be reviewed by the City. Coverings with visible corrugated metal or corrugated fiberglass are not permitted. Fabric, plastic and rigid metal awnings are acceptable if they meet the applicable standards. All lettering and graphics on pedestrian coverings shall conform to the City’s sign regulations as set forth in LMC 18A.50.600.
D. Signage. Signage should be included as an integral element of the building and site design. Sign colors and design should relate and be complementary to the architecture of the building. Individual channel letters are generally preferred over cabinet-style signs. All signs must conform to the requirements of the City’s Sign Code.
E. Design Treatment of Blank Walls. Reduce the apparent size and visual impact of large plain walls through the use of various architectural and landscaping treatments.
    1. All blank walls within one-hundred (100) feet and visible from a street right-of-way, park, or a residential use in a residential zone shall be treated in at least two (2) of the following methods:
        a. Install a vertical trellis in front of the wall with climbing vines or similar plant materials.
        b. Provide a planting bed at least five (5) feet wide or raised planter at least two (2) feet high and three (3) feet wide in front of the wall. Landscape with plant materials that obscure or screen at least fifty (50) percent of the wall surface within three (3) years.
        c. Provide artwork such as mosaic, mural, decorative masonry, metal patterns or grillwork, sculpture, relief or other art, on at least fifty (50) percent of the blank wall surface.
        d. Showcase, display, recessed windows.
        e. Architectural features such as setbacks, indentations, overhangs, projections, articulated cornices, bays, reveals, canopies, and awnings.
        f. Material variations such as colors, brick or metal banding, or textural changes;
        g. Landscaped public plaza(s) with space for vendor carts, concerts and other pedestrian activities.
        h. Other methods subject to City approval of architectural plans and elevations of the proposed treatments.
F. Surface Parking and Parking Structure Facilities. Coordinate parking facilities to reduce visual and traffic impacts as follows:
    1. In parking facilities, the preferred location for markings and signs for individual stalls is the pavement. Parking and vehicle circulation areas shall be clearly delineated using directional signage. Limit the height of free standing or wall mounted stall signs to three (3) feet above grade, except for handicap accessible parking signs, which shall be three (3) to five (5) feet in height. Limit parking lot entrance signs to one (1) per parking area entrance. The sign shall be no more than six (6) feet in height above grade, and shall have a surface area of no more than six (6) square feet per side.
    2. Screen the storage of all moveable parking lot equipment, such as barrels, saw horses, etc. from the public right-of-way.
    3. Driveways shall be located to be visible from the right-of-way but not impede pedestrian circulation on-site or to adjoining properties. Parking aisles without loop access are discouraged. Driveways should be shared with adjacent properties to minimize the number of driveways and curb cuts. Vehicular circulation between adjoining properties is encouraged.
    4. Minimize the size and surface area of required parking lots by:
        a. Encouraging the use of shared parking facilities whenever feasible.
        b. Encouraging the inclusion of underground and/or rooftop parking facilities in multi-story buildings.
        c. Encouraging the development and use of parking structures and facilities; and
        d. Encouraging the use of transit and ride share programs whenever possible.
    5. Design parking structures, including parking floors located within commercial buildings, as follows:
        a. The bulk and mass of a parking structure as seen from the right-of-way should be minimized by placing its short dimension along the street edge. The parking structure shall include active uses at the ground level such as retail, offices or other commercial uses that occupy at least fifty (50) percent of the building's lineal frontage along the right-of-way.
        b. Parking structures which are part of new development shall be architecturally consistent with exterior architectural elements of the primary structure, including roof lines, facade design, and finish materials.
        c. Parking structures should incorporate methods of articulation and accessory elements, pursuant to LMC 18A.50.241(A) Large Buildings, and LMC 18A.50.231(A)(2). Commercial Building Design, for facades located above grade.
        d. Buildings built over parking should not appear to “float” over the parking area, but should be linked with ground level uses or screening. Parking at grade under a building is discouraged unless the parking area is completely enclosed within the building or wholly screened with walls and/or landscaped berms.
        e. Top deck lighting on multi-level parking structures shall be architecturally integrated with the building, and screened to control impacts to off-site uses.
        f. Parking structures and vehicle entrances should be designed to minimize views of parked vehicles inside the structure from surrounding streets, without sacrificing public safety. Methods to help minimize such views may include, but are not limited to landscaping, planters, and decorative grilles and screens.
        g. Security grilles for parking structures shall be architecturally consistent with and integrated with the overall design. Chain link fencing is not permitted for garage security fencing.
        h. A minimum of eight (8) foot wide strip of landscaping along the base of the facade pursuant to LMC 18A.50.425(A)(1)(a), Landscape Types, in those areas where ground level retail or other active uses are not located.
        i. When curtain wall glass and steel systems are used to enclose a building, the glazing panels shall be transparent on fifty (50) percent of the ground floor facade fronting a right-of-way or pedestrian area.
        j. Transparent glazing panels shall be utilized in the construction of all elevators and enclosed stairways. Elevators and stairways shall be sited so as to maximize the visual surveillance from the surrounding streets as well from within the parking structure.
        k. The parking structure shall be designed and lighted in accordance with crime prevention concepts so that personal safety risks are minimized.
G. Public Safety. Provide surveillance opportunities from buildings and public streets to promote personal safety, discourage vandalism, and contribute to property security.
    1. Avoid site design features that create entrapment areas such as long enclosed corridors and opaque fences in locations with pedestrian activity. Provide more than one (1) pedestrian access route to the sidewalk from a parking lot or other enclosed area.
    2. Ensure that site and building designs provide lines of sight that allow building occupants and passersby to observe on-site activities. All buildings adjacent to the street should provide visual access from the street into activities within the building. Windows, balconies, and entries overlooking parking lots, pedestrian corridors and vehicular routes will allow for informal surveillance.
H. Drive-Through Facilities. These standards are intended to allow for drive-through facilities while reducing the negative impacts they may create. The specific purposes of these standards are to reduce noise, lighting, exhaust, and visual impacts on abutting uses, particularly residential uses; promote safer and more efficient on-site vehicular and pedestrian circulation; and minimize conflicts between queued vehicles and traffic on adjacent streets. These standards are in addition to other development standards applicable under this chapter or other chapters of the LMC and shall apply to not only new development but also the addition of drive-through facilities to existing developments and the relocation or redevelopment of existing drive-through facilities. Drive-through facilities are not a right; conditions such as size, configuration, or location of the site or existing structures may make it inappropriate to establish a drive-through on a specific property. If that is the case, a drive-through facility may be denied even if it is otherwise allowed in the zoning district.
    1. Drive-through points of customer service and queuing lanes should not be located along facades of buildings that face a right-of-way. If a drive-through cannot be located on any other portion of the site, then it shall be visually screened from the street by landscaping and/or architectural element, or combination thereof, provided such elements reflect the primary building and provide appropriate screening.
    2. Queuing lanes should be physically separated from the parking lot, sidewalk, and pedestrian areas by landscaping and curbing, an architectural element, or combination thereof, provided such elements reflect the primary building and provide appropriate separation.
    3. Drive-through speakers or amplified music shall not be audible off-site.
    4. Hours of operation may be limited as determined necessary by the City to achieve compatibility with surrounding land uses.
    5. A bypass lane to escape the queuing lane is suggested for all drive-through facilities, especially high-volume facilities.
    6. Queuing lanes shall provide space for at least three (3) vehicles awaiting service, which shall encompass a minimum distance of sixty (60) linear feet as measured from each point of customer service to the end of the lane. For uses having multiple drive-through service lanes, each lane shall provide this minimum.
    7. Queuing lanes should be located so as to minimize interference with pedestrian circulation routes. Unless the use is a standalone drive-through whose primary orientation is to vehicles, primary pedestrian access to the business from the parking lot should not cross the queuing lane or drive-through ingress/egress.
    8. Vehicular entrances and exits shall not be located so as to cause congestion on any public street or right-of-way. The queuing lane shall be situated so that any overflow shall not spill out onto public streets or major circulation routes of any parking lot. Drive-through uses shall not be approved with ingress or egress driveways within 300 feet of a signalized intersection operating with a Level of Service D, E, or F unless a traffic analysis acceptable to the Public Works Department demonstrates that vehicles entering or leaving the site will not impair the efficiency or operation of the intersection.
    9. When located in a shopping center or other multiple tenant development, drive-through facilities shall provide sufficient queuing space to handle peak business demands and shall not in any way obstruct the normal circulation pattern of the shopping center.
I. Design Elements for Vendors. Stands for espresso, food, merchandise, and other outdoor vendors are subject to the following design standards:
    1. The stand or cart shall be constructed of good quality, permanent materials. Tarps, bare plywood, cardboard, plastic sheeting, corrugated fiberglass or metal, or similar materials are not permitted.
    2. The design, materials, and colors shall be compatible with existing features in the proposed location.
    3. Awning quality shall be equal to that required for permanent buildings.
    4. The size of the stand or cart shall be adequate for storage, trash containers, and other facilities. No outside storage is permitted.
    5. Wiring and plumbing shall be hidden from view.
    6. One (1) sign, maximum area six (6) square feet, two (2) sided, is permitted. Menus and price lists two (2) square feet and less, are not signs for the purpose of this guideline.
    7. No music or drive-up speakers shall be audible off-site.
J. Transit Facilities. Provide residents and shoppers with convenient transit and pedestrian connections to work places, parks, schools and shopping by:
    1. Encouraging the development of pedestrian-oriented retail and services uses in close proximity to transit facilities.
    2. Encouraging the development of residential uses within walking distance of the Sound Transit commuter rail station.
    3. Encouraging the development of multi-story combined uses buildings in the area around the Sound Transit commuter rail station.
    4. Encouraging the connection of a variety of transit modes, such as rail, bus, park and ride, vanpool, bicycles and pedestrian, around the Sound Transit commuter rail station to create a transit hub for the City of Lakewood.
K. Development Adjacent to Highways. In new development and projects where there is an opportunity to address a property’s frontage on Interstate 5 or Highway 512, the following principles should be applied:
    1. Development designs, including site design, architecture, and landscaping, should pay careful attention to the project’s presentation to the highway. Designs should strive to present a positive visual presentation to the highway through architectural design elements and building orientation which acknowledge the presence of the highway.
    2. Signage should be sufficient for way-finding purposes, without being overly demanding of the viewer’s attention. The scale and design of signage should be comparable to other signs in the vicinity. Businesses shall not try to out-compete each other for visual attention.
    3. To permit other businesses to have visual access to the highway, signage should be located within the first half of the highway frontage as encountered by oncoming highway traffic.
    4. Landscaping should frame views of the site, accentuating positive visual focal points and screening unsightly or visually distracting elements. If visual access to the freeway is not critical, then landscaping shall be installed that provides visual continuity and effective screening of the site as seen from the highway.
    5. Avoid the placement of service and utility areas toward the highway. Use the primary structure to screen such areas from the vision of oncoming traffic on the highway.
    6. Outdoor display of merchandise should be focused toward a limited, specially designated and designed area of the site. Landscaping should frame the display area, screening other areas of the site and focusing the viewer’s attention to the display. Merchandise and equipment placed for display along the highway shall not exceed 20 feet in height.
    7. Work with WSDOT to provide complementary landscaping within the highway right-of-way.
    8. In order to establish visual continuity along the highway, fencing should be limited to vinyl coated galvanized chain link fencing for developments providing visual access to the highway, and grey colored split-face block walls for projects that do not require visual access. Fencing along the freeway shall be installed in accordance with design guidelines issued by the Washington State Department of Transportation. A coating to help allow clean-up of spray paint graffiti shall be applied to the face of the block wall.
L. Large-Scale Commercial Facilities. Large-Scale Commercial Facilities shall be designed in such a manner as to be adaptable for reuse/compartmentalization. The building design shall include specific elements that facilities the structure’s adaptation for multi-tenant reuse should the initial use cease. Such elements may include but are not limited to compartmentalized construction, including plumbing, electrical service, heating, ventilation, and air conditioning. The building design shall also allow for all of the following:
    1. Division of the interior of the structure into separate tenancies. The design for interior division shall accommodate multiple potential tenancies, each no larger than fifty (50) percent of the size of the original structure.
    2. Facades that readily adapt to multiple entrances without compromising the structural integrity of the building, and adapt to entrances on at least two sides of the building or, if the building is designed to have only one front facade, all potential tenancies shall be designed for access from the front facade.
    3. Parking lot designs that are shared by establishments or that are linked by safe and functional driving and bicycle/pedestrian connections.
    4. Landscaping schemes that complement a multiple entry redesign.
    5. Design and placement of loading docks/bays to accommodate potential multiple tenancies.
    6. Other elements of design which facilitate multi-tenant reuse of the building and site. [Ord. 567 § 4, 2013; Ord. 525 § 11, 2010; Ord. 483 § 26, 2008; Ord. 397 § 14, 2005; Ord. 392 § 4, 2005; Ord. 277 § 1, 2002.]

18A.50.251 Administration.
Applications subject to community design guidelines shall be subject to the Design Review process pursuant to the procedures set forth in LMC 18A.10.400. Planning staff will inform the applicant which standards are applicable to the project to assist the applicant to meet the community design requirements. Each application shall demonstrate how the various building elements, such as walls, roofline, entries, modulation, and materials are organized into a functional and visually agreeable composition, and how the concept relates to site conditions and site design such as visibility, access, pedestrian circulation, and neighboring development. Design review will generally be conducted as a function of project permit review. During project permit review, the staff person will note which design standards have been satisfied and any requirements that have not yet been met. The Community Development Director shall have the authority to approve, modify, or deny proposals pursuant to a review under this process.
This chapter sets parameters for design, but is constructed to allow for design flexibility and innovative design solutions. Decisions under this chapter will consider proposals on the basis of individual merit and will encourage creative design alternatives in order to achieve the stated purpose and objectives of this chapter. Advisory guidelines may be used as a basis for the conditioning, modification, or denial of an application. Decisions under this chapter may be appealed using the appeal procedures of the administrative land-use process.
Exceptions to the Standards. The Community Development Director may permit a deviation from one (1) or more specific standards if it is determined that public benefit may be achieved by an alternative proposal. In addition, the Community Development Director may allow a development project to meet a lesser standard, if during redevelopment of an existing developed site, the Community Development Director, in consultation with the City Engineer, has determined that the specific standard(s) cannot be met due to the size or configuration of the parcel and makes findings that demonstrate that the public benefit associated with public safety and/or the community design standards that have been met by the project design exceeds the public benefit associated with those standards that will not be met by the proposed design. The alternative proposal shall be consistent with the purpose of this section, public safety practices and with the comprehensive plan goals and policies.
This chapter in no way should be construed to supersede or modify any other City codes or ordinances that apply to the proposal. To the extent that any provision of this chapter is inconsistent or conflicts with any other chapter or City ordinance, the more specific provision shall control. Otherwise, this chapter shall be construed consistently with the other provisions and regulations of the City. [Ord. 307 § 23, 2003; Ord. 277 § 1, 2002.]

18A.50.300 Tree Preservation.

18A.50.305 Purpose - Tree Preservation.
This section promotes tree preservation by protecting the treed environment of the City of Lakewood by regulating the removal of significant trees and providing incentives to preserve trees that, because of their size, species, or location, provide special benefits. Tree preservation protects and enhances critical areas, facilitates aquifer recharge, reduces erosion and storm water runoff, and helps to define public and private open spaces. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.310 Applicability - Tree Preservation.
The requirements for tree preservation shall be provided in accordance with the development standards of each individual zoning district and the provisions of this section, and are applicable to all zoning districts. Lots of less than seventeen thousand (17,000) square feet in single family residential zones are exempt from this Chapter, except where specific tree preservation is required as a mitigation measure under SEPA. In the event a permit is not required for the establishment of a use, the standards of this section shall still apply. [Ord. 500 § 11, 2009; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.320 Significant Tree Preservation.
A. Standards. Significant tree preservation shall be required for any project permit.
    1. A significant tree is an existing tree which:
        a. When measured at four and one-half (4.5) feet above ground, has a minimum diameter of nine (9) inches for evergreen trees and deciduous trees;
        b. When measured at four and one-half (4.5) feet above ground; has a minimum diameter of six (6) inches for Garry Oaks, also known as Oregon White Oaks, and,
        c. Regardless of the tree diameter, is determined to be significant by the Community Development Director due to the uniqueness of the species or provision of important wildlife habitat.
    2. For the purposes of this section, existing trees are measured by diameter at four and one-half (4.5) feet above ground level, which is the usual and customary forest standard. Replacement trees are measured by diameter at six (6) inches above ground level, which is the usual and customary nursery standard.
    3. Damaged or Diseased Trees. Trees will not be considered “significant” if, following inspection and a written report by a registered landscape architect, certified nursery professional or certified arborist, and upon review of the report and concurrence by the City, they are determined to be:
        a. Safety hazards due to root, trunk or primary limb failure;
        b. Damaged or diseased, and do not constitute an important wildlife habitat. At the discretion of the City, damaged or diseased or standing dead trees may be retained and counted toward the significant tree requirement, if demonstrated that such trees will provide important wildlife habitat and are not classified as a safety hazard.
B. Preservation Criteria. All significant trees shall be preserved according to the following criteria:
    1. Perimeter trees. All significant trees within twenty (20) feet of the lot perimeter or required buffer, which ever is greater, shall be preserved.
        a. Except that significant trees may be removed if required for the siting and placement of driveway and road access, buildings, vision clearance areas, utilities, sidewalks or pedestrian walkways, or storm drainage facilities and other similar required improvements, subject to the discretion of the Community Development Director. This requirement shall not apply to single family residential lots less than 17,000 square feet in size, where no specific tree preservation is required.
    2. Interior trees. A percentage of all significant trees within the interior of a lot, excluding the perimeter area, shall be preserved within the applicable zoning district.
        a. For new single family residential development including a single family dwelling on an individual lot, multifamily residential development, and public/quasi-public institutional development, fifty (50) percent of the significant trees located within the interior area of the lot, shall be retained.
        b. For new residential subdivisions where the proposed lot size is greater than 17,000 square feet, all significant trees shall be retained and preserved except those required to be removed in order to construct streets, utilities, or other on-site improvements. Tree retention shall thereafter be provided on a lot-by-lot basis as the individual lots are developed. For subdivisions where the proposed lots are less than 17,000 square feet, no specific tree preservation is required.
        c. For commercial and industrial development, ten (10) percent of the significant trees located within the interior area of the lot, or individual lots in the case of subdivisions, shall be retained.
        d. In Open Space and Recreation zones, ninety-five (95) percent of the significant trees located within the interior area of the lot shall be retained unless otherwise determined by the Community Development Director.
    3. Buffers and Sensitive/Critical Areas. Tree preservation criteria listed above shall exclude sensitive/critical areas and their buffers, and open space areas and tracts. All trees within such areas shall be retained except as may be specifically approved and indicated in the written findings of a discretionary land use permit or a tree removal permit. See also LMC 18A.40.240 for tree removal standards within the Riparian Overlay.
    4. SEPA Requirements. Additional or specific tree retention may be required as SEPA mitigation in addition to the requirements of this section.
C. Tree Retention Plan Required. 
    1. A significant tree retention plan shall be submitted to the Community Development Department for any project permit, except building permits that do not increase the footprint of a building. The plans shall be submitted according to the requirements of the application form provided by the Community Development Department.
    2. The Community Development Director shall review and may approve, approve with modifications, or deny a tree retention plan subject to the provisions of this section.
    3. A significant tree permit is required for the removal of any significant tree or street tree unless specifically exempted within this section.
D. Permit/Plan Requirements. Any project permit, except building permits that do not increase the footprint of a building shall identify, preserve, and replace significant trees in accordance with the following:
    1. Submit a tree retention plan that consists of a tree survey that identifies the location, size and species of all significant trees on a site and any trees over three (3) inches in diameter at four and one half (4 1/2) feet above ground level that will be retained on the site.
        a. The tree survey may be conducted by a method that locates individual significant trees, or
        b. Where site conditions prohibit physical survey of the property, standard timber cruising methods may be used to reflect general locations, numbers and groupings of significant trees.
    2. The tree retention plan shall also show the location, species, and dripline of each significant tree that is intended to qualify for retention credit, and identify the significant trees that are proposed to be retained, and those that are designated to be removed.
    3. The applicant shall demonstrate on the tree retention plan those tree protection techniques intended to be utilized during land alteration and construction in order to provide for the continued healthy life of retained significant trees.
    4. If tree retention and/or landscape plans are required, no clearing, grading or disturbance of vegetation shall be allowed on the site until approval of such plans by the City.
E. Construction Requirements. 
    1. An area free of disturbance, corresponding to the drip line of the significant tree’s canopy, shall be identified and protected during the construction stage with a temporary three (3) foot high chain-link or plastic net fence. No impervious surfaces, fill, excavation, storage of construction materials, or parking of vehicles shall be permitted within the area defined by such fencing.
    2. At Community Development Director’s sole discretion, a protective tree well may be required to be constructed if the grade level within ten (10) feet of the dripline around the tree is to be raised or lowered. The inside diameter of the well shall be at least equal to the diameter of the tree spread dripline, plus at least five (5) feet of additional diameter.
    3. The Community Development Director may approve use of alternate tree protection techniques if the trees will be protected to an equal or greater degree than by the techniques listed above. Alternative techniques must be approved by a registered landscape architect, certified nursery professional or certified arborist, with review and concurrence by the City.
    4. If any significant tree that has been specifically designated to be retained in the tree preservation plan dies or is removed within five (5) years of the development of the site, then the significant tree shall be replaced pursuant to LMC 18A.50.320(G).
F. Significant Tree Removal for Non-Development Action. Where no project permit is proposed or is pending on a lot, a maximum of two (2) significant trees within the interior of the lot and which shall not constitute more than twenty (20) percent of the significant trees on the lot, may be removed within a single calendar year:
    1. If a project permit is proposed or occurs on the lot within one (1) year of removal of a significant tree, the replacement requirements of LMC 18A.50.320(G) shall apply to the significant trees previously removed.
G. Replacement. When a significant tree subject to this section cannot be retained, the tree shall be replaced as a condition for the removal of the significant tree, in accordance with the following.
    1. On-Site Replacement. 
        a. Significant trees shall be replaced at a ratio of two to one (2:1) of the total diameter inches of all replacement trees to the diameter inches of all the significant trees removed.
        b. Replacement trees shall be a no smaller than three (3) inches in diameter at six (6) inches above ground;
        c. Existing healthy trees anywhere on the site which are retained to support the remaining significant trees can be counted against the on-site replacement requirements on a one to one (1:1) basis of the total diameter inches of all replacement trees removed, provided it meets the following criteria:
            1. The tree does not present a safety hazard; and,
            2. The tree is between three (3) and nine (9) inches in diameter at four and one half (4.5) feet above ground.
    2. Each significant tree that is located interior to the twenty (20) foot perimeter area, and which is in excess of the fifty (50) percent of significant trees that are required to be retained, may be credited towards replacement on a one and one-half to one (1.5:1) basis of the total diameter inches for any perimeter trees required to be removed for development, provided the interior tree is between nine (9) inches and twenty-four (24) inches in diameter for evergreen trees, or between nine (9) inches and thirty (30) inches in diameter for deciduous trees.
    3. Each significant tree that is located interior to the twenty (20) foot perimeter area, and which is in excess of the fifty (50) percent of significant trees that are required to be retained, may be credited towards replacement on a two to one (2:1) basis of the total diameter inches for any perimeter trees required to be removed for development, provided it meets one of the following criteria:
        a. The tree exceeds sixty (60) feet in height, or twenty-four (24) inches in diameter for evergreen trees, or thirty (30) inches in diameter for deciduous trees.
        b. The tree is located in a grouping of at least five (5) other significant trees with canopies that touch or overlap.
        c. The tree provides energy savings, through wind protection or summer shading, as a result of its location relative to buildings.
        d. The tree belongs to a unique or unusual species.
        e. The tree is located within twenty-five (25) feet of any critical area or required critical area buffers.
        f. The tree is eighteen (18) inches in diameter or greater and is identified as providing valuable wildlife habitat.
    4. Off-Site Replacement. When the required number of significant trees cannot be physically retained or replaced on site, the applicant may have the option of:
        a. The planting of the required replacement trees at locations approved by the City throughout the City. Plantings shall be completed prior to completion of the project permit requiring tree replacement.
        b. Payment in lieu of replacement may be made to the City Tree Fund for planting of trees in other areas of the City. The payment of an amount equivalent to the estimated cost of buying and planting the trees that would otherwise have been required to be planted on site, as determined by the City’s Tree Replacement Cost Schedule. Payment in lieu of planting trees on site shall be made at the time of the issuance of any building permit for the property or completion of the project permit requiring the tree replacement, whichever occurs first.
H. Trimming. Trimming of tree limbs and branches for purposes of vegetation management is permitted, provided the trimming does not cause the tree to be a safety hazard. [Ord. 500 § 12, 2009; Ord. 307 § 24, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.400 Landscaping.

18A.50.405 Purpose - Landscaping.
This section establishes standards for landscaping, street trees and landscape maintenance for new development and uses. The use of landscaping, street trees, and the retention of existing vegetation by property owners reduces visual, noise and lighting impacts, and promotes compatibility between land uses while enhancing the visual appearance of the City. Landscaping protects and enhances critical areas, facilitates aquifer recharge, reduces erosion and stormwater runoff, and helps to define public and private open spaces. This section also encourages the protection and planting of vegetation native and common to the Puget Sound region while providing policies and standards for the preservation of natural vegetation and maintenance of landscaping within the City of Lakewood. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.410 Applicability - Landscaping.
This section shall apply to all land development proposals including tree removal permits, discretionary land use permits, zoning certifications, subdivisions and building permits. Landscaping, landscape buffering, and tree preservation shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of individual zoning districts, specific use requirements, and the provisions of this chapter. In the event one of the above permits is not required for the establishment of a permanent use, the standards of this section shall still apply. The Community Development Department shall review and may approve, disapprove, or approve with modification all site/landscape plans for public and private projects where required. [Ord. 317 § 8, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.415 Exceptions - Landscaping.
Exceptions to this section are allowed under the following circumstances:
A. Residential Properties. The landscaping and street tree provisions of this chapter shall not apply to lots which are, as of the effective date of this title, zoned for and used as a detached or an attached single-family dwelling use type, excluding zero lot line developments, provided that the zoning and/or use continues unchanged from its status as of said effective date.
B. Interior Tenant Improvement. The landscaping provisions of this section shall not apply to existing structures where interior tenant improvements, such as interior remodel or painting, occur and where there is no addition to the number of parking spaces provided.
C. Existing Structures. Where existing structures are situated so as to preclude installation of required landscaping, the Community Development Director, at his/her sole discretion may reduce the required landscaping for the area affected by such structures pursuant to 18A.50.415(E).
D. Physical Limitation of the Site. The Community Development Director may modify landscaping requirements for structure remodeling or tenant improvements when the development of the required landscaping improvement(s) is not, in the determination of the Community Development Director, feasible due to physical limitations of the site that are no fault of the applicant. Where landscaping requirements have been reduced, the landscaping shall be relocated in the following manner and order:
    1. At the entry of the building.
    2. To another lot line.
    3. To an equal-sized area in another portion of the lot.
    4. To an area, as determined by the Community Development Director upon review with the owner or developer.
    5. The applicant shall post money into the City Street Tree Fund proportionate to the landscaping that cannot be relocated. The cost of the landscaping shall be based on a proportionate square foot cost of other areas on the lot that have been landscaped to a similar standard.
E. Parking for Existing Structures. Where compliance with the provisions of loading areas and off-street parking requirements for existing buildings or structures conflicts with the requirements of this section, the required landscaping and/or parking may be reduced, as determined by the Community Development Director, pursuant to 18A.50.415(F).
F. Landscaping Reduced. Where landscaping is reduced or waived in a specific location, equivalent landscaping shall be located elsewhere on the site in the following manner and order:
    1. At the entry of the building.
    2. To another lot line.
    3. To an equal-sized area in another portion of the lot.
    4. To an area, as determined by the Community Development Director upon review with the owner or developer.
    5. The applicant shall post money into the City Street Tree Fund proportionate to the landscaping that cannot be relocated. The cost of the landscaping shall be based on a proportionate square foot cost of other areas on the lot that have been landscaped to a similar standard.
G. Jointly Developed Properties. If contiguous lots or driveways to such lots are developed jointly with like uses, a portion of the perimeter buffering required between the lots may be relocated to other areas of the site, at the discretion of the Community Development Director, provided that the remaining portion of the perimeter buffering area is landscaped in a pedestrian-friendly manner to the required standard.
H. Existing Vegetation. Where existing vegetation can provide the same level of screening as required by the landscaping requirements, the Community Development Director may grant a waiver to some or all of the standard requirements. In such case, the applicant shall be responsible for submitting to the Community Development Department, an alternate conceptual landscape plan, supporting photographs and a brief explanation as to how the alternate plan satisfies the intent of the landscape standard required. Supplemental plant material may be required to be installed within, or adjacent to, the natural landscape area to fully comply with the intent of the required landscape standards. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.420 Landscaping Standards.
A. General Standards. 
    1. Where any structure is enlarged or expanded, then landscaping shall be provided for the area of said expansion or enlargement in accordance with LMC 18A.50.400, Landscaping. A change in use in an existing structure may require additional landscaping as set forth in this section.
    2. If the development proposal is a structure remodel or exterior tenant improvement, and the parking area is not reconfigured or expanded, the following standards apply:
        a. Perimeter landscaping and parking area landscaping may be required pursuant to 18A.50.200, Community Design.
        b. Building and/or entry landscaping may be required pursuant to 18A.50.200, Community Design.
    3. If the development proposal is a structure remodel or exterior tenant improvement, and the parking area is reconfigured or expanded, the following standards apply:
        a. Perimeter landscaping is required pursuant to LMC 18A.50.425 and 18A.50.430, Landscaping Regulations by Zoning Districts.
        b. Parking area landscaping is required pursuant to LMC 18A.50.425(A)(4), Landscaping Types.
        c. Building and/or entry landscaping may be required pursuant to 18A.50.200, Community Design.
    4. If the development proposal is for a new structure, the following standards shall apply:
        a. Perimeter landscaping is required pursuant to LMC 18A.50.425 and 18A.50.430.
        b. Parking area landscaping is required pursuant to LMC 18A.50.425(A)(4), Landscaping Types.
        c. Building and/or entry landscaping may be required pursuant to 18A.50.200, Community Design.
    5. All parking areas of over 20,000 square feet shall have a minimum of 10 percent of the total parking area, drive aisles, maneuvering area and loading space landscaped as a means to reduce the barren appearance of the lot and to reduce the amount of stormwater runoff. Required perimeter landscaping adjacent to property lines shall not be calculated as accounting for a portion of the 10 percent figure.
    6. All ingress or egress driveways, internal circulation routes and easements which provide access corridors to the subject lot, and which are not adjacent to a public right-of-way, shall be landscaped to the same standard as a public right-of-way.
    7. All outside storage areas shall be screened by fencing and landscaping a minimum of five feet in depth unless it is determined by development plan review that such screening is not necessary because stored materials are not visually obtrusive.
    8. All trash containers shall be screened from abutting properties and streets by a 100 percent sight-obscuring fence or wall and appropriate landscaping.
    9. Landscaping shall be placed outside of fences unless it is determined by the Community Development Department that such arrangement would be detrimental to the stated purpose of this chapter.
    10. All portions of a lot not devoted to a building, future buildings, parking, storage or accessory uses shall be landscaped in a manner appropriate to the stated purpose of this chapter. Type III landscaping is the minimum landscaping required if no other landscaping standards apply.
    11. All required landscaping areas shall extend to the curb line or the property line, whichever is greater.
    12. All required landscaping areas shall be surrounded by concrete curbing and shall contain soil of sufficient quantity and quality to allow landscaping plantings to flourish. Landscaping areas shall not be placed on top of any impervious surface.
    13. Required landscaping for those areas that are inappropriate to landscape due to the existence of rail lines or other features, shall be relocated in the following manner and order:
        a. At the entry of the building.
        b. To another lot line.
        c. To an equal-sized area in another portion of the lot.
        d. To an area as determined by the Community Development Director upon review with the owner or developer.
        e. The applicant shall post money into the City Street Tree Fund proportionate to the landscaping that cannot be relocated. The cost of the landscaping shall be based on a proportionate square foot cost of other areas on the lot that have been landscaped to a similar standard.
    14. The perimeter of parking lots that abut residential zones or uses shall be landscaped with Type I landscaping and a solid wood or equivalent fence. Substitute fencing may be allowed at the discretion of the Community Development Director to address public safety concerns. The term “adjacent residential property,” for purposes of this section, shall mean abutting property and lots immediately adjacent to abutting property.
    15. Landscaping shall not conflict with the safety of those using adjacent sidewalks or with traffic safety.
    16. The perimeter landscape strip of all property abutting Interstate 5 or abutting railroad right-of-way adjacent to Interstate 5 shall be increased to a minimum depth of 15 feet along the highway or railroad right-of-way frontage, unless a larger area is otherwise required by LMC 18A.50.425, Landscaping Types.
    17. Quantity, arrangement and types of plants installed shall be appropriate to the size of the required landscape area and purpose of planting area described in LMC 18A.50.425, Landscaping Types.
    18. Landscape plans shall include, where feasible, a diversity of native plant species which promote native wildlife habitat.
    19. Landscaping buffers shall be required adjacent to any above ground stormwater facilities of no less than five feet in width.
    20. Landscape areas adjacent to required biofiltration systems that do not exceed one to three (1:3) slope may be counted toward a portion of any required landscaping areas if they meet the following:
        a. The configuration and plant species of landscape areas on a site shall be designed so as to not disrupt the functions of stormwater systems, and plant species and location are subject to approval of the City Engineer and Community Development Director.
    21. Where the width of a required landscape strip exceeds the setback requirement for any structure subject to this section, the setback shall be increased to provide the full width of the landscape strip, except where otherwise permitted for commercial buildings under LMC 18A.50.200, Community Design.
    22. Use of manmade nonvegetative material such as plastic or artificial plants or grass is prohibited as substitute for the required landscaping. Nonvegetative material is not a substitute for plant material. Nonporous weed barriers are prohibited in landscaped areas. Bark, mulch, rock or other nonvegetative material shall only be used in conjunction with landscaping to assist vegetative growth and maintenance or to visually complement plant material.
    23. Required landscape areas shall be provided with adequate drainage.
    24. All trees shall be double staked for the first two years.
    25. Slopes shall not exceed a one to three (1:3) ratio (height to width from center), in order to decrease erosion potential and assist in ease of maintenance.
B. Plant Standards. Where new landscaping is required, the following plant standards apply:
    1. Deciduous Tree. A minimum three-inch diameter at six inches above grade at the time of planting.
    2. Evergreen Tree. A minimum six feet in height above grade at the time of planting.
    3. Low Shrub. Plants shall be a minimum of one to two feet in height at the time of planting with approximately a one- or two-gallon pot or ball-and-burlap.
    4. Medium Shrub. Plants shall be a minimum of two to three feet in height at the time of planting with approximately a three- to five-gallon pot or ball-and-burlap.
    5. Ornamental Tree. A minimum of one-inch diameter for deciduous; a minimum of two feet tall for evergreens. Ornamental trees may count as medium shrubs, but do not count for trees otherwise required.
    6. Vegetative Groundcover. Grass sod, or spreading groundcover in four-inch pots with a maximum spacing of nine inches, or one-gallon pots with a maximum spacing of 18 inches and of sufficient size, spacing and species as to spread to form a solid cover of the planting area within two years from the time of planting.
    7. Drought Tolerant Plants. The use of native and drought tolerant, low water use plants shall be incorporated into landscape design plans.
C. Irrigation Standards. The intent of this standard is to ensure that plants will survive the critical establishment period when they are most vulnerable to lack of watering and to survive periods of extended drought once they are established.
    1. Irrigation systems shall be incorporated into a landscaping area and the applicant shall prepare a water use and conservation plan for review and approval by the City Engineer and Community Development Director.
    2. The applicant shall choose one of the following options to provide all landscaped areas with an irrigation method:
        a. A permanent underground irrigation method with an automatic controller plus an overriding rain switch. All landscape that is placed in median strips in the middle of street rights-of-ways shall be irrigated with underground automated irrigation systems.
        b. An irrigation method which provides sufficient water to ensure that the plants will become established. The method shall be required to be permanent unless the plant material selected is classified as drought tolerant and a permanent irrigation system is determined to be unnecessary by the Community Development Department, in which case irrigation standards shall be required only during the first growing season following installation. Even if drought tolerant plants are used in the landscape design, there must be an identified method to easily provide water to the plants in the case of a drought. Any automatic/mechanical system designed under this option shall be fitted with an overriding rain switch. [Ord. 651 § 23, 2016; Ord. 317 § 8, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.425 Landscaping Types.
A. The landscaping types are intended to provide a basic list of landscaping standards that may be applied within a proposed project as necessary to provide for the intent of the comprehensive plan.
    1. Type I, Vegetative Buffer. A combination of landscaping, evergreen and deciduous trees, and fencing that provides a substantial visual barrier between uses and creates an impression of separation of spaces along an interior property line. The following standards shall be applied:
        a. Landscaping strip shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in width, and shall be increased to ten (10) feet in width and fifteen (15) feet in width as required by LMC 18A.50.430, Landscaping Regulations by Zoning District.
        b. Depending on the use, a sight obscuring barrier may be required to be placed within the landscaping strip to consist of:
            1. Fence/wall five (5) feet in height, or
            2. A medium shrub barrier (hedge) which is of such a density as to provide a solid visual barrier.
        c. One (1) evergreen or deciduous tree is required per twenty (20) linear feet of landscaping strip. Trees shall be spaced at intervals not greater than (20) feet on center along the full extent of the landscaping strip. No more than sixty (60) percent of the trees may be deciduous.
        d. The percentage of evergreen trees allowed may be further reduced at the discretion of the Community Development Director to address public safety concerns.
        e. Shrubs:
            1. Two (2) medium shrubs are required per six (6) linear feet of landscaping strip and placed no greater than four (4) feet on center.
            2. Three (3) low shrubs are required per six (6) linear feet of landscaping strip and placed no greater than three (3) feet on center.
            3. Shrubs shall be placed along the entire length of the landscaping strip as to provide vegetative cover.
        f. Vegetative groundcover.
        g. Landscaping shall be placed along the entire length of the landscaping strip so as to provide a vegetative buffer. These are minimum standards, additional landscaping may be required if, in the determination of the Community Development Director, the proposed landscaping plan does not provide effective separation and screening.
    2. Type II, Streetscapes. A unifying theme of canopy-type trees along a public or private street within the right-of-way, with an optional landscaping strip and a minimum five- to eight-foot-wide sidewalk citywide, or 11 to 20 feet in the CBD zone, as required by the City Engineer, shall apply to all zones and shall be applied to all proposed developments other than a single-family dwelling. The following standards shall be applied:
        a. Curb, gutter, and sidewalks standards as required in LMC 18A.50.135 Streetscapes, Chapter 12.10 LMC, Site Development Provisions, LMC Title 12, Public Works, and LMC Title 18B, Downtown Development Code.
        b. Landscaping strip of vegetative ground cover of three to eight feet in width, or as specified in LMC Title 18B, Downtown Development Code, at the discretion of the City Engineer, located between the curb and the sidewalk.
        c. Deciduous street trees, pursuant to LMC 18A.50.440, Street Tree Standards, are required along the entire street frontage at a spacing of no more than 30 feet on center or as required to continue the existing pattern of street, whichever is less distance.
        d. Tree wells, a minimum of four feet in any dimension, with a grating system approved by the City Engineer, are required when trees are placed within the sidewalk. Sidewalks must maintain a minimum 48-inch clear width exclusive of curbing. Trees not located on the sidewalk shall be centered on the landscaping strip, or behind the sidewalk within 10 feet of the right-of-way if the right-of-way is insufficient to accommodate street trees, or if curbs, gutters and sidewalks already exist.
        e. Level 1 utilities shall be placed underground as appropriate.
        f. Street lights as directed by the City Engineer.
        g. Landscaped medians within the roadway may be required at the discretion of the City Engineer and the Community Development Director including:
            1. Curb, gutter, four- to 12-foot wide landscaping strip within the roadway with a length determined by the City Engineer.
            2. One street tree at each end of the median, plus one street tree per 30 feet of median.
            3. Vegetative ground cover.
            4. Small shrubs shall be placed within the landscaping strip so as to cover 30 percent of the strip, have a maximum bush height of three feet, and provide year-round screening.
        h. Bus stop(s), benches and/or bus shelter(s) as deemed necessary by the Community Development Director and Pierce Transit.
    3. Type III, Open Space. A combination of natural and native open space, vegetative groundcover, and deciduous and evergreen trees.
        a. One (1) deciduous or evergreen tree shall be spaced at intervals not greater than fifty (50) feet on center along the full extent of the open space. No more than eighty (80) percent of the trees may be deciduous.
        b. Vegetative groundcover.
    4. Type IV, Parking Areas. A combination of landscaping to break up the bulk of a parking area. The following standards shall be applied:
        a. Landscaping Islands. Landscaped islands shall be located at the end of each parking row. Internal landscaping islands shall occur at intervals within the row so that no parking stall within that parking row is more than eight (8) parking stalls from a landscaping island. The following standards shall apply:
            1. The length of the island shall be the same depth as the adjacent parking stalls and have an interior width a minimum of four (4) feet.
            2. The island shall be completely curbed.
            3. Contain one (1) street tree.
            4. One (1) medium shrub or two (2) small shrubs per twelve (12) square feet of island.
            5. Vegetative ground cover.
        b. Internal Landscaping. If internal landscaping other than landscaping islands is included in a parking area, the internal landscaping shall at a minimum consist of vegetative groundcover and trees per Type III, Open Space.
        c. Perimeter Landscaping. Landscaping around the perimeter of the parking area shall be a Type I, Vegetative Buffer.
    5. Type V, Solid Barrier. A combination of fencing and landscaping which is intended to provide a solid sight barrier between uses, around storage yards, salvage yards, and other incompatible or unsightly uses, and to create screening and a strong impression of spatial separation. The following standards shall be applied:
        a. Landscaping strip minimum ten (10) feet in width.
        b. Solid fence or wall six (6) feet in height located within the landscape strip.
        c. The Community Development Director may direct the location, style, and construction materials of the required fence/wall to lesson visual impact on adjacent properties.
        d. One (1) deciduous or evergreen tree is required per twenty (20) linear feet of landscaping strip. Trees shall be spaced at intervals not greater than twenty (20) feet on center along the full extent of the landscaping strip. No more than forty (40) percent of the trees may be deciduous.
        e. The percentage of evergreen trees allowed may only be reduced, at the discretion of the Community Development Director, to address public safety concerns.
        f. Shrubs;
            1. Two (2) medium shrubs are required per four (4) linear feet of landscaping strip and placed no greater than five (5) feet on center.
            2. Three (3) low shrubs are required per four (4) linear feet of landscaping strip and placed no greater than four (4) feet on center.
        g. Vegetative groundcover.
        h. Landscaping shall be placed along the entire length of the landscaping strip so as to provide a vegetative barrier. These are minimum standards, additional landscaping may be required if, in the determination of the Community Development Director, the proposed landscaping plan does not provide an actual or effective barrier or separation.
    6. Type VI, Area Screening. A combination of fencing/wall and landscaping that provides visual relief from dumpsters, recycling areas, or small storage yards, of less than two hundred (200) square feet in size. The following standards shall be applied:
        a. Landscaping strip minimum five (5) feet in width around the area, excluding access points.
        b. A fence or wall six (6) feet in height located on the interior of the landscaping strip.
        c. Minimum six (6) foot tall Arborvitae or approved equivalent trees placed at four (4) feet on center.
        d. Shrubs.
            1. One (1) medium shrub per four (4) linear feet of landscaping strip and placed no greater than four (4) feet on center.
            2. One (1) small shrub per four (4) linear feet of landscaping strip and placed no greater than four (4) feet on center.
            3. Shrubs shall be spaced at intervals along the full extent of the landscaping strip.
        e. Vegetative groundcover.
        f. The fence and landscaping may be modified at the discretion of the Community Development Director to address public safety concerns. [Ord. 695 § 4, 2018; Ord. 317 § 8, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.430 Landscaping Regulations by Zoning Districts.
A. Type II, Streetscape, shall apply to all zones and shall be applied to all proposed developments other than a single-family dwelling, pursuant to LMC 18A.50.135 Streetscapes, Chapter 12.10 LMC, Site Development Provisions, and Chapter 12.09 LMC, Transportation Facilities, and LMC Title 18B, Downtown Development Code.
B. Type III, Open Space shall apply to all zones where open space is required as part of the development standards or Community Design Guidelines.
C. Type IV, Parking Areas; and Type VI, Area Screening are types of landscaping that shall apply in all zones, as applicable.
D. Discretionary land use permit approval and conditions may require any landscaping type in order to mitigate the impacts of the proposed use.
E. The unique character of development within the OSR1 and OSR2 zones, as private and public open space, parks, and public facilities requires a case-by-case review of the landscaping standards and requirements by the Community Development Director.
F. The following standards are representative and may not include all uses or types. Where individual uses or zones are not specified, the Community Development Director shall make a determination as to the most appropriate Landscaping Type in order to mitigate the impacts of the proposed development.
G. Zones and Uses Minimum Landscaping Requirements
    1. Single Family Uses/Zones:
    Single Family Dwellings Exempt from Perimeter Landscaping Standards
    Civic Uses Type I, Vegetative Buffer, 10’ landscape strip
    2. Multifamily uses/zones that abut:
    Single-Family Uses/Zones Type I, Vegetative Buffer, 10-foot landscape strip, except CBD 20-foot landscape strip in Transition Overlay
    Open Space and Recreation Zones Type I, Vegetative Buffer, 10-foot landscape strip
    3. Neighborhood Business and Commercial Uses/Zones that abut:
    Single-Family Uses/Zones Type I, Vegetative Buffer, 15-foot landscape strip, except CBD 20-foot landscape strip in Transition Overlay
    Multifamily Uses/Zones Type I, Vegetative Buffer, 10-foot landscape strip, except CBD 20-foot landscape strip in Transition Overlay.
    Open Space and Recreation Zones Type I, Vegetative Buffer, 10-foot landscape strip
    4. Industrial Uses/Zones that abut:
    Single Family Uses/Zones Type V, Solid Barrier
    Multi Family Uses/Zones Type V, Solid Barrier
    Commercial Uses/Zones Type I, Vegetative Buffer, 10’ landscape strip
    Open Space and Recreation Zones Type V, Solid Barrier
    5. Public/Institutional Zone Type I, Vegetative Buffer, 10’ landscape strip
    6. Between developments in the same zone:
    All Uses (other than Single Family uses) Type I, Vegetative Buffer, 8’ landscape strip
    7. Parking Lots in all zones: Type I, Vegetative Buffer & Type IV, Parking Areas
    8. Property Lines abutting public right-of-way or private streets: Type II Streetscape and Type I, Vegetative Buffer, 8' landscape strip or appropriate landscaping per LMC Section 18A.50.200 Community Design
    9. Storage Space (for all uses other than single family residential):
    Under 200 gsf Type VI, Area Screening
    200 or more gsf Type V, Solid Barrier
    Salvage/Wrecking Use Type V, Solid Barrier
    Industrial and Outdoor Type V, Solid Barrier
    10. Wireless Telecommunication Facilities See LMC 18A.70.600, WTF
    11. Open Space Type III, Open Space
    12. Streets/ Rights-of-Way Type II, Streetscape
    13. Trash Dumpsters Type VI, Area Screening [Ord. 695 § 4, 2018; Ord. 317 § 8, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.435 Landscaping Design.
In addition to the requirements of this section, LMC 18A.50.200, Community Design, contains standards that promote connectivity between landscape improvements and adjacent sites and buildings. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.440 Street Tree Standards.
A. Applicability. This section applies to projects that require street trees in order to fulfill a landscaping standard, and to all projects that are installing street trees unrelated to other landscaping or street improvements.
B. Standards. All street trees shall meet the following standards:
    1. A minimum of three (3) inches in diameter at the time of planting.
    2. Street trees shall be located and placed within the street rights-of-way in accordance with the requirements of the City Engineer, unless otherwise permitted in 18A.50.440(B)(3).
    3. Street trees may be planted within ten (10) feet of the right-of-way only if the right-of-way is insufficient to accommodate street trees, or if curbs, gutters and sidewalks already exist.
    4. The adjoining property owner shall be responsible for all maintenance of street trees and landscaping in public right-of-ways.
    5. Street tree shall be trimmed to maintain the street canopy and provide for public safety. Street trees can not be removed without the prior approval of the City Engineer.
    6. Trees planted within five (5) feet of public or private road pavement edge, curbing or sidewalk, or within parking areas shall be surrounded by a root control barrier. Root control barriers shall consist of galvanized metal or plastic sheets extending a minimum of two (2) feet below the finished grade of the surrounding surface.
    7. All trees shall be double (2) staked for the first two (2) years.
    8. All street trees shall be of a species approved by the Community Development Department. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.445 Plan Requirements - Landscaping.
The Community Development Director shall review and may approve, approve with modifications, or deny a landscape plan subject to the provisions of this section.
A. The following plans shall be submitted according to the requirements of the application form provided by the Community Development Department for any project permit subject to the provisions of this section:
    1. Irrigation plan.
    2. Tree retention plan, pursuant to LMC 18A.50.300, Tree Preservation.
    3. Landscape plan.
B. Persons Qualified to Prepare Landscape Plans. The landscape plans shall be prepared by a Washington state registered landscape architect, a Washington state certified nurseryman, or a Washington state certified landscaper, except that planting plans for short plats may be prepared by the applicant, subject to approval by the Community Development Director.
C. Review of Landscape Requirements. At the time of the preapplication conference, the Community Development Department staff shall review specific landscape requirements with the applicant or his/her representative.
D. Irrigation Plan. All proposed multifamily or non-residential developments require an irrigation plan. An irrigation plan is required to ensure that the planting will be watered at a sufficient level to ensure plant survival and healthy growth. The irrigation plan shall indicate the location of pipes, sprinkler heads, and back flow prevention devices. The Community Development Director or City Engineer may require additional information, including but not limited to pumps, pipe size, head capacity, water pressure in pounds per square inch at the pump and sprinkler heads, and timer system. The irrigation plan shall conform to the requirements of this section.
E. Persons Qualified to Prepare Irrigation Plans. The irrigation plan shall be prepared by a Washington State registered landscape architect, except that irrigation plans for short plats may be prepared by the applicant.
F. Approved Landscaping Plan Required. A building permit or zoning certification shall not be issued until the landscaping plan has been approved. [Ord. 317 § 8, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.450 Landscaping Installation.
A. Planting Season. Landscape installation is encouraged to take place in the spring or fall planting season following building permit issuance or zoning certification. The Community Development Director may allow a postponement of the landscaping due to weather conditions, subject to LMC 18A.50.465, Guarantee, and may approve an alternative timeline if the development is a phased project.
B. Landscaping and Irrigation Installed. The person or persons qualified, pursuant to LMC 18A.50.445(B) and E above, to prepare the landscape and irrigation plans shall submit, within 30 days of completed installation, a signed affidavit that landscaping and irrigation systems have been installed per the approved plans.
C. Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. Except as provided for in LMC 18A.50.450(A), the Community Development Department shall not issue a final certificate of occupancy and/or final site certification until the landscaping has been installed as shown on the approved landscaping plan. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.455 Water Conservation and Suggested Plant Materials.
A. Intent. The following guidelines are promoted and strongly recommended by the City to reduce the maintenance cost of a development, enhance the long-term health of plant material and reduce the cost of watering. The intent of water conservation guidelines is to ensure that costly plant material is provided with the opportunity to take advantage of natural watering and therefore reduce the amount of water required to maintain plant material health during the dry season. The intent of a plant material guideline is to encourage use of plants native to the Pacific Northwest and introduced plants common to the Pacific Northwest, in that order, in order to maximize use of rainwater, to reduce general maintenance needs and to encourage the development of landscape designs reflective of our natural surroundings. It is also the intent of these guidelines to encourage the use of drought tolerant plants in landscape designs in order to reduce the amount of water devoted to outdoor watering at a time when population pressures are increasing faster than the water supply.
B. Water Conservation Guidelines. Water conservation measures shall be employed in the following manner:
    1. Soil Preparation. Landscape areas should be deep-tilled to a depth of at least twe1ve (12) inches to facilitate deep water penetration and soil oxygenation. Use of soil amendments is encouraged to improve water drainage, moisture penetration or water-holding capacity. For all newly landscaped areas organic matter should be incorporated to a depth of four (4) to six (6) inches to facilitate deep water penetration and soil oxygenation.
    2. Mulching. Mulch should be applied regularly to, and maintained in all, planting areas to assist soils in retaining moisture, reducing weed growth and minimizing erosion. Mulches include organic materials such as wood chips and shredded bark. Mulches should be applied to the following depths: three (3) inches over bare soil and two (2) inches where plant materials will cover.
    3. Plant Types. Applicants are strongly encouraged to utilize drought tolerant plant material native to the Western Washington and introduced noninvasive plants common to the area that are well suited to the wet/dry climate of the Puget Sound. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.460 Maintenance - Landscaping.
The following standards shall be followed for the maintenance of on-site landscaping and landscaping on adjacent public rights-of way:
A. Failure to complete all of the required landscaping or any portion of that landscaping, other than as permitted in LMC 18A.50.450(A), Landscaping Installation, shall constitute a zoning violation.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the project manager or business owner to contact the Community Development Department upon completion of the landscaping work and request an inspection.
C. Whenever landscaping is or has been required in accordance with the provisions of this title as amended, or in accordance with the provisions of any previous code or ordinance of the City, the landscaping shall be permanently maintained in such a manner as to accomplish the purpose for which it was initially required.
D. The Community Development Department may inspect the landscaping upon request of the project manager or business owner or at any time after the installation of landscaping.
E. Any installed plant material that dies shall be replaced within the spring or fall growing season following plant loss but not more than ninety (90) days from the time of loss. This standard shall apply for the life of the project or development.
F. Failure to maintain all of the required landscaping or any part of it shall constitute a zoning violation.
G. Regardless of whether the landscaping existed prior to the effective date of this title or was added thereafter, replacement landscaping shall comply with all provisions of this section.
H. All landscape materials shall be pruned and trimmed as necessary to maintain a healthy growing condition, to prevent primary limb failure, and to prevent limbs from becoming an impediment or hazard to vehicles or pedestrian traffic.
I. All landscape areas shall be kept free of trash and weeds and all irrigation systems shall be properly maintained by the property owner to ensure the function of the requirements of this title. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.465 Guarantee - Landscaping.
In order to guarantee performance of the landscaping requirements, cash guarantee or other appropriate security, including letters of credit, in the amount of one hundred fifty (150) percent of the estimated cost of the required landscaping, shall be required if landscaping is not installed prior to the issuance of the occupancy permit. The cash guarantee or other appropriate security shall forfeited to the City if the work is not completed within one hundred eighty (180) days of the date of posting of the cash guarantee or other appropriate security, or upon such other date as agreed to between the City and the property owner or authorized person acting on the property owner’s behalf. In the case where such a cash guarantee or other appropriate security is forfeited to the City, the proceeds therefrom shall be used by the City to effectuate the landscaping requirements which were not completed. Along with the requirement for the cash guarantee(s) or other appropriate security, the property owner, or authorized person acting on the property owner’s behalf, shall agree and consent to entry upon the property in the event of guarantee forfeiture, and completion of the landscaping requirements by the City representatives. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.500 Parking.

18A.50.510 Purpose - Parking.
The purpose of this section is to regulate parking and loading activities in order to improve traffic circulation and contribute to the public health, safety, general welfare and aesthetics of the City of Lakewood by providing standards for those areas intended for the maneuvering and parking of motor vehicles. It is the intent of this section to allow the provision of sufficient off-street parking to meet the needs of urban development, but not an excess surplus of spaces, and to promote more efficient use of the City's transportation facilities by encouraging the movement of people from place to place via alternative modes of transportation other than the single-occupant vehicle. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.520 Applicability - Parking.
This section is applicable to all new developments, and all alterations and additions to, or expansion of, existing developments in the City of Lakewood. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.530 Parking Standards.
A. Expansions or Enlargements. Where any structure is enlarged, expanded, erected, remodeled, or the use is changed, off-street parking spaces shall be provided for said development in accordance with the standards of this section. A change in use of an existing structure may require additional off-street parking spaces as set forth in this section.
B. Uses Not Specified. In the case of a use that is not specifically mentioned in this section, the requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be determined by the Community Development Director based upon the requirements for the most comparable use specified in this section; or, where no comparable use exists, based upon a reasonable rationale provided in an administrative determination written to the applicant. The Community Development Director may require that the applicant conduct a parking study to evaluate the parking needs associated with a proposed use.
C. Surface Improvements. All areas used for parking, maneuvering, circulation, pedestrian access, and loading or unloading shall be paved with asphalt or concrete and shall be improved and available for use prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
D. Location. Off-street parking facilities shall be located on the same property as the use they are required to serve and within three hundred (300) feet of the use, except as provided below. Where a distance is specified, such distance shall be the walking distance measured from the nearest point of the parking facilities to the nearest point of the building that such facility is required to serve.
    1. For a nursing home, assisted living facility, convalescent home, or group home, the parking facilities shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of the building they are required to serve.
    2. For single-family residential dwellings, the required number of parking spaces shall be in addition to any parking that is provided for by garages and/or carports that serve the development.
    3. For multifamily dwellings where the lot cannot accommodate all the required parking on-site for its needs, up to forty (40) percent of the required parking may be located on a lot adjacent to the development, provided that the lot is legally encumbered pursuant to LMC 18A.50.550(F), Off-Site Parking.
    4. For all non-residential uses where the lot cannot accommodate all the required parking on-site for its needs, parking facilities shall be located not farther than seven hundred fifty (750) feet from the facility, provided that the lot is legally encumbered pursuant to LMC 18A.50.550(F), Off-Site Parking. Parking shall not be permitted on properties zoned single-family residential (R1, R2, R3, R4) or open space (OSR1 and OSR2) unless the parking is being provided for a use that is permitted in said district.
    5. Required parking for developments other than Single Family residential dwellings shall not be located in a required front yard setback abutting a public street, except as allowed in LMC 18A.50.200, Community Design.
E. Size and Access. 
    1. Minimum Stall Dimensions. A standard parking space shall have a minimum width of nine feet and a minimum length of eighteen (18) feet. Compact stalls shall have a minimum width of eight and one-half (8 1/2) feet and a minimum length of fifteen (15) feet.
    2. Compact Car Allowance. Up to thirty (30) percent of the required parking for a development may consist of compact stalls. No more than four (4) compact stalls may be adjacent to each other, and a total of eight (8) spaces head to head. Compact stalls shall be evenly dispersed throughout the parking area and clearly identified with permanent marking on the pavement as approved by the City Engineer and Community Development Director.
    3. Minimum Aisle Width. Two-way drive aisles shall have a minimum width of twenty four (24) feet where providing access to spaces at a ninety (90) degree angle to the drive aisle, and twenty (20) feet in width where spaces are at angles of seventy (70) degrees or less to the drive aisle. One-way drive aisles shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet where providing access to spaces at a ninety (90) degree angle to the drive aisle. Where spaces are at angles of seventy (70) degrees or less to the drive aisle, the standards for aisle width in the following table shall apply:
    +--------------------+-----------------------------+
    |   Parking Angle    | Minimum One-Way Aisle Width |
    +--------------------+-----------------------------+
    | 50 degrees or less | 15’                         |
    +--------------------+-----------------------------+
    | 55                 | 16’                         |
    +--------------------+-----------------------------+
    | 60                 | 17’                         |
    +--------------------+-----------------------------+
    | 65                 | 18’                         |
    +--------------------+-----------------------------+
    | 70                 | 19’                         |
    +--------------------+-----------------------------+
    [IMAGE: <18A.50.530_001.png>]
    4. Driveways and Turnarounds. Except for a single family dwelling, groups of more than three (3) parking spaces shall be provided with adequate aisles and/or turnaround areas so that all vehicles may enter the street in a forward manner. These parking spaces shall be served by a driveway designed and constructed to facilitate the flow of traffic on and off the site, with due regard to pedestrian and vehicle safety, and which shall be clearly and permanently marked and defined.
        a. Driveways, aisles, turnaround areas, and ramps shall have a minimum vertical clearance of fourteen (14) feet for their entire length and width except that such clearance may be reduced in parking structures.
        b. For the purpose of loading and unloading children, one-way driveways with a continuous forward flow design shall be located on the site of schools and daycares with a capacity of fifty (50) children or greater.
F. Wheel Stops. Wheel stops, a minimum of two (2) feet from the end of the parking stall or any obstruction, shall be required in the following locations.
    1. Where the parking stall abuts a building or where vehicles may overhang a property line;
    2. Where the parking stall abuts a raised pedestrian walkway of less than eight (8) feet in width;
    3. Where a parking stall abuts a pedestrian walkway that is not raised.
    4. Where a parking stall abuts any physical object that may be impacted, such as light standards, fire hydrants fences, power vaults, utility poles, etc.
    5. Where a hazardous grade difference exists between the parking area and the abutting property;
    6. Where hazardous situations may exist as determined by the City Engineer or Community Development Director.
G. Parking Structures. Multiple level parking structures developed either as a single use structure or as parking incorporated into a structure shall be designed and laid out in accordance with the dimension and numeric requirements of this section.
H. Unit of Measurement.
    1. Where stationary, immoveable seating is used by patrons or spectators in places of assembly, each twenty (20) inches of width of bench, pew, or other seating shall count as one (1) seat for the purpose of determining requirements of off-street parking facilities under this section.
    2. Where removable or temporary seating is used by patrons or spectators in places of assembly, fifty (50) square feet of open area where such seating facilities could be located shall count as one (1) seat for the purpose of determining requirements of off-street parking facilities under this section.
    3. Where seating and/or uses may be unique or unusual, in the opinion of the Community Development Director, a parking study may be required to determine usage of a facility and associated parking demand.
I. Parking Plan. Where off-street parking is required, except for a single-family dwelling, a parking plan, indicating how the off-street parking and loading requirement is to be provided, shall accompany the application for a project permit. The plan shall show all those elements necessary to indicate that these requirements to be fulfilled including but not limited to:
    1. Delineation and dimensions of individual parking spaces, both regular and compact spaces, and loading and unloading areas;
    2. Dimensions of circulation and maneuvering areas necessary to serve spaces;
    3. Access to streets, alleys, and properties served;
    4. Curb cuts and curb placement;
    5. Dimensions, continuity and substance of landscaping and screening;
    6. Grading, drainage, surfacing and subgrading details;
    7. Delineation of all structures or other obstacles to parking, circulation and visual clearance on the site;
    8. Specifications as to location of signs and wheel stops;
    9. Sidewalks and pedestrian pathways
    10. Vision clearance areas for all points of ingress and egress.
J. Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Accessible parking for persons with disabilities shall be provided consistent with state and federal regulations.
K. Landscaping Requirements. Parking areas shall meet the applicable landscaping requirements of LMC 18A.50.400, Landscaping.
L. Community Design Requirements. Parking areas shall meet the applicable parking, landscaping and community design requirements of LMC 18A.50.200, Community Design. [Ord. 317 § 9, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.540 Loading and Unloading.
A. Required Loading and Unloading Areas. Any building that is erected, enlarged or for which a change of use is proposed, shall provide a minimum of one (1) off-street or off-alley loading area.
    1. The minimum area required for commercial and industrial loading spaces is as follows:
        a. 250 sf for buildings of 5,000 to 20,000 gsf.
        b. 500 sf for buildings of 20,000 to 50,000 gsf.
        c. 750 sf for buildings in excess of 50,000 gsf.
        d. Additional loading space shall be required of buildings based on the size, proposed use, potential uses, and location, as deemed necessary by the Community Development Director.
    2. Each loading space shall measure not less than ten (10) feet by twenty-five (25) feet and shall have an unobstructed height of fourteen (14) feet
    3. Each loading space shall be made permanently available for such purpose, and shall be surfaced, improved, maintained, and screened in accordance with this section and LMC 18A.50.400, Landscaping.
    4. Loading spaces shall be located adjacent to the building to be served and in such a manner that these spaces shall not encroach upon or interfere with areas reserved for off-street parking nor project into any public right-of-way or pedestrian area. Loading space or maneuvering areas shall be in addition to area required for off-street parking spaces.
    5. Loading berths shall be located no closer than fifty (50) feet from any residential district, unless wholly enclosed within a building, or unless screened from such residential area by a wall or uniformly painted fence not less than six (6) feet in height and by Type V, Solid Barrier landscaping.
    6. Space for loading berths may occupy all or any part of any required setback except for landscaping setback requirements as long as the loading berth is uncovered. A covered loading area shall comply with the minimum building setback requirements for the district.
    7. If the site where such loading space is to be located abuts upon an alley, such loading space shall be accessed off the alley, unless alley dimensions and vehicle maneuvering turn radius prohibits such access.
B. Maneuvering Areas for Buildings with Loading Doors. Buildings that utilize dock-high loading doors shall provide a minimum of one hundred (100) feet of clear maneuvering area in front of each door. Buildings that utilize ground level service or loading doors shall provide a minimum of forty five (45) feet of clear maneuvering area in front of each door. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.550 Use and Site Specific Standards.
A. Transit Support Facilities. 
    1. For developments that generate a parking demand of greater than 20 parking spaces, the developer shall fund the purchase and installation of one or more transit shelters and/or other related transit support facilities as determined by the Community Development Director and Pierce Transit operational criteria, based on the size and nature of the use.
    2. For developments that generate a parking demand of fewer than 20 parking spaces, the developer shall install a bench and a concrete pad adjacent to the sidewalk at a bus stop where at least five transit riders are expected to board buses on an average weekday, and a shelter shall be provided at a bus stop where at least 10 transit riders are expected to board buses on an average weekday.
    3. Any single-family development with 50 to 200 units, or multifamily residential with 30 to 100 units that will be located on a street where regularly scheduled transit service is provided, shall be required to provide a transit shelter with all required transit support facilities.
    4. Any single-family development with over 200 units, or multifamily residential with over 100 units that will be located on a street where regularly scheduled transit service is provided, shall be required to provide two transit shelters with all required transit support facilities.
    5. Transit facilities shall be sited in accordance with the requirements of Pierce Transit and this title. Transit shelters and related facilities shall be provided for transit stops that are located adjacent to or within 600 feet of the development site on each side of the street that has a transit route. This requirement may be waived when Pierce Transit has determined that current and projected ridership do not warrant the installation of a shelter within the 600-foot distance.
    6. When a transit shelter is required to be installed, a concrete pad, seating, garbage receptacles, and lighting shall also be provided. When a transit shelter is not required to be installed, transit stops shall include design features or changes in materials that demarcate the stop.
    7. Transit pullouts shall be provided as an element of street improvements if Pierce Transit and the City determine that a pullout is necessary to provide a safe refuge for transit vehicles or to minimize conflicts with other vehicles.
B. Mixed Occupancies. In the case of two or more uses in the same building or on the same site, the total requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be the sum of the requirements for all of the uses calculated separately. Off-street parking facilities for one use shall not be considered as providing the required parking facilities for any other use, except as provided in subsection (E) of this section.
C. Parking Incentives. 
    1. When residential uses are combined with commercial or industrial uses in the same building, parking requirements may be reduced by 20 percent, except when located within the CBD or TOC zoning districts for which parking requirements are reduced by 35 percent.
    2. A structured parking space shall count as one and one-fourth parking spaces towards the required number of parking spaces.
    3. When affordable housing is constructed pursuant to LMC 18A.50.700, Housing Incentives Program, the parking space requirements shall be calculated employing any available modifications based upon LMC 18A.50.750(B).
D. Shared Use Parking. Joint use of required parking spaces may be permitted where two or more uses on the same site or separate sites in close proximity to one another are able to share the same parking spaces because their parking usage does not materially overlap (e.g., uses primarily of a daytime vs. nighttime, or weekday vs. weekend nature). Shared parking shall be legally encumbered and shall meet all of the applicable standards of this section pursuant to subsection (E) of this section, Off-Site Parking.
E. Off-Site Parking. Joint use of required parking spaces may be authorized by the Community Development Director if the following documentation is submitted in writing to the Community Development Department:
    1. The names and addresses of the owners and/or tenants that are sharing the parking.
    2. The uses that are involved in the shared parking.
    3. The location and number of parking spaces that are being shared.
    4. An analysis showing that the peak parking times of the uses occur at different times and/or that the parking area will be large enough for the anticipated demands of both uses.
    5. A legal instrument such as an easement or deed restriction that guarantees continuing access to the parking for both uses which shall be subject to review and approval by the Community Development Director and the City Attorney. [Ord. 651 § 20, 2016; Ord. 397 § 15, 2005; Ord. 284 § 1, 2002; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.560 Parking Space Standards by Use Type.
A. General Requirements. 
    1. The size of a development and the proposed use type shall determine the minimum number of required parking spaces. Unless otherwise specified, the parking space requirements shall be based on the gross square footage (gsf) of the building.
    2. The parking space requirement for any office space associated with a use shall be calculated at the rate of one (1) parking space for each two hundred fifty (250) gsf of office use.
    3. One (1) parking space shall be required for each commercial vehicle that originates from the site or is regularly present on the site.
    4. The number of employee spaces required shall be based on the maximum number of employees who may be on-site at any one-time.
B. Residential Use Category Required Parking Spaces
    1. Single-Family
    Detached Dwelling Levels 1,2 Two per dwelling unit.
    2. Single-Family
    Attached Dwelling Levels 1,2 Two per dwelling unit.
    3. Multi-Family Dwelling
    Level 1 1.75 per dwelling unit.
    Level 2 1.5 per dwelling unit.
    4. Co-housing One per two adult occupants, plus one per resident staff.
    5. Group Homes One per three beds plus one per employee.
    6. Assisted Living Facilities One per three beds plus one per employee.
    7. Continuing Care Retirement Community Parking study.
    8. Nursing Home One per four beds plus one per employee.
    9. Hospice Care Center One per four beds plus one per employee.
C. Civic Use Category Required Parking Spaces
    1. Community and Cultural Services
    Levels 1,2,3 One per 250 gsf
    2. Daycare Facilities
    Level 1 One per facility in addition to those spaces required for single family use.
    Level 2 One per employee, plus one per five clients, and loading area.
    2. Daycare Facilities
    Level 1 One per facility in addition to those spaces required for single family use.
    Level 2 Two per facility, plus one per employee, in addition to those spaces required for single family use.
    Level 3 One per employee, plus one per five clients, and loading area.
    3. Education
    Level 1,2 For primary schools, two per employee, plus one per 30 children, plus parking for buses, if applicable, and loading area. For secondary schools, two per employee, plus one per four students, plus parking for buses, if applicable, and loading area.
    4. Government Administration Facilities
    Levels 1,2,3 One per 250 gsf.
    5. Health Services One per 250 gsf
    Hospital by parking study.
    6. Outdoor Recreation
    Levels 1,2,3,4 Community Development Director shall determine parking requirements based on size and nature of the use(s).
    7. Postal Services
    Levels 1,2,3 One per 250 gsf customer service area, plus one per 1000 gsf of warehouse.
    8. Public Maintenance Facilities
    Levels 1,2,3 Community Development Director shall determine parking requirements based on size and nature of the use(s).
    9. Public Safety Services
    Levels 1,3,4 Parking study.
    Level 2 One per 500 gsf.
    10. Social Services
    Level 1,2 One per 500 gsf
    Level 3 Community Development Director shall determine parking requirements based on size and nature of the use(s).
    11. Religious Assembly
    Levels 1,2 One per three seats.
    Level 3 Community Development Director shall determine parking requirements based on size and nature of the use(s). Parking study may be required.
    12. Transportation
    Level 1 N/A
    Level 4 One per commercial vehicle.
    Level 2,3,5 Parking study.
D. Utilities Use Category Required Parking Spaces
    1. Communication Facilities
    Levels 1,2 NA
    Level 3 Community Development Director shall determine parking requirements based on size and nature of the use(s). Parking study may be required.
    2. Electrical Facilities
    Levels 1,2 NA
    3. Electrical Generation Facilities One per employee.
    4. Natural Gas Facilities
    Level 1 NA
    Level 2 One per 750 gsf of the building devoted to maintenance/storage.
    5. Organic Waste Processing
    Facilities One per employee.
    6. Pipelines NA
    7. Sewage Collection Facilities
    Levels 1,2 NA
    8. Sewage Treatment Facilities One per employee.
    9. Stormwater Facilities
    Levels 1,2,3 NA
    10. Waste Disposal Facilities
    Levels 1,2,3,4 Community Development Director shall determine parking requirements based on size and nature of the use(s).
    11. Waste Transfer Facilities
    Level 1 One per facility.
    Level 2,3,4 Community Development Director shall determine parking requirements based on size and nature of the use(s).
    12. Water Supply Facilities
    Levels 2,3,4 Community Development Director shall determine parking requirements based on size and nature of the use(s).
E. Commercial Use Category Required Parking Spaces
    1. Amusement and Recreation
    Levels 1,2,3,4 Community Development Director shall determine parking requirements based on size and nature of the use(s).
    2. Building/Garden Supply & Nurseries
    Levels 1,2 One per 300 gsf.
    Levels 3,4 Parking study.
    3. Bulk Fuel Dealers One per 750 gsf of building devoted to maintenance/storage.
    4. Business Services One per 250 gsf.
    5. Buy-Back Recycling Center One per 750 gsf.
    6. Convenience Commercial
    Levels 1,2,3,4 One per 300 gsf, plus one per employee.
    7. Eating and Drinking Establishment
    Level 1 NA
    Level 2 One per employee, plus two per establishment.
    Level 3 & 4 One per 100 gsf
    8. Food Stores
    Levels 1,2,3 One per 300 gsf.
    9. Funeral Services One per three seats.
    10. Lodging
    Level 1 One per guest room.
    Level 2 See LMC 18A.70.500, RV Parks.
    Level 3 One per guest room, plus two per three employees.
    11. Manufactured and Modular
    Homes Sales One per 10,000 gsf.
    12. Motor Vehicle Sales and Rental
    Levels 1,2,3,4 One per 5,000 gsf.
    13. Motor Vehicle Service and Repair
    Level 1 One per 500 gsf, plus one per commercial vehicle.
    Level 2 Community Development Director shall determine parking requirements based on size and nature of the use(s).
    Levels 3,4 One per 400 gsf.
    Level 5 Parking study.
    14. Personal Services
    Levels 1,2 One per 250 gsf.
    15. Pet Sales and Services
    Levels 1,2,3 One per 300 gsf.
    Level 4 Two per employee.
    16. Private Training School
    Levels 1,2 Community Development Director shall determine parking requirements based on size and nature of the use(s).
    17. Professional Offices
    Levels 1,2,3 One per 250 gsf.
    18. Rental and Repair Services
    Levels 1,2,3,4 One per 500 gsf.
    19. Sales of General Merchandise
    Levels 1,2,3 One per 300 gsf.
    Level 4 Parking study.
    20. Sales of Secondhand Property
    Levels 1,2,3 One per 300 gsf.
    21. Sexually Oriented Business One per 100 gsf.
    22. Shopping Center One per 350 gsf of all development on the site.
    23. Storage
    Level 1 One per 2,000 gsf.
    Level 2 One per 2,000 of the site’s total square foot area.
    Level 3 Community Development Director shall determine parking requirements based on size and nature of the use(s).
F. Industrial Use Category Required Parking Spaces
    1. Primary Manufacturing
    Levels 1,2 One per 1,000 gsf.
    2. Secondary Manufacturing and Major Assembly
    Levels 1,2 One per 1,000 gsf.
    3. Limited Manufacturing/Assembly
    Levels 1,2,3 One per 1,000 gsf.
    4. Food and Related Products One per 1,000 gsf.
    5. Industrial Services One per 1,000 gsf.
    6. Printing and Publishing One per 1,000 gsf.
    7. Warehousing, Distribution and Freight Movement
    Levels 1,2,3 One per 2,000 gsf.
    8. Speculative Warehouse or Industrial Building One per 1,000 gsf.
    9. Speculative Business Park:
    with Warehouse/Industrial Space One per 1,000 gsf.
    with Office/Retail Spaces One per 400 gsf.
    - Percent Office/Retail/Warehouse/Industrial will be determined at time of application
    10. Outdoor Distribution and Freight Movement Community Development Director shall determine parking requirements based on size and nature of the use(s).
    11. Contractor Yards
    Levels 1,2 Community Development Director shall determine parking requirements based on size and nature of the use(s).
    12. Motion Picture
    Production Studios Community Development Director shall determine parking requirements based on size and nature of the use(s).
    13. Off-Site Hazardous Waste
    Treatment and Storage Facilities Community Development Director shall determine parking requirements based on size and nature of the use(s).
    14. Recycling Processor One per 1,000 gsf.
    15. Salvage Yards/Vehicle Storage Facilities One per 2,000 gsf.
    16. Flex Space
    Levels 1,2,3 Community Development Director shall determine parking requirements based on size and nature of the use(s).
    17. Research, Development, and Laboratories
    Levels 1,2,3 One per 1,000 gsf.
    18. Mineral Extraction Community Development Director shall determine parking requirements based on size and nature of the use(s).
G. Agricultural Use Category Required Parking Spaces
    1. Agriculture
    Levels 1,2,3 Community Development Director shall determine parking requirements based on size and nature of the use(s).
H. Accessory Use Category Required Parking Spaces
    1. Accessory Dwelling Unit One per unit.
    2. Caretaker Dwelling One per unit. [Ord. 483 § 27, 2008; Ord. 462 § 8, 2007; Ord. 397 § 16, 2005; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.600 Sign Regulations.

18A.50.605 Purpose - Sign Regulations.
The purpose of this section is to control and manage signs by establishing a common framework for the balanced regulation of signage in the City of Lakewood that protects the right of free speech and freedom of expression, while allowing for fair and appropriate utilization of the public landscape and “viewshed.” This section recognizes that signs serve a number of valuable public and private functions, including providing effective communication between people, wayfinding information, commercial images, marketing, advertising, and education; and creating a visually stimulating retail environment. However, the City also finds that unregulated signage can be detrimental to the promotion of the safety, well being, and comfort of the users of streets, reduce the effectiveness of individual signs, have a significant negative impact on the aesthetic quality of the City’s streetscapes, negatively impact property values and can result in dangerous conflicts between traffic control signs and other signs. This section balances the community’s interest in traffic safety, aesthetics, potential negative consequences of unregulated signage, with the community’s desire to realize the public and private benefits of private signage. These regulations strive to achieve this balance by limiting the number, type, size and location of signs in order to minimize visual blight, clutter and traffic hazards while at the same time providing opportunities for free speech, freedom of expression, and the realization of the benefits of private signage. This section reduces distractions and obstructions from signs that would adversely affect traffic safety; and reduces hazards caused by signs encroaching upon public ways. The City’s visual character is enhanced by promoting new and replacement signage which is creative and distinctive, compatible with the surroundings, and responsive to the public need to locate a business establishment by identification, address, and product and/or service information.
With these purposes in mind, it is the intent of this Chapter to ensure that the use and regulation of signage is consistent with the public interest as follows:
1. Provide functional flexibility and accommodate signage that follows basic principles of good contextual design;
2. Ensure legibility of signage in the circumstances in which it is seen;
3. Assure that public benefits derived from expenditures of public funds for the improvement and beautification of streets, other public structures, and spaces are not obviated by overly aggressive signage that results in a negative impact on the visual and aesthetic cohesiveness of the streetscape. [Ord. 534 § 1, 2011; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.607 Sign Definitions.

18A.50.610 Administration - Sign Regulations.
A. Permitted Zones. Only signs of the type or types as designated by this section shall be permitted in approved zoning districts that allow their use. This section shall be enforced pursuant to the procedures established in LMC 18A.02.460, Enforcement.
B. Review and time limits. The Community Development Director shall promptly review the application upon the receipt of a completed permit application and payment of the permit fee by the applicant. The Community Development Director shall grant or deny the permit application within twenty (20) days from the date the completed application and permit fee was filed with the Community Development Department.
C. Approval or denial.The Community Development Director shall approve a permit for the sign if it complies with all applicable laws, including the building, electrical or other adopted codes of the City of Lakewood; the regulations for signs contained in this Chapter; and any variances granted from this Chapter. If the Community Development Director does not approve a permit for the sign, he/she shall state the reasons for the denial in writing, and shall mail a certified copy of the reasons for denial to the address of the applicant stated on the application.
D. Appeal of sign permit determinations. Decisions on sign permit applications may be appealed to the City’s hearing examiner pursuant to LMC Section 18A.02.740. An appeal hearing regarding the issuance of a sign permit shall be conducted within 30 days of the receipt of the appeal petition and appeal fee. [Ord. 534 § 2, 2011; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.615 Permanent Sign Permits.
New sign or sign modification permit. A permit is required for any new sign or modification of any existing sign, except as provided for in 18A.50.625.
A. Each individual permanent or temporary sign shall require a separate sign permit, except as specifically exempted in this section. Any sign for which a building permit is required under the Uniform Building Code shall also obtain a building permit.
B. No sign shall hereafter be erected, re-erected, constructed, installed, or altered except as provided by this Chapter. For the purposes of this Chapter “altered sign,” as defined in LMC 18A.50.680 shall not include maintenance as that term is used in LMC 18A.50.680, Definitions.
C. Any alteration or change to a sign or any change in the sign copy requires a sign permit, except for a change in the sign copy where the sign copy is contained within a permanent framework and designed to be periodically replaced, or a message which changes on a changeable copy readerboard or a billboard.
D. A new sign or sign modification permit shall become null and void if the work for which the permit was issued has not been completed within six (6) months of issuance.
E. The Community Development Director shall not issue a sign permit for a freestanding sign or modification of a freestanding sign if a nonconforming freestanding sign exists on the subject property or contiguously owned properties; nor issue a sign permit for a wall sign or modification of a wall sign if a nonconforming wall or roof sign exists on the subject property or contiguously owned properties, except as provided in LMC 18A.50.675, Nonconforming Signs. [Ord. 534 § 3, 2011; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.620 Prohibited Signs.
The following signs are prohibited in all zoning districts:
A. Mobile readerboards.
B. Roof signs.
C. Non-utility and non-governmental signs on utility poles or traffic control devices, public sign posts, or other public utility devices.
D. Signs which, by virtue of their size, location, movement, content, coloring or manner of illumination, may be confused with traffic control signs or signals, including but not limited to signs containing words such as “stop,” “look,” and “danger,” and directional features such as lighted arrows.
E. Posters, pennants, banners, streamers, string pennants, blinking or flashing or strobe lights, balloons, searchlights, strings, twirlers, propellers, flares, and other displays of a carnival nature, blimps, or inflatables except as permitted in conjunction with a temporary sign pursuant to LMC 18A.50.665, Signs for Temporary Display.
F. Animated, emitting, moving, rotating, or visually projecting signs.
G. Vehicle signs, except as allowed pursuant to LMC 18A.50.625(B)(21)-(22), Sign Permit Exceptions.
H. Parking lot, curb or wheelstop painting, or advertising which is not restrictive or cautionary in nature.
I. Public address systems or sound devices used in conjunction with any sign or advertising device.
J. Obscenity. No sign shall bear or contain statements, words, or pictures in which the dominant theme appeals to the prurient interest in sex or is patently offensive because it affronts the contemporary community standard relating to the description or representation of sexual material, that is utterly without redeeming social value.
K. Abandoned signs.
L. Off-premise signs, except as specifically permitted within this section.
M. Billboard signs, except as provided for in LMC 18A.50.635. [Ord. 534 § 4, 2011; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.625 Sign Permit Exemptions.
A. Exemption from the sign permit requirements of this Chapter shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any sign constructed, erected or located in any manner in violation of the provisions of this Chapter or any other laws or Ordinances of the City or the State of Washington.
B. A sign permit shall not be required for the following:
    1. Professional nameplates not exceeding two (2) square feet of sign area.
    2. Plaques, tablets, or inscriptions indicating the name of a building, date of erection, commemorative information, or historic designation provided it is:
        a. non-illuminated; and
        b. no more than two signs per site; and
        c. a maximum twelve (12) square feet of sign area.
    3. Signs owned and/or required by the State, City, or public utility entities indicating or warning of danger, aids to safety, traffic control, or traffic direction signs.
    4. Tourist-related business signs associated with those highway tourist-related signs regulated by the Washington State Department of Transportation.
    5. City sponsored or co-sponsored signs, banners, decorations or displays subject to approval of the Community Development Director. These signs, banners, and displays may be located on or over public rights-of-way with approval of the sign placement by the City Engineer.
    6. Temporary signs for the purpose of announcing or promoting a City-sponsored or promoted community fair, festival, or event. Such decorations and signs may be displayed no more than fourteen (14) calendar days prior to and during the fair, festival, or event. All decorations and signs must be removed within five (5) calendar days following the end of the fair, festival or event. Temporary signs may be located on or over public rights-of-way with approval of the sign placement by the City Engineer.
    7. Public art including sculptures, wall paintings, murals, collages, and other design features that do not incorporate advertising or identification.
    8. “No soliciting,” “no trespassing,” tow-away zone,” or indications of danger or warning signs less than four (4) square feet in sign face size.
    9. Maintenance of a legal sign in accordance with this section.
    10. Signs intended to notify the public of public meetings or hearings and official or legal notices required, issued, sponsored, or posted by any public agency or court.
    11. Incidental signs, provided for in LMC 18A.50.640
    12. Religious symbols, when not included in a sign.
    13. Decorative flags in commercial zones, on private property, within the confines of parking lots, landscape areas and on building frontages, which do not incorporate advertising, logos, or business identification; provided, that each individual flag does not exceed eighteen (18) square feet in sign area.
    14. Identification signs installed on and pertaining to structures or improvements such as phone booths, charitable donation containers, and recycling boxes. Signs may not exceed ten (10) percent of the area of the structure’s facade or surface elevation upon which they are installed.
    15. Building addresses with numbers and letters which comply with the requirements of the Uniform Building Code and the Uniform Fire Code.
    16. Signs located inside of a building, painted on a window, or hanging inside of a window, provided that window signs shall be limited to forty (40) percent of the window area.
    17. Strings of incandescent lights where the lights do not flash or blink in any way and do not unreasonably impact adjacent properties or street with excessive illumination or glare.
    18. Reasonable seasonal and holiday decorations within the appropriate season. Such displays shall be removed within ten (10) calendar days following the end of such season or holiday.
    19. Non-illuminated signs not exceeding four (4) square feet of sign area placed on lawns or buildings or in windows and containing a noncommercial political, religious, or personal message (subject to LMC 18A.50.665).
    20. Gravestones or other memorial displays associated with cemeteries and mausoleums.
    21. Vehicle signs painted or adhered directly and permanently on the vehicle, such as vinyl letters and logos, adhered magnetically, or inside a vehicle window, subject to the requirements of LMC 18A.50.630, General Sign Standards.
    22. Public transit buses and taxis bearing rental advertising, subject to the requirements of LMC 18A.50.630, General Sign Standards.
    23. Public Service directional signs, subject to the requirements of LMC 18A.50.630.
    24. On-site directional signs that do not contain a business name or advertising. [Ord. 534 § 5, 2011; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.630 General Provisions.
The provisions of this section apply within all zone districts citywide and include rules for signs that may be approved to benefit the general public interest as well as general rules for the placement and maintenance of all signs.
A. Public Service Directional Signs. Non-advertising and non-promotional directional or informational signs of a public or quasi-public nature, such as religious, educational, medical and emergency facilities, citizen recognition signs, neighborhood welcome signs, signs indicating scenic or historic points of interest may be erected or maintained by an official or civic body. Tourist related highway business signs are subject to WSDOT rules and are not included here as public service directional signs. Public service directional signs may be located in any zone with the approval of the Community Development Director if all of the following standards are met:
    1. The sign shall not exceed a nine (9) square foot sign face.
    2. Such signs shall be directional or informational in nature only (no advertising other than name of the use and location allowed).
    3. Signs are of a consistent size, color and style as established by the City.
    4. No more than four (4) such signs for each use or occupancy shall be approved.
    5. Such a sign shall meet all other applicable provisions of this section.
    6. These signs may be located within the public rights-of-way with approval of the sign placement by the City Engineer.
    7. Signs shall be located on arterial streets nearest the location unless otherwise approved by the Community Development Director.
B. Maintenance of Signs. All signs, including signs heretofore installed, shall be maintained in a constant state of security, safety, and repair. Signs which are allowed to fall into a state of disrepair to the extent they are unsightly, broken, or hazardous may be declared a nuisance by the Community Development Director and abated pursuant to LMC 18A.02.460, Enforcement.
C. No permanent sign shall be constructed, erected, or retained unless the sign and sign structure is constructed, erected, and maintained so as to be able to withstand the wind, seismic, and other regulations as specified in the Uniform Building Code or other applicable regulations.
D. Fire Safety Obstructing Signs. No sign or sign structure shall be constructed in such a manner or at such a location that it will obstruct access to any fire escape or other means of ingress or egress from a building or any exit corridor, exit hallway, or exit doorway. No sign or supporting structure shall cover, wholly or partially, any window or doorway in any manner that will substantially limit access to the building in case of fire.
E. Visibility. No sign or sign structure shall be placed or erected in any place or manner where by reason of its position it will obstruct the visibility of any vehicular, mobile, or pedestrian traffic or be hazardous to motorists' ingress and egress from parking areas.
F. Illumination. Illumination from or upon any sign shall be shaded, shielded, directed or reduced so as to avoid undue brightness, glare, reflection of light skyward, or onto private or public property in the surrounding area and so as not to unreasonably distract pedestrians and motorists. Illumination in excess of that which is reasonably necessary to make the sign visible from an adjacent street shall be prohibited.
G. Placement. 
    1. A sign shall not be affixed to a tree, shrub, rock or other natural object.
    2. No unauthorized sign may be affixed to a utility pole, or other public structure.
    3. Signs shall not be mounted on any portion of the roof or extend above the roof line unless mounted on a parapet wall. Signs shall not extend above the top edge of the parapet wall.
    4. No sign shall project into a vehicular public way or be less than nine (9) feet above a pedestrian way.
    5. No sign together with any supporting framework shall extend to a height above the maximum building height allowed in a zone.
    6. Signs shall not cover architectural details such as, but not limited to, arches, sills, moldings, cornices, and transom windows.
    7. Signs shall not obstruct traffic signals. The issuance of a sign permit as regulated by this code shall not relieve the permit holder from fully complying with the State of Washington or any other law governing the obstruction of any authorized traffic sign, signal or device.
    8. Signs shall not obstruct vision clearance as determined by the City Engineer.
    9. Signs shall not be placed within the public right-of-way except as specifically allowed in this section. No person, organization, or agency shall place any signs, indicators, advertisements, stakes, posts or any other foreign object or objects within a public street or the right-of-way of any public street in the City of Lakewood without the express permission, in writing, of the City Engineer. Any such objects now upon the public rights-of-way are hereby declared illegal, except for those now in place with written permission of the City Engineer and except for mailboxes or newspaper delivery tubes placed on the public right-of-way, with the approval of the City Engineer.
    10. Unauthorized signs in the public right-of-way that the City Engineer determines to be located so as to present a hazard to the public health or safety may be immediately removed without prior notice.
    11. Signs in or on vehicles, as allowed in LMC 18A.50.625(B)(21)-(22), shall be subject to the following requirements:
        a. Graphics and letters identifying a business or its principal product, painted or adhered directly and permanently on the vehicle, such as vinyl letters and logos, adhered magnetically, placed inside a window, or otherwise securely mounted to a vehicle which is routinely operated in the normal course of business for delivery, pickup, or transportation.
        b. Signs permanently adhered on rental vehicles, such as U-haul rental trucks, identifying the name of the rental company,
        c. Private “for sale” signs placed in the windows of vehicles being sold by their owners, and
        d. Signs depicting the price and model year of vehicles for sale at motor vehicle sales lots.
H. Identification. Any sign constructed or erected after the effective date of this Chapter that identifies a business must contain within its text an identification of the business name in the English language in order to aid public safety and emergency responses in locating the advertised business.
I. Transmission Lines - Clearance. Horizontal and vertical clearance of signs or sign structures from power and communication transmission lines shall not be less than twelve (12) feet.
J. Flagpoles. No flagpole shall extend to a height above the maximum building height allowed in the zone. A flagpole greater than six (6) feet in height shall require a building permit. All flagpoles shall be set back eight (8) feet from all property lines. Flagpoles greater than twenty-five (25) feet in height shall be set back an additional foot for each foot in height above twenty-five (25) feet.
K. Entrance and Exit Signs. Entrance and exit signs and/or other similarly worded directional signs, used for the purpose of controlling traffic, shall be limited to the following:
    1. One (1) sign per entrance or exit.
    2. Sign height shall not exceed thirty (30) inches.
    3. Sign width shall not exceed sixteen (16) inches.
    4. The maximum area of a sign face shall be four (4) square feet.
    5. Advertisements shall not constitute more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total face area of the sign, and shall not distract the reader from the primary directional and traffic control function of the sign.
L. Bus Shelter Signs. To support the provision of transit bus shelters in Lakewood, signs are permitted when provided in conjunction with the City-approved Pierce Transit Lakewood Bus Shelter Program, subject to the following requirements:
    1. A bus shelter sign is an accessory sign that is structurally integrated into a bus shelter approved for design, construction, and location by Pierce Transit and the City of Lakewood.
        a. The maximum sign area is forty-eight (48) square feet for the entire shelter structure.
        b. Sign setback requirements are waived.
        c. Sign separation requirements are waived.
        d. Bus shelter signage is exclusive of signage limits of the lot on which it is located.
        e. A sign permit for a bus shelter sign may be issued where a nonconforming freestanding sign exists on the lot.
    2. Signage shall only be permitted on shelters in accordance with the City-approved Pierce Transit Lakewood Bus Shelter Program.
M. Address Number Signs. Address number signs shall be provided for all properties as required by LMC 15.14.030.Z [Ord. 536 § 1, 2011; Ord. 534 § 6, 2011; Ord. 483 § 28, 2008; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.635 Billboards.
A. The total number of billboard faces within the City of Lakewood shall not exceed the total number of billboard faces existing on the date of incorporation of the City.
B. The demolition or removal of any billboard face reduces the number of allowable billboard faces by the number removed.
C. In the event that the City of Lakewood annexes areas containing billboards after the date of incorporation, the total number of allowable billboard faces shall be increased by the number of faces existing in such areas on the effective date of annexation.
D. Any billboard sign in existence on the date of incorporation, or on the effective date of annexation, shall be considered nonconforming.
E. Removal or demolition of a billboard shall require the issuance of a demolition permit for the removal of the existing billboard. Billboard removal or demolition shall be completed within ninety (90) days of permit issuance.
F. Billboards shall not be altered or modified, except as provided in subsections “G,” “H,” and “I” below.
G. Ordinary and necessary maintenance and repairs that do not change the size, shape, orientation, height, or location of billboards shall not require a zoning certification, but may require a building permit. Billboard copy replacement may occur at any time and is exempt from the requirement for permits.
H. Billboards that have any projections that extend more than three (3) feet out from the surface of the billboard face shall not be modified, except to remove or reduce such projections.
I. Billboards that contain, include, or are illuminated by any flashing, intermittent, or moving lights shall not be altered or modified, except to remove or reduce such lights. Billboards shall not include lighting unless it is effectively shielded so that the light is directed to the billboard face and prevents beams or rays of light from being directed at any portion of the traveled ways of the highway or airways, or is of such low intensity or brilliance as not to cause glare or to impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle. Billboards found to have excessive illumination, at the sole discretion of the City, shall be modified in accordance with the City’s instructions.
J. Amortization of billboards shall be fulfilled as required in LMC 18A.50.675, Nonconforming Signs. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.640 Provisions for Signs That are Permanent or Continuous Displays.
A. Table 18A.50.640 presents the dimensional standards and permit requirements by zone district for signs that are permanently installed or otherwise permitted for display without time restriction.
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
|  Zone Districts   |                                             Sign Standards1                                             |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
| "                 |       Sign Type       | Number Allowed |  Min. / Max.   |  Maximum Total  |    Maximum    | Permit Rqd? |
|                   |                       |                |   Sign Size    |      Area       |    Height     |             |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
| Residential       |                       |                |                |                 |               |             |
| (All R,           |                       |                |                |                 |               |             |
| MR, and           |                       |                |                |                 |               |             |
| MF Zones)         |                       |                |                |                 |               |             |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
| Subdivision       | Monument              | 1 per primary  | 0 sf. / 32     |                 | 7’            | Y           |
|                   |                       | entrance       | sf.            |                 |               |             |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
| Each residential  | All                   | 1 per street   | 0 sf. / 4      | 4 sf.           | 3’ for picket | N           |
| lot               |                       | frontage       | sf.            |                 |               |             |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
| MF with           | Monument              | 1 per primary  | 0 sf. / 32     |                 | 7’            | Y           |
| more than         |                       | entrance       | sf.            |                 |               |             |
| 6 units           |                       |                |                |                 |               |             |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
| Schools,          | Monument              | 1 per primary  | 0 / 32 sf.     |                 | 7’            | Y           |
| churches          |                       | entrance       |                |                 |               |             |
| and other         |                       |                |                |                 |               |             |
| permitted         |                       |                |                |                 |               |             |
| non-residential   |                       |                |                |                 |               |             |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
| "                 | Wall2                 | Number limited | 0 / 50 sf.     | 5% of facade    |               | Y           |
|                   |                       | by Total       |                | up to 50        |               |             |
|                   |                       | Area           |                | sf              |               |             |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
| Commercial        |                       |                |                |                 |               |             |
| / Industrial      |                       |                |                |                 |               |             |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
| All (excluding    |                       |                |                |                 |               |             |
| Freeway)          |                       |                |                |                 |               |             |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
|                   | Monument              |                |                |                 |               | Y           |
|                   | (by frontage)         |                |                |                 |               |             |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
|                   | 50’ or less           | 1              | 16 sf. / 24    | 24 sf.          | 7’            | Y           |
|                   |                       |                | sf.            |                 |               |             |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
|                   | More than             | Number limited | 24 sf. / 40    | 24 sf. plus     | 7’            | Y           |
|                   | 50’                   | by Total       | sf.            | 0.17 for        |               |             |
|                   |                       | Area           |                | each frontage   |               |             |
|                   |                       |                |                | foot over       |               |             |
|                   |                       |                |                | 50 sf.          |               |             |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
|                   |                       | A monument sign shall be separated from any other monument                      |
|                   |                       | sign on the same property by a minimum 200’                                     |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
|                   | Pole (by              |                |                |                 |               |             |
|                   | frontage)             |                |                |                 |               |             |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
|                   | Less than             | None           |                |                 |               |             |
|                   | 250’                  |                |                |                 |               |             |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
|                   | 250’ to               | 1 in trade     | 24 sf. / 40    |                 | 20’           | Y           |
|                   | 500’                  | for any 2      | sf.            |                 |               |             |
|                   |                       | permitted      |                |                 |               |             |
|                   |                       | Monument       |                |                 |               |             |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
|                   | Over 500’             | "              | 24 sf. /48     |                 | 20’           | Y           |
|                   |                       |                | sf.            |                 |               |             |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
|                   | Wall2                 |                | 200 per sign   | 10% of facade   |               | Y           |
|                   |                       |                | or group       |                 |               |             |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
|                   | Window                |                | 40% of the     |                 |               | N           |
|                   |                       |                | window area    |                 |               |             |
|                   |                       |                | on each wall.  |                 |               |             |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
|                   | Sale / Lease          | 1 per street   | 16 sf. for     |                 | 10’           | Y           |
|                   |                       | frontage       | ARC, TOC,      |                 |               |             |
|                   |                       |                | NC; 32 sf.     |                 |               |             |
|                   |                       |                | for others     |                 |               |             |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
|                   | Incidental            | See Note #3 below                                                 | N           |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
|                   | Portable              | See Subsection #C.4 below                                         | N           |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
| Freeway4          |                       |                |                |                 |               |             |
|                   |                       |                |                |                 |               |             |
| (Select           |                       |                |                |                 |               |             |
| TOC, C1,          |                       |                |                |                 |               |             |
| C2, IBP,          |                       |                |                |                 |               |             |
| I1)               |                       |                |                |                 |               |             |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
|                   | Pole/Monument-Surface | Same as Non-Freeway Commercial / Industrial                       | Y           |
|                   | Street                |                                                                   |             |
|                   | frontage              |                                                                   |             |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
|                   | Pole- Freeway         | 1 additional   | 60 s.f. min/   | 1 sq. ft.       | 35’ w/in      | Y           |
|                   | Frontage              | pole sign      | 200 s.f.       | per lineal      | 50’ of        |             |
|                   |                       | per freeway    | max. Must      | foot arterial   | freeway       |             |
|                   |                       | frontage.      | be within      | frontage        |               |             |
|                   |                       | Min 60 l.f.    | 50’ of freeway | (min. 60        |               |             |
|                   |                       | surface street | r.o.w.)        | linear feet     |               |             |
|                   |                       | frontage       |                | of surface      |               |             |
|                   |                       | req’d.         |                | street frontage |               |             |
|                   |                       |                |                | to qualify      |               |             |
|                   |                       |                |                | for freeway     |               |             |
|                   |                       |                |                | pole sign)      |               |             |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
|                   | Wall2, Window,        | Same as Non-Freeway Commercial / Industrial                                     |
|                   | Sale /                |                                                                                 |
|                   | Lease,                |                                                                                 |
|                   | Incidental,           |                                                                                 |
|                   | Portable              |                                                                                 |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
| Open Space,       | The Director shall review any request for signs in these districts                                      |
| Public,           | and consider the type, size and location of the proposed signage                                        |
| and Institutional | in respect to the type and intensity of the use, and make a determination                               |
| (OSR1,            | to approve, deny or modify the proposed sign(s) consistent with                                         |
| OSR2, P1)         | the intent of this chapter and the applicable zone district regulations.                                |
+-------------------+-----------------------+----------------+----------------+-----------------+---------------+-------------+
B. Notes for Figure 18A.50.640
    1. The following abbreviations are used in the Table:
    Min. / Max. = Minimum / Maximum; sf = square foot or feet; Y = Yes; N = No; Rqd.= Required; r.o.w. = right-of-way.
    2. Wall sign includes Projecting, Canopy, Awning, and Marquee signs.
    3. Incidental signs are defined in LMC 18A.50.680. Incidental signs shall not be readily visible or legible from a public right-of-way. Incidental signs shall not individually exceed two (2) square feet or, cumulatively, one-half of one (1/2 of 1) percent of the building facade; provided, said size limitation shall not apply to signs providing directions, warnings or information when, established, authorized, or maintained by a public agency.
    4. Freeway Commercial / Industrial. TOC, C1, C2, IBP, NC2 and I1 zoning districts which abut I-5, SR 512, Tacoma Mall Boulevard, or the BNSF rail-road right-of-way in Tillicum.
C. Additional requirements and explanations for specific Sign Types and situations:
    1. Wall signs shall not project more that 18 (eighteen) inches from the façade of the supporting structure.
    2. Projecting signs shall not extend more than 6 (six) feet from the attached building.
    3. Freestanding signage for landlocked parcels.
        a. For purposes of this section:
            1. A landlocked parcel is a parcel which does not have frontage on a public street and access to the parcel is provided through an adjacent parcel via a recorded access easement, or is a parcel that has less than 30 (thirty) feet on a public street and may or may not have access on that street.
            2. A host parcel is the parcel which provides the access to a landlocked parcel, via an easement.
        b. A host parcel may share its allocation of freestanding signage with the landlocked parcel. The host parcel is under no obligation to grant the landlocked parcel use of its property for an easement or to grant part of its signage allotment.
        c. Freestanding signage for the landlocked parcel shall be placed adjacent to the recorded access easement and shall only advertise those businesses located on the landlocked parcel and/or the host parcel.
        d. In the case of landlocked parcels utilizing a host parcel for signage, the signage for the landlocked parcel shall not be considered to be off-premise signage.
    [IMAGE: <18A.50.640_001.png>]
    [Added]
    4. Standards for Portable Signs Intended for Continuous Display:
    Any business may display one portable sign, either a freestanding sign such as an A-Frame or a T-Frame, or a banner, on a continuous basis under the terms of this subsection. Portable signs permitted under this subsection are in addition to any permanent or temporary signs otherwise permitted by this Chapter. No permit is required if the portable sign complies with the following standards:
        a. The sign must be located on private property on which the business is located (with the permission of the property owner) and shall not be located within the public right-of-way. On-site portable signs that are not generally visible from the public right-of-way or property are not considered signs under this Chapter.
        b. The sign shall not block critical sight distances for the adjacent roadway, or for vehicles entering or exiting the roadway to or from a lawfully established driveway.
        c. The sign may not block any pedestrian way. A minimum of 48 (forty-eight) inches clearance shall be provided.
        d. The sign shall not block or interfere with any vehicular circulation, maneuvering or parking areas.
        e. The maximum size for an A-Frame or T-Frame sign displayed under this subsection shall be 36 (thirty-six) inches wide and 48 (forty-eight) inches high.
        f. The maximum size of a banner allowed under this subsection shall be 40 (forty) square feet.
        g. Banners shall be displayed against a building wall, and shall be maintained in good condition. Torn, faded, dirty, dingy, or shredded banners shall be removed immediately. Banners displayed on a continuous basis are in addition to the allotment of permanent wall signs for the business.
        h. Freestanding portable signs shall be separated from each other by a minimum of 50 (fifty) feet.
        i. Only one portable sign per business may be displayed on a permanent basis under the terms of this section. A business may display a freestanding portable sign (A-Frame/ T-Frame) or a banner, but not both, under the terms of this subsection. For the purposes of this subsection, separate business entities occupying one tenant space shall be considered a single business. Additional portable signs may only be displayed on a temporary basis subject to the provisions of Section 18A.50.665, Signs for Temporary Display.
        j. Freestanding portable signs permitted under this section shall be displayed only during regular business hours when the business is open, and shall be removed during those times when the business is closed.
        k. No balloons, streamers, stringer pennants, festoons, or other similar devices are permitted in conjunction with signs displayed under this subsection. Such devices may be allowed on a temporary basis as permitted under Section 18A.50.665, Signs for Temporary Display.
        l. Preference shall be given to conventional, non-portable signs lawfully erected and intended for display on a permanent basis. Signs displayed under this subsection shall be subject to all applicable standards and provisions of this Chapter.
    5. Landscaped berm and decorative block edged berm alternatives for a monument sign.
        a. Landscaped berms or decorative block edged berms of 2 (two) feet or less in height shall not be included in the height calculations of a ground sign. Berms of more than 2 (two) feet in height shall be counted toward the sign height calculation. Landscaped berms shall have a slope ratio of not more than 1:3 height-to-width, from the center of the berm to be considered a landscaped berm.
    [IMAGE: <18A.50.640_002.png>]
    [Added]
    6. Major Commercial or Employment Centers within the NC1, NC2, CBD, TOC, C1, C2, IBP, I1 and I2 zoning districts.
        a. A major commercial center or employment center is an integrated development with contiguous ownership larger than 10 (ten) acres in size. Contiguous properties under separate control, but which function as an integrated center and when combined are larger than 10 (ten) acres in size, may be considered a major center.
        b. Major commercial and employment centers may vary from the development standards of this section by obtaining approval of an Integrated Sign Plan for the center.
            1. The sign plan for the center shall be reviewed either separately or as part of the conditional use permit for the project.
            2. In approving the sign plan for the center, the Hearing Examiner shall make a finding that the sign plan is proportionate to the intensity of the major commercial or employment center and consistent with the intent of this code. [Ord. 534 § 7, 2011; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.665 Signs for Temporary Display.
A. Signs for temporary display are allowed according to the standards and permit requirements of Table 18A.50.665 below. There are five (5) activity categories of temporary signs: Real Estate/Development, Political, Special Event, Private Sales and Temporary Use.
+---------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+------------+----------------------------+----------------+
|    Temporary Sign Activity     |                                  Temporary Sign Standards                                  |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+------------+----------------------------+----------------+
| "                              | Number Allowed |    Max Size    | Max Height |      Other Provisions      |    Permit?     |
|                                |                |    per Sign    |   (feet)   |                            |                |
|                                |                |   (sq. feet)   |            |                            |                |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+------------+----------------------------+----------------+
| Apply to all Zones             |                |                |            |                            |                |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+------------+----------------------------+----------------+
| Real Estate   |                |                |                |            |                            |                |
| / Development |                |                |                |            |                            |                |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+------------+----------------------------+----------------+

+---------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+------------+----------------------------+----------------+
|               | Construction   | 4              | 32             |            | Permit expires with        | Condition      |
|               |                |                |                |            | project completion;        | of Building    |
|               |                |                |                |            | signs may be freestanding  | Permit         |
|               |                |                |                |            | or attached to             |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | site fencing or            |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | walls; signs shall         |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | be on-premises             |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | only. Total area           |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | allowance is 128           |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | sf per site.               |                |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+------------+----------------------------+----------------+
|               | Subdivision &  | 4              | 16 for 8       | 7          | Only one on-premise        | Condition      |
|               | Condominium    |                | or fewer       |            | sign per street            | of Preliminary |
|               |                |                | lots /         |            | frontage; permit           | Plat           |
|               |                |                | units;         |            | expires within             |                |
|               |                |                | 32 for         |            | 2 years of preliminary     |                |
|               |                |                | more than      |            | plat approval or           |                |
|               |                |                | 8              |            | sale of 75% of             |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | lots / units. No           |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | off-premise placement.     |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | Total area allowance       |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | is 128 sf per site.        |                |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+------------+----------------------------+----------------+
|               | Residential    | 1 per street   | 4 for ‘R’;     | 4 in ‘R’   | Display only while         | N              |
|               | Sale or        | frontage       | 8 for ‘MR/MF’; | zones;     | property is actively       |                |
|               | Rent           |                | 12 for         | 7 in other | for sale, rent,            |                |
|               |                |                | other zones    | zones      | or lease; No off-premise   |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | display except             |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | for Open House             |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | (below).                   |                |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+------------+----------------------------+----------------+
|               | Residential    | 4              | 4              | 3          | Allowed only for           | N              |
|               | Open House     |                |                |            | single-family dwellings    |                |
|               | (Off-Premise)  |                |                |            | for sale. Display          |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | shall be only on           |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | open house days.           |                |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+------------+----------------------------+----------------+
| Political     |                |                |                |            |                            |                |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+------------+----------------------------+----------------+
|               |                |                | 4 per sign     |            | Signs placed in            | N              |
|               |                |                | or aggregated  |            | the public right-of-way    |                |
|               |                |                | display        |            | shall not impede           |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | public circulation         |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | or create a hazard         |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | to circulation             |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | and shall not be           |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | located within             |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | a vision clearance         |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | area. Signs may            |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | be placed on fences,       |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | buildings, or other        |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | structures, in             |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | windows, or on             |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | pickets. Signs             |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | may be placed on           |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | private property           |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | only with the permission   |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | of the property            |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | owner or occupant.         |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | Display is limited         |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | to 60 days before          |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | and 10 days after          |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | an election.               |                |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+------------+----------------------------+----------------+
| Special       |                |                |                |            |                            |                |
| Events        |                |                |                |            |                            |                |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+------------+----------------------------+----------------+
|               | Grand Opening; |                | Poster /       | A-frame,   | One 30-day display         | Y              |
|               | business       |                | banner:        | T-frame    | period per new             |                |
|               | closing        |                | 32             | or picket  | business or organization   |                |
|               |                |                | A-frame,       | signs:     | opening or business        |                |
|               |                |                | T-frame        | 4          | closing. Two Incidental    |                |
|               |                |                | or picket      |            | signs / devices            |                |
|               |                |                | signs:         |            | are also allowed.          |                |
|               |                |                | 6              |            | Total sign face            |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | area shall not             |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | exceed eighty (80)         |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | square feet.               |                |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+------------+----------------------------+----------------+
|               | City-sponsored | Signs, banners, or displays                  | Displays may be            | N              |
|               | Community      | as approval by the Community                 | located on or over         |                |
|               | Events         | Development Director.                        | public rights-of-way       |                |
|               |                |                                              | with approval of           |                |
|               |                |                                              | the sign placement         |                |
|               |                |                                              | by the City Engineer       |                |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+------------+----------------------------+----------------+
|               | Non-Profit     | 1 per arterial | Poster /       | A-frame,   | Applicant must meet        | Y              |
|               | Events         | frontage       | banner:        | T-frame    | definition of Non-Profit   |                |
|               |                | (minimum       | 32             | or picket  | Community Organization     |                |
|               |                | 1)             | A-frame,       | signs:     | in LMC 18A.50.680          |                |
|               |                |                | T-frame        | 4          | Definitions. Maximum       |                |
|               |                |                | or picket      |            | of one 15-day event        |                |
|               |                |                | signs:         |            | per calendar quarter.      |                |
|               |                |                | 6              |            | Total sign face            |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | area shall not             |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | exceed eighty (80)         |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | square feet.               |                |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+------------+----------------------------+----------------+
| Private       |                |                |                |            |                            |                |
| Sales (Garage |                |                |                |            |                            |                |
| / Estate)     |                |                |                |            |                            |                |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+------------+----------------------------+----------------+
|               | Residential    | 1              | 4 per sign     | 3          | Display only on            | N              |
|               | Uses Only      | on-premise;    | face           |            | days of sale and           |                |
|               |                | 4 off-premise  |                |            | not to exceed12            |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | continuous days            |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | in any 90-day period.      |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | A-frame, T-frame           |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | or picket style            |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | freestanding sign          |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | only; signs shall          |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | be located within          |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | ½ mile of the sale         |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | site, except that          |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | (1) sign may be            |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | placed at the nearest      |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | arterial street;           |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | signs may be placed        |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | on private property        |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | only with the permission   |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | of the owner or            |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | occupant.                  |                |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+------------+----------------------------+----------------+
| Temporary     |                |                |                |            |                            |                |
| Use           |                |                |                |            |                            |                |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+------------+----------------------------+----------------+
|               |                |                | 50             |            | Only issued in association | Condition      |
|               |                |                |                |            | with and as a condition    | of Temporary   |
|               |                |                |                |            | of a Temporary             | Use Permit     |
|               |                |                |                |            | Use permit; not            |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | issued if another          |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | temporary sign             |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | permit is active;          |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | on-premise only;           |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | total allowed area         |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | not exceed 50 square       |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | feet. (Also see            |                |
|               |                |                |                |            | LMC 18A.10.520)            |                |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+------------+----------------------------+----------------+
B. Notes for Table 18A.50.665
    1. Temporary use sign permits shall not be issued for detached or attached dwellings.
    2. Failure to comply with the conditions in this Chapter and the issued permit shall result in immediate enforcement pursuant to LMC 18A.02.460, Enforcement. In addition, the subject applicant, business, and location shall be ineligible for a temporary sign permit for a period of one (1) year.
    3. Attachments to a temporary sign, including lighting, shall be prohibited
    4. Alteration of required landscaping in any manner shall be prohibited.
    5. Up to two (2) of the following types of devices and displays may be permitted as accessory to one (1) or more temporary signs if such devices are included in the special event temporary sign permit:
        a. Streamers.
        b. Stringer pennants.
        c. Strings of twirlers or propellers.
        d. Balloons. [Ord. 534 § 12, 2011; Ord. 317 § 10, 2003; Ord. 307 § 25, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.675 Nonconforming Signs.
A. Any sign which does not conform to the sign standards within this chapter, for which a permit was issued by Pierce County prior to February 28, 1996, and which was constructed, erected, and maintained in compliance with applicable Pierce County regulations shall be regarded as a legal non-conforming sign; excluding those signs that are prohibited under LMC 18A.50.620, Prohibited Signs.
B. Nonconforming Sign Permits.
    1. A permit is required for each legal nonconforming sign within the City of Lakewood.
    2. The permit shall include the necessary information pertaining to the nonconforming status of the sign for administrative tracking, public notice, amortization (if applicable), and removal of the sign in accordance with this title.
    3. All property owners, lessors, or businesses with control of a nonconforming sign within the City shall obtain a nonconforming sign permit for each nonconforming sign within ninety (90) days of notification by the City of Lakewood.
    4. No fee shall be charged for required nonconforming sign permits which are obtained within ninety (90) days of notification by the City of Lakewood. Owners of signs who have not obtained the required permit prior to the stated deadline shall be assessed a permit fee for administration of the permit.
    5. Changes to nonconforming signs, as allowed pursuant to this title, shall be permitted by documenting the nature and extent of the change on a nonconforming sign permit.
C. Any legal nonconforming sign which is structurally altered, relocated, or replaced shall immediately be brought into compliance with all of the provisions of this title, excluding the, repair, and/or restoration of a sign to a safe condition. Normal maintenance shall be permitted on any part of a sign or sign structure without loss of nonconforming status. Sign face changes that do not result in an increase of the nonconformity shall be allowed, except as specifically prohibited in this chapter.
D. All nonconforming signs not exempted by subsection E below shall be removed or modified to conform with current sign standards no later than December 31, 2006. A sign permit shall be obtained for any sign modifications necessary to bring signs into conformance. Pursuant to subsection C, all non-conforming signs required to be modified or replaced by this section shall be brought into full compliance with the provisions of this code.
E. Signs for which permits were issued by Pierce County prior to February 28, 1996, if they are within 25 percent of the height and area requirements of the current sign standards as of the effective date of this Ordinance, shall be exempt from the provisions of subsection D above. In addition, any sign erected pursuant to a valid sign permit issued by the City of Lakewood at any time since incorporation of the City shall be exempt from the provisions of subsection D above. These exemptions shall not apply to any sign listed as a prohibited sign. If the removal of a non-conforming sign is subject to compensation by the City pursuant to RCW 47.42, the Highway Scenic Control/Scenic Vistas Act, an exemption may be provided for said sign at the discretion of the City Manager.
F. In addition to the provisions of subsection D, all nonconforming signs not exempted by subsection E shall be removed or brought into conformance prior to December 31, 2006, under the following conditions:
    1. In conjunction with any administrative use permit, conditional use permit, variance, subdivision, change in use, or building permit application for an expansion or alteration (including new structures) on the property on which the sign is located, where the cost of the expansion, alteration, or new construction is greater than twenty-five (25) percent of the value of the existing structure(s) on the site. This calculation shall include cumulative value, adjusted for inflation, of all expansions, alterations, and new construction initiated since incorporation of the City.
    2. Within ninety (90) days of the demolition or destruction of any portion of a building containing the use to which a non-conforming sign is accessory, where the value of that portion of the building is greater than fifty (50) percent of the appraised value of the entire building
    3. Within ninety (90) days of damage of the sign by catastrophic events, such as earthquakes, floods and wind, vandalism, fire or other casualty such that the cost of repair and restoration of the sign, to the same or a more conforming design, exceeds fifty (50) percent of the cost of replacing the sign with a conforming sign. The Building Official may require that such sign be removed or repaired in less than ninety (90) days if the sign is deemed to be an immediate danger to the public.
    4. Upon notice by the City that the sign is in a state of disrepair, is unsafe, or may become a danger to the public, providing the costs of repair and restoration of the sign exceeds fifty (50) percent of the cost of replacing the sign with a conforming sign.
    5. Upon notice by the City that the sign constitutes a traffic hazard not created by the relocation of streets or highways or the result of acts by the City.
G. Any signs not removed within the time limit specified in Section D above, or as otherwise ordered by the City shall be deemed a public nuisance, subject to the removal provisions of this chapter, and shall be removed by the City if the sign owner or property owner fails to do so after being so ordered by the Community Development Director. Costs, including administrative and indirect costs, of said removal shall be borne by the sign and/or property owner and may be recovered by the City, if necessary, by placing a lien on the property from which the sign has been removed.
H. Amortization. To ease the economic impact of this code on businesses with legal nonconforming signs subject to removal under subsection D, this code has provided for a limited period of use for a nonconforming sign in its existing state. During this period, it is expected that the sign will be amortized on federal income taxes; however, whether it may be so amortized shall not affect the application of this section. Similar treatment shall be accorded signs in new areas annexed to the City. [Ord. 385 § 1, 2005; Ord. 317 § 11, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.680 Sign Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
A. ABANDONED SIGN. Any sign that has been deserted and its effective use terminated, and which no longer fulfills the purpose for which it was constructed.
B. A-FRAME OR T-FRAME SIGN. A temporary, portable, freestanding, and self-supporting sign which may be either single- or double-faced, forming an “A” shape, or on a pole attached to a flat base.
C. ALTERATION SIGN. Any change in size, shape, position, location, construction, or supporting structure of a sign. A change in copy is not an alteration.
D. ANIMATED SIGN. A sign which has any visible moving part, flashing or oscillating lights, visible mechanical movement of any description, or other apparent visible movement achieved by any means. Animated signs include, but are not limited to, changing or moving pictures, drawings, and designs regardless of the means and mechanisms of the animation; and message display changes at intervals of five seconds or less.
E. AWNING SIGN. Any sign painted on, attached to, or supported by an awning.
F. BALLOON. A decorative inflatable device with a diameter of less than eighteen (18) inches, generally composed of a thin layer of latex or mylar. The tether of a balloon is less than twelve (12) feet in length (see “blimp”).
G. BANNER SIGN. A typically rectangular or square shaped sign, of cloth or other similar material, bearing a commercial message, motto, or slogan. A banner may have a message and/or display a commercial graphic or symbol. It can vary in size, color, and design.
H. BILLBOARD SIGN. A sign that contains a message or directs attention to a business, profession, product, activity, or service that is not related to a use or activity conducted or offered on the premises or at the location where the sign is located, excluding road directional signs, and which is generally available by means of rental or lease to persons other than the owner of the sign. A billboard sign includes the sign face(s) that contains the message or direction noted above, as well as the pole or other structure upon which the sign face is attached.
I. BILLBOARD SIGN FACE. That portion of a billboard, exclusive of its structural support, on which changeable advertising copy is displayed either by affixing pre-printed poster panels or by painted copy.
J. BLIMP. An advertising or decorative device with a diameter or combined diameter of eighteen (18) inches or larger that is inflated by some means and is used to attract attention, advertise, promote, market or display goods and/or services. These devices include large single displays or displays of smaller balloons connected in some fashion to create a larger display. A balloon with a tether longer than twelve (12) feet is considered a blimp.
K. BUSINESS SIGN. A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity, goods, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered on the premises.
L. CANOPY SIGN. A sign attached to the underside of a canopy.
M. CONSTRUCTION SIGN. A temporary sign placed in advance of occupancy of a building or structure indicating the name of the building or structure, the architects, the contractors and other information regarding the building or structure.
N. DIRECTIONAL OR INFORMATIONAL SIGN. A sign designated to guide or direct pedestrians or vehicles.
O. EMITTING SIGN. A sign which emits sound, odor, or visible matter such as smoke or steam.
P. FLAG. An individual piece of cloth or other similar material, varying in size, shape, color, and design, affixed to a staff or pole. A flag is used as a symbol of a nation, state, City, or organization; or it may be merely decorative. A “pennant” is a shape of flag, however one (1) “string pennant” is not a flag.
Q. FLASHING SIGN. Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not maintained in a stationary status and/or remain constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is in use.
R. FLASHING SIGN. An illuminated sign may utilize action or motion, or light or color.
S. FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign that is self-supported on a structure used exclusively or primarily for the support of the sign or for a group of signs, being detached from any building or structure.
T. GATE OR ENTRANCE SIGN. A sign attached or adjacent to an entranceway of a residential site or subdivision, which identifies the site or subdivision.
U. GRAND OPENING. The celebration or promotional period beginning on or shortly after the date when a new, permanent business or use if first opened for business in a permanent, fixed building. A grand opening must occur at or near the beginning of a business operation and can only occur once during the lifetime of the operation. For the purposes of this definition, Grand Re-Opening, Under New Ownership, Under New Management, or similar type events shall be allowed for the following: a change of business location; construction of a new business structure; major remodeling or expansion valued at $50,000 or more; change of ownership; change of general management; or change of name, provided that such event is for a permanent business in a permanent, fixed building and occurs on or about the date of the above changes in business.
V. IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign used only for the purpose of identifying the occupancy of a building, structure or property.
W. INFLATABLES. A decorative device with a diameter or combined diameter of 18 inches or larger that is inflated by some means and is used to attract and/or promote attention to a site or service. These devices include large single displays or displays of smaller balloons connected in some fashion to create a larger display. Blimps are not considered inflatables.
X. ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign designed to give forth artificial light or reflect such light from an artificial source.
Y. INCIDENTAL SIGN. Signs, emblems, and decals attached to a primary building which are designed to provide general building and limited non-advertising business information and may include but are not limited to signs designating restrooms, hours of operation, acceptable credit cards, property ownership or management, and phone booths. Incidental signs shall not be readily visible or legible from a public right-of-way. Incidental signs shall not individually exceed two (2) square feet or, cumulatively, one-half of one (1/2 to 1) percent of the building facade; provided, said size limitation shall not apply to signs providing directions, warnings or information when, established, authorized, or maintained by a public agency.
Z. INDIRECTLY ILLUMINATED SIGN. An illuminated nonflashing sign whose illumination is derived entirely from an external artificial source and which is arranged so that no direct rays of light are projected from such source into residences or the street.
AA. Integrated Sign Plan. A special sign entitlement available to Major Commercial or Employment Centers as defined in this Code. An integrated sign plan is subject to review and approval by the Hearing Examiner using the procedures provided for conditional use permits.
BB. MARQUEE SIGN. Any sign painted on, attached to, or supported by a marquee.
CC. MOBILE READERBOARD SIGN. Any sign which is manifestly designed to be transported, including by trailer or on its own wheels, even though the wheels of such sign may be removed and the remaining chassis or support constructed without wheels is converted to an “A” or “T” frame sign, or attached temporarily or permanently to the ground since this characteristic is based on the design of such a sign. It is characteristic of such a mobile readerboard that the space provided for advertising matter consists of a changeable copy sign.
DD. MONUMENT SIGN. A freestanding sign which is affixed in or upon the ground with no air space between the ground and the sign face.
EE. NONCONFORMING SIGN. Any sign legally established prior to the effective date of this title or subsequent amendments thereto, which is not in full compliance with the regulations of this title.
FF. NON-PROFIT COMMUNITY ORGANIZATION. Any organization that qualifies as a non-profit entity under the provisions of section 501(c)(3) of the IRS federal tax code, including but limited to children’s clubs, religious institutions, fraternal organizations, public schools, and governmental organizations.
GG. OFF-PREMISE SIGN. A sign that contains a message or directs attention to a business, profession, product, activity, or service that is not directly related to a use or activity conducted or offered on the premise or at the location where the sign is located, excluding road directional signs.
HH. ON-PREMISE SIGN. A sign identifying a business, product, service or activity conducted or sold on the same premises as that on which the sign is located.
II. PAINTED SIGN. A sign which is painted on any office, wall, window, fence or structure of any kind.
JJ. POLE SIGN. A freestanding sign where the sign face is elevated above the site grade by structural supports, and includes the supports.
KK. POLITICAL SIGN. A sign advertising a candidate for political office or a measure scheduled for election.
LL. PORTABLE SIGN. A sign that is not permanently affixed to the ground or to a building or structure and which may be easily moved.
MM. PROJECTING SIGN. A two-faced wall sign affixed to the exterior wall of a building or structure with the exposed faces perpendicular to the plane of such wall.
NN. READERBOARD OR CHANGEABLE MESSAGE SIGN. A sign or part of a sign on which the letters are readily replaceable such that the copy can be changed.
OO. ROOF SIGN. A sign or sign structure erected upon, against or directly above a roof or above the vertical parapet wall of a building, including a sign affixed to any structure erected upon a roof.
PP. SIGN. Any structure, device, letter, figure, character, poster, picture, logo, trademark or reading matter which is used or designed to announce, declare, demonstrate, display or otherwise identify or advertise, or attract the attention of the public. Including, but not limited to every device, frame, letter, figure, character, mark, plane, point, design, picture, logo, stroke, stripe, trademark, plane, point, design, picture, logo, stroke, stripe, trademark, or reading matter, which is used or intended to be used to attract attention or convey information when the same is placed visible from a public right-of-way or public property; and shall include all parts, portions, units, and materials composing the same, together with the frame, background, and supports or anchoring thereof.
QQ. SIGN AREA. The total area of all sign faces expressed in square feet.
RR. SIGN FACE. The total area of one sign face expressed in square feet. Area is measured from the outside perimeter, including backup, molding, framing, but excluding structural supports, architectural details, decorative scrollwork, etc. The area of a group of individual mounted letters or figures shall be the area of the smallest single geometric form necessary to enclose the entire group of letters or figures.
SS. SIGN HEIGHT. The distance from ground level to the highest point on the sign structure.
TT. SPECIAL USE SIGN. A sign intended to be displayed for a limited time and which is not permanently mounted, that advertises political issues or candidates, private sales, residential sale/rent/lease, commercial and industrial sale/rent/lease, or is a short term contractor’s sign.
UU. STRING PENNANT. A series of shapes, signs, streamers, or other similar devices made of fabric, plastic or other material which are connected together or attached to a cord to create a rope-like device that is typically displayed between poles or buildings. String pennants may contain advertising or be decorative. String pennants can vary in size, color, or design.
VV. SUBDIVISION SIGN. A sign erected and maintained within the boundaries of a recorded subdivision and indicating the name of the subdivision, the name of the contractor or subdivider and the name of the owner or agent, and giving information regarding directions, price or terms.
WW. TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign intended to be displayed for a limited time and which is not permanently mounted, that advertises non-profit community or civic events, special events, temporary uses, a subdivision, or is an interim sign for a business.
XX. VEHICLE SIGN. The use of a vehicle as a sign, any sign which is attached to or placed on a parked vehicle or trailer which is principally used for advertising purposes rather than transportation, any advertising or advertising space for which the owners or operator of the vehicle receives any compensation, except public transit buses bearing rental advertising.
YY. VISUALLY PROJECTED SIGN. A sign which is projected, by whatever means, onto a surface or into the air.
ZZ. WALL SIGN. Any sign painted on or attached directly to or erected against and supported by a building wall, or facade, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the portion of the structure to which it is attached. [Ord. 534 § 13, 2011; Ord. 277 § 1, 2002; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.700 Housing Incentives Programs.

18A.50.710 Purpose - Housing Incentives Program.
The City is responsible for establishing regulations that will result in housing opportunities for all of its residents, no matter what their economic means. To that end, the City’s comprehensive plan contains policies designed to encourage affordable housing. Not only are a number of regulatory tools available to help stimulate the development of desired housing in the City, but some of these tools benefit the City by dispersing low-income units throughout the City so as to avoid perpetuating existing concentrations of poverty. The provisions contained herein would allow a project proponent to receive more return from a project through additional density, relaxed development standards, and discounted review fees in return for helping meet public goals. [Ord. 284 § 2, 2002; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.720 Applicability - Housing Incentives Program.
This section applies, at the developer’s option, to land-use applications for rental housing in all zones, except the construction of a single-family dwelling on one (1) lot that can accommodate only one (1) dwelling based upon the underlying zoning designation, excluding accessory dwelling units allowed under LMC 18A.20.900 and the underlying zoning. This section shall not apply to congregate care and group living facilities. [Ord. 284 § 3, 2002; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.730 General Provisions - Housing Incentives Program.
All housing developed under these standards shall meet all applicable federal, local, and state guidelines and requirements for limiting occupancy to identified qualified groups. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.740 Inclusionary Density Bonuses - Housing Incentives Program.
A. Rate and calculation. In return for the inclusion of a number of “qualified,” as defined herein, on-site units dedicated to serving and reserved for occupancy by very-low- and/or extremely-low income, as defined herein, persons, families, or groups, one (1) additional, on-site market-rate unit is permitted as a bonus for each qualified very-low-income unit provided, and 1.5 additional, on-site market rate units are permitted as a bonus for each qualified extremely-low-income unit provided, up to a maximum percentage above the maximum density permitted in the underlying zoning district as shown below.
+-------------------------+-----------+
|     Zoning District     | Maximum % |
+-------------------------+-----------+
| Additional Density      |           |
+-------------------------+-----------+
| R1, R2, R3, R4          | 10        |
+-------------------------+-----------+
| MR1, MR2; ARC; NC1, NC2 | 15        |
+-------------------------+-----------+
| MF1, MF2, MF3           | 20        |
+-------------------------+-----------+
| CBD, TOC                | 25        |
+-------------------------+-----------+
B. Duration. Prior to the final approval of any land-use application for which density bonuses are being sought, the owner of the affected parcels shall deliver to the City a duly executed covenant running with the land, in a form approved by the City Attorney, requiring that the qualified dwellings created pursuant to this section shall remain as such for a period of at least twenty (20) years from the commencement date. The covenant shall form an enduring contractual agreement between the owner/applicant and the City. The owner/applicant shall be responsible for the cost of preparing and recording the covenant, and the owner/applicant or subsequent owner(s) or operator(s) shall be responsible for administering the covenant. The commencement date shall be the date that the first lease agreement with a qualified renter becomes effective.
C. Siting of Units. The qualified units constructed under these provisions shall be integrated and dispersed within the development for which the density bonus is granted. The physical segregation of qualified housing units from unqualified market-rate housing units, or the congregation of qualified housing units into a single physical portion of the development, is prohibited.
D. Size of Units. The size of the qualified units constructed under the provisions of this chapter shall be proportionate to the size of the units contained in the entire project, i.e., if fifty (50) percent of the units in the project are one-bedroom units and fifty (50) percent are two-bedroom units, then the qualified units shall be divided equally between one- and two-bedroom units.
E. Appearance of Units. Qualified units shall possess the same style and architectural character and shall utilize the same building materials as market-rate units.
F. Completion. If a project is to be phased, the proportion of qualified units to be completed with each phase shall be determined as part of the phasing plan approved by the Community Development Director. [Ord. 284 § 4, 2002; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.750 Development Standard Modifications.
In order to accommodate bonus housing units awarded under this program, the development standards set forth separately in this code may be modified as follows for properties containing qualified housing units:
A. Lot Coverage. Where it does not conflict with surface water management requirements, the maximum percent of lot coverage may be increased by up to five (5) percent of the total square footage over the maximum lot coverage permitted by the underlying zoning district.
B. Parking Requirements. For multifamily developments containing qualified housing, the percentage of compact parking stalls may be increased up to fifty (50) percent of the total required parking. In addition, for multifamily developments containing qualified housing dedicated to extremely-low-income, as defined herein, persons, families, or groups, the number of required parking stalls serving such units shall be reduced by fifty (50) percent.
C. In circumstances where housing serving qualified populations is located within one quarter (1/4) mile of transit routes and can be shown to generate significantly lower-than-average parking demand, parking requirements may be further reduced at the Community Development Director’s discretion. The applicant shall be responsible for preparing any additional studies or evaluation required to provide evidence of demand.
D. Building Height. The maximum building height may be increased by up to twelve (12) feet for those portions of the building(s) at least twenty (20) feet from any property line. [Ord. 284 § 5, 2002; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.760 Fee Reduction - Housing Incentives Program.
In order to further stimulate the provision of qualified units under this program, review fees for land-use applications and building permits for properties containing housing units dedicated to serving very-low-income and/or extremely-low-income, as defined herein, persons, families, and groups shall be reduced by the percentage shown below at the time of application. Discounts shall be applicable to the entire scope of the application, including both standard and qualified units, and shall correspond with the percentage of dedicated qualified units in the overall project. For properties containing both levels of qualified units, the highest discount shall apply. For projects dedicating in excess of 50 percent of units to qualified housing, a standard 75 percent discount shall apply. Any available refunds for applications withdrawn in progress shall also be discounted correspondingly.
+----------------------+------------------------------+----------------------------+
| % of Qualified Units | Discount for Very Low Income | Discount for Extremely Low |
|                      |                              |           Income           |
+----------------------+------------------------------+----------------------------+
| 0 – 10 percent       | 10 %                         | 15%                        |
+----------------------+------------------------------+----------------------------+
| 11 – 20 percent      | 20 %                         | 25%                        |
+----------------------+------------------------------+----------------------------+
| 21 – 30 percent      | 30 %                         | 35%                        |
+----------------------+------------------------------+----------------------------+
| 31 – 40 percent      | 40 %                         | 45%                        |
+----------------------+------------------------------+----------------------------+
| 41 – 50 percent      | 50 %                         | 55%                        |
+----------------------+------------------------------+----------------------------+
[Ord. 284 § 6, 2002; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.770 Review Process - Housing Incentives Program.
A preapplication conference will be required for any land-use application that includes a proposal for density bonus under this program. Density bonus proposals shall be reviewed and approved concurrently with the primary land-use application and shall follow the established procedures for review and appeal, if necessary, of the permit type. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.780 Monitoring - Housing Incentives Program.
The Community Development Department shall maintain a list of all qualified units created under this program. On a yearly basis, the property owner shall provide the City with a signed affidavit of compliance with the terms under which any qualified units have been dedicated. In conjunction with comprehensive plan review and amendment processes, the level and type of unit production and other factors relating to this program shall be evaluated to gauge how effectively these regulations are functioning and to direct necessary adjustments in the program. [Ord. 284 § 7, 2002; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.790 Definitions - Housing Incentives Program.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
A. VERY LOW INCOME. An individual, family, or unrelated persons living together, regardless of age or ability, whose adjusted gross income is fifty (50) percent or less of the median income, adjusted for household size, as determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development for the Tacoma Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area.
B. EXTREMELY LOW INCOME. An individual, family, or unrelated persons living together, regardless of age or ability, whose adjusted gross income is thirty (30) percent or less of the median income, adjusted for household size, as determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development for the Tacoma Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area.
C. QUALIFIED UNIT. Residential housing for rental occupancy which, as long as the same is occupied by a very-low-income or extremely-low-income, as defined herein, household, requires payment of monthly housing costs, including utilities other than telephone, of no more than thirty (30) percent of the resident’s or residents’ income(s). [Ord. 284 § 8, 2002; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.800 Performance Standards.

18A.50.810 Purpose - Performance Standards.
Performance standards deal with the operational aspects of land uses and their impacts on other adjacent uses, the community and the general public. The intent of this section is to provide standards and regulations to minimize and mitigate the potential adverse effects of industrial and commercial development to other properties, development and people. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.820 Applicability - Performance Standards.
While performance standards are primarily concerned with the impact of industrial development upon the environment, performance standards shall apply to all land uses within the City. Within the CZ, AC1 and AC2 zoning districts, which have their own performance standards, the most restrictive standard shall apply. Continued compliance with the performance standards shall be required of all uses, except as otherwise provided for in this title. No land or building in any district shall be used or occupied in any manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable condition. The following elements, if created, may become dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable under the circumstances, and are then referred to as dangerous or objectionable elements:
A. Noise, vibration or glare.
B. Smoke, dust, odor or other form of air pollution.
C. Heat, cold or dampness.
D. Hazardous substances and wastes. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.830 Nonconforming Uses - Performance Standards.
Uses established before the effective date of this title, which are nonconforming as to performance standards shall be given five (5) years from the date of adoption of this title in which to conform therewith. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.840 Location.
The determination of the existence of any dangerous and objectionable elements shall be made at the location of the use creating the dangerous or objectionable elements and at any points where the existence of such elements may be more apparent; provided, however, that the measurement of performance standards for noise, vibration, odors, glare or hazardous substances or wastes shall be taken at the property lines and/or at the buffer zone setback line for any hazardous substance land use facility, in all zoning districts. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.850 Restrictions on Dangerous and Objectional Elements.
A. Noise. The provisions of LMC 8.36, Noise Control, shall apply. In addition, frequent, repetitive or continuous sounds emanating from any use or facility, other than transportation facilities or temporary construction work shall not exceed seventy-five (75) decibels at the property lines. If the Community Development Director determines it to be necessary or has reason to believe that noise levels are being exceeded, the owner and/or operator of a use or facility shall be required to provide noise reading data for noise levels at all property lines.
B. Vibration. No vibration shall be permitted which is discernible without instruments at the points of measurement specified in this section.
C. Odors. No emission shall be permitted of odorous gases or other odorous matter released from any operation or activity in such quantities so as to exceed the odor threshold beyond lot lines. The odor threshold shall be defined as the concentration in the air of a gas or vapor which will just evoke a response in the human olfactory system.
D. Glare. No direct or reflected light or glare, whether from floodlights or from high temperature processes such as combustion or welding or otherwise, so as to be visible at the property lines or skyward beyond the building height of the zone, shall be permitted. This restriction shall not apply to signs or lighting of buildings for security protection purposes as permitted by this title.
E. Radioactivity or Electrical Disturbance. The regulations of the federal occupational safety and health standards shall apply for all radioactivity and electrical disturbance unless local codes and ordinances supersede this federal regulation.
F. Fire and Explosion Hazards. The relevant provisions of federal, state and local laws and regulations shall apply.
G. Smoke, Fly Ash, Dust, Fumes, Vapors, Gases and Other Forms of Air Pollution. The standards of the Puget Sound Air Pollution Control Agency, Regulation I, or those regulations as may be subsequently amended, shall apply.
H. Liquid or Solid Wastes. No discharge of any materials of such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply, interfere with bacterial processes in sewage treatment or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements shall be permitted at any point into any public sewer, private sewage disposal system or stream, or into the ground, except in accord with standards approved by the State Department of Ecology or other appropriate state agencies.
I. Hazardous substances or wastes. No release of hazardous substances or wastes which could contaminate any water supply, interfere with bacterial processes in sewage treatment or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements shall be permitted at any point into any public sewer, private sewage disposal system, watercourse or water body, or the ground, except in accordance with standards approved by the State Department of Ecology or other appropriate state or federal agency. The relevant provisions of federal, state and local laws and regulations shall apply, and compliance shall be certified by applicants for permits under this title. The following site development standards shall apply:
    1. Hazardous waste facilities shall meet the location standards for siting dangerous waste management facilities adopted pursuant to Chapter 70.105 RCW.
    2. Hazardous substance land use facilities shall be located at least:
        a. Two hundred (200) feet from unstable soils or slopes which are delineated in a geo-technical report or on a critical areas hazard area map.
        b. Two hundred (200) feet from the ordinary high-water mark of major or minor streams or lakes which are delineated in a wetland report or on a critical areas wetlands area map, and from shorelines of statewide significance or shorelines of the state.
        c. One-quarter (1/4) mile from public parks, public recreation areas or natural preserves, or state or federal wildlife refuges; provided, that for purposes of this section public recreation areas does not include public trails.
        d. Fifty (50) feet from any property line to create and serve as an onsite hazardous substance land use facility buffer zone. The buffer zone setback line for any hazardous substance land use facility shall apply to all such facilities in all zoning districts.
        e. Five hundred (500) feet and one hundred (100) feet from a residential zone and a residential unit respectively.
        f. Five hundred (500) feet from a public assembly use or location.
    3. Hazardous substance land use facilities shall not be located in the one hundred (100) year floodplain.
    4. Hazardous substance land use facilities which are not entirely enclosed within a building shall provide a Type V solid screen landscaping buffer in the hazardous substance facility buffer zone as required by LMC 18A.50.400, Landscaping.
    5. Aboveground hazardous substance land use facilities shall be constructed with containment controls which will prevent the escape of hazardous substances or wastes in the event of an accidental release from the facility, and shall meet federal, state and local design and construction requirements.
    6. Underground hazardous substance land use facilities shall meet federal, state and local design and construction requirements.
    7. Hazardous substance land uses shall comply with the 1997 Uniform Fire Code and as revised thereafter.
    8. Hazardous substance land uses shall provide a Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement for review and approval by the Fire Marshal. A Hazardous Materials Management Plan shall also be provided, if required by the Fire Marshal.
    9. Hazardous substance land uses should use traffic routes which do not go through residential zones.
    10. Without limiting the application of the Uniform Fire Code, above and below ground diesel fuel storage tanks exclusively intended for use on stationary, on-site, oil burning equipment, such as electrical power generator systems, in all nonresidential zoning districts shall be exempt from the hazardous substance regulations of this section, and above and below ground diesel fuel tanks of up to six thousand (6,000) gallons intended exclusively for use by essential governmental facilities for stationary, on-site, oil burning equipment, such as electrical power generator systems, in residential zones shall be exempt from the hazardous substance regulations of this section. However, all above-ground diesel fuel tanks over five hundred (500) gallons exempted by this subsection are required to have a five (5) foot minimum landscape buffer surrounding the tank to buffer the visual impacts of these tanks. Moreover, the Community Development Director shall have the discretion to increase or modify this landscape buffer requirement depending upon the specific circumstances posed by any particular tank location.
    11. Residential uses are limited to a two hundred (200) gallon tank limit for household fuels that are classified as hazardous substances.
    12. The hazardous substance zoning code regulations, except as specifically exempted in this section, shall apply to all hazardous substances as defined in this title.
    13. In case of conflict between any of these site development standards and the development standards of specific zoning districts or other requirements of this title, the more restrictive requirement shall apply. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.50.860 Performance Standards Procedures.
A. The Community Development Director shall have the power to authorize the following procedures prior to the issuance of a zoning certification for commercial and/or industrial uses, as deemed necessary:
    1. Application for Zoning Permits. An application for a zoning certification for a use subject to performance standard procedures shall be accompanied by a site plan and detailed information describing the proposed machinery, processes and products, and specifications for the mechanisms and techniques to be used in restricting the creation or emission of dangerous and objectionable elements as set forth in LMC 18A.50.820. The applicant shall also provide such supporting scientific, technical or other data and/or information as is necessary to establish that the use will comply with the performance standards set forth in LMC 18A.50.850.
    2. Review by Expert Consultants. The Community Development Director, at his or her discretion, may refer the application for review and evaluation to one (1) or more expert consultants qualified to advise as to whether a proposed use will conform to the applicable performance standards specified in LMC 18A.50.850 in a manner set forth in the application. The applicant shall be responsible for the cost of the expert review required by the City. A copy of such report shall be filed with the planning department for inspection by interested persons.
    3. Review by Community Development Director. The Community Development Director shall determine whether the proposed use will conform to the applicable performance standards, and on such basis shall authorize or refuse to authorize issuance of a zoning certification, or require a modification of the proposed equipment or operation. Any zoning certification so authorized and issued shall be conditioned upon, among other things, the applicant’s completed buildings and installations conforming in operation to the applicable performance standards.
B. Enforcement.
    1. The Community Development Department shall investigate any purported violation of performance standards. For the purpose of investigating such violations, the Community Development Director may employ qualified experts, the cost for which shall be reimbursed by the alleged violator if found to be in violation.
    2. After investigation, on due notice to the alleged violator, the Community Development Director may order the violations corrected within a prescribed period of time, and if such violations are not so corrected may order the violator to cease and desist from carrying on that portion of the operation or process causing a violation.
    3. Violations. If violation has occurred, the Community Development Director may employ any or all of those enforcement measures established in this title necessary to ensure future compliance with this section. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

Chapter 18A.70 USE-SPECIFIC STANDARDS

Sections:
18A.70.100   Daycare Facilities.
18A.70.110   Purpose - Daycare Facilities.
18A.70.120   Applicability - Daycare Facilities.
18A.70.130   Development Standards - Daycare Facilities.
18A.70.200   Home Occupations.
18A.70.210   Purpose - Home Occupations.
18A.70.220   Applicability - Home Occupations.
18A.70.230   Exemptions - Home Occupations.
18A.70.240   Prohibited Activities - Home Occupations.
18A.70.250   Performance Standards - Home Occupations.
18A.70.260   Criteria for Approval and Conditions - Home Occupations.
18A.70.270   Permit Revocation and Expiration - Home Occupations.
18A.70.280   Nonconforming Uses - Home Occupations.
18A.70.300   Accessory Living Quarters.
18A.70.310   Accessory Dwelling Units.
18A.70.311   Purpose - Accessory Dwelling Units.
18A.70.312   Applicability - Accessory Dwelling Units.
18A.70.313   Standards - Accessory Dwelling Units.
18A.70.350   Accessory Caretaker's Dwelling.
18A.70.351   Purpose - Accessory Caretaker's Dwelling.
18A.70.352   Standards - Accessory Caretaker's Dwelling.
18A.70.400   Manufactured Home Parks.
18A.70.410   Purpose - Manufactured Home Parks.
18A.70.420   Applicability - Manufactured Home Parks.
18A.70.430   Permitted Uses Within a Manufactured Home Parks.
18A.70.440   Development Standards - Manufactured Home Parks.
18A.70.450   Operation and Maintenance - Manufactured Home Parks.
18A.70.460   Nonconforming Parks - Manufactured Home Parks.
18A.70.500   Camping and Recreational Vehicle Parks.
18A.70.510   Purpose - Camping and Recreational Vehicle Parks.
18A.70.520   Duration of Occupancy - Camping and Recreational Vehicle Parks.
18A.70.530   Development Standards - Camping and Recreational Vehicle Parks.
18A.70.600   Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
18A.70.610   Purpose - Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
18A.70.615   Applicability - Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
18A.70.620   Exemptions - Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
18A.70.625   Priority of Locations - Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
18A.70.630   General Siting and Design Requirements.
18A.70.635   Siting and Design Requirements for Structure-Mounted WTF's.
18A.70.640   Tower Siting and Design Requirements.
18A.70.645   Collocation - Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
18A.70.650   Permits Required - Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
18A.70.655   Administratively Approved WTFs.
18A.70.660   Conditional Use Permit - Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
18A.70.665   Factors for Granting Conditional Use Permits for Towers.
18A.70.670   Siting and Permit Requirements for WTF Use on Public Property.
18A.70.675   Landscaping and Screening - WTFs.
18A.70.680   Nonconforming Uses - Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
18A.70.685   Non-use or Abandonment - WTFs.
18A.70.690   Expert Review - Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
18A.70.695   Controlling Provisions.
18A.70.700   Cottage Housing.
18A.70.710   Purpose and Intent - Cottage Housing.
18A.70.720   Applicability- Cottage Housing.
18A.70.730   General Provisions - Cottage Housing.
18A.70.740   Development Standards - Cottage Housing.
18A.70.750   Open Space - Cottage Housing.
18A.70.760   Building Design Standards - Cottage Housing.
18A.70.770   Parking - Cottage Housing.
18A.70.780   Common Area Maintenance - Cottage Housing.
18A.70.790   Cottage Housing - Low Impact Development Standards.
18A.70.795   Modifications - Cottage Housing.
18A.70.900   Bed and Breakfast Facilities.
18A.70.910   Purpose - Bed and Breakfast Facilities.
18A.70.920   Applicability - Bed and Breakfast Facilities.
18A.70.930   Requirements for Bed and Breakfasts.
18A.70.1000  Motor Vehicle Sales and Rental.
18A.70.1010  Purpose – Motor Vehicle Sales and Rental.
18A.70.1020  Applicability – Motor Vehicle Sales and Rental.
18A.70.1030  Development Standards – Motor Vehicle Sales and Rental.

18A.70.100 Daycare Facilities.

18A.70.110 Purpose - Daycare Facilities.
Affordable, good quality, licensed day care within Lakewood is a needed service that is critical to the well being of parents, children, elders, and disabled persons in the community. It is the purpose of this section to facilitate the siting of licensed facilities in the City in a manner that both simplifies the review and approval process and ensures that the facilities are compatible with the surrounding land uses. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.120 Applicability - Daycare Facilities.
This section shall apply to family day care homes and day care centers, as defined in LMC 18A.20.400(B), Daycare Facilities, operating within the City of Lakewood. It shall not apply to foster care, group homes, and other residential programs providing round-the-clock care; nor shall it apply to care services of a casual, non-recurring nature or provided in the home of the person being cared for (i.e., babysitting) or cooperative, reciprocal care by a group of individuals in their respective homes (i.e., childcare co-operative). [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.130 Development Standards - Daycare Facilities.
The Community Development Director or Hearing Examiner, as appropriate, shall approve applications for family day care homes and day care centers subject to the following general requirements:
A. Appropriate Washington State licensure and all applicable state and local licensure and land-use permits shall be obtained prior to operation and shall be maintained.
B. The facility shall comply with all building, fire safety, health code, and business licensing requirements.
C. A safe passenger loading area shall be provided. For home-based daycare facilities, the passenger loading area shall consist of a five (5) foot wide by eighteen (18) foot long drop-off area adjacent to each required parking stall. For all other daycare facilities, there shall be a clearly marked, off-street area for loading and unloading clients. The minimum dimensions of the passenger loading area shall be determined as part of the design review and zoning certification process. Adequate vehicle turnaround shall be provided on site for parking and loading so as to preclude the necessity of backing out onto the street.
D. Signage, if any, shall conform to the requirements of LMC 18A.50.600, Signs.
E. Parking shall conform to the requirements of LMC 18A.50.500, Parking, with the exception of loading area, which shall instead be subject to the provisions of subsection “C” above.
F. No structural or decorative alteration shall be made to the dwelling, which will alter the single-family character of an existing or proposed residential structure, or which is incompatible with surrounding residences.
G. In addition to the general requirements above, Daycare Facilities, Level 1 are subject to the following requirements:
    1. Outdoor recreation areas shall be enclosed by an at least six (6) foot high fence.
    2. Outdoor play equipment for child day cares shall not be located in any required front or side yard setback area.
H. In addition to the general requirements above, Daycare Facilities, Level 2 are subject to the following requirements:
    1. The day care center shall not be located within three hundred (300) feet of another day care facility which is not located in the residence of the care provider.
    2. Outdoor recreation areas shall be enclosed by a six (6) foot high fence.
    3. Outdoor play equipment for child day cares shall not be located in any required front or side yard setback area.
    4. The permit may be conditioned in order to reduce potential conflicts between the day care center and surrounding neighborhood, including, but not limited to, noise attenuation, special parking needs, and hours of operation. [Ord. 483 § 29, 2008; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.200 Home Occupations.

18A.70.210 Purpose - Home Occupations.
The purpose of this section is to provide standards which allow residents of single-family or multifamily dwellings to operate businesses or conduct commercial activity from their principal residence or from a permitted accessory structure while achieving the goals of retaining the residential character of the dwelling and the neighborhood, maintaining property values, and preserving environmental quality. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.220 Applicability - Home Occupations.
Limited home occupations are permitted as an accessory use to a Single-Family Detached Dwelling, Single-Family Attached Dwelling, or Multifamily Attached Dwelling use type, with approval of a limited home occupation permit.
Home occupations are permitted as an accessory use only to a Single-Family Detached Dwelling use type, with approval of a Process II home occupation permit. [Ord. 500 § 13, 2009; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.230 Exemptions - Home Occupations.
The following uses are exempt from the regulations of this section.
A. Daycare Facilities, Level 1, which are instead subject to LMC 18A.70.100.
B. Lodging, Level 1.
C. Garage sales; yard sales; bake sales; temporary home bazaars for hand-crafted items; parties for the display of clothing, gifts and household products;, and other similar uses shall not be considered home occupations subject to regulation pursuant to this section; provided, that any such use shall not be in existence for more than twenty (20) days in any one (1) calendar year and is not in violation of any other section of the title or other City ordinances; and provided further, that any such garage sales and yard sales involve only the sale of household goods, none of which were purchased for the purpose of resale.
D. On-line endeavors that do not generate any outward appearance, including but not limited to deliveries, of commercial use at the site.
E. For-profit production of produce or other food products grown on the premises. This may include temporary or seasonal sale of produce or other food products grown on the premises.
F. Hobbies which do not result in payment to those engaged in such activity. [Ord. 483 § 30, 2008; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.240 Prohibited Activities - Home Occupations.
A. No person shall carry on a home occupation or a limited home occupation, or permit such use to occur on property which that person owns, occupies or is in lawful control of, contrary to the provisions of this section.
B. The following activities are prohibited as home occupations:
    1. Motor vehicle, commercial truck and heavy equipment repair.
    2. Motor vehicle, commercial truck and heavy equipment body work.
    3. Motor vehicle, commercial truck and heavy equipment painting.
    4. Motor vehicle, commercial truck and heavy equipment wash and/or detailing services.
    5. Parking and storage of motor vehicles, commercial trucks or heavy equipment.
    6. Storage of used parts of vehicles and/or used machinery in inoperable condition.
    7. Storage of building materials such as lumber, plasterboard, pipe, paint or other construction materials unless being used to construct a specific structure on the premises, pursuant to a current City building permit.
    8. Escort services. [Ord. 307 § 26, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.250 Performance Standards - Home Occupations.
The following performance standards prescribe the parameters under which home occupation activities may be conducted when incidental to a residential use. Activities that exceed these performance standards are subject to Chapter 18A.20, Use Types and Levels, to determine the appropriate Civic, Commercial, or Industrial use category that applies to the activity.
A. General Standards. The following standards apply to all home occupation activities within the City of Lakewood:
    1. A home occupation permit shall be obtained for each home occupation and for each property on which a home occupation is undertaken.
    2. A City business license shall be obtained and maintained for each home occupation, which clearly indicates each property on which a home occupation is undertaken.
    3. The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the property for residential purposes and shall not change the residential character of the dwelling or neighborhood.
    4. All the activities of the home occupation(s) shall be conducted indoors, except for those related to growing or storing of plants used by the home occupation(s).
    5. No modification shall be made to the dwelling to establish or operate the home occupation that would cause it to resemble anything other than a dwelling.
    6. There shall be no more than three (3) deliveries per week to the residence by suppliers, including postal and parcel delivery services but excluding regular mail service.
    7. Traffic generated by a home occupation shall not exceed eight (8) vehicular trips per day associated with the home occupation, including deliveries and client-related trips.
    8. Sales, either retail or wholesale, shall be limited to mail order and telephone sales with off-site delivery.
    9. Services to patrons shall be arranged by appointment or provided off-site.
    10. Utility demand for sewer, water, electricity, garbage or natural gas shall not exceed normal residential levels.
    11. Equipment or operation processes shall not be utilized which would produce or cause the emission of gasses, dust, odors, vibration, electrical interference, smoke, noise, or light in a manner likely to cause offense or irritation to neighboring residents.
    12. The home occupation(s) shall not use electrical or mechanical equipment that results in:
        a. A change to the fire rating of the structure(s) used for the home occupation(s);
        b. Visual or audible interference in radio or television receivers, or electronic equipment located off-premises; or
        c. Fluctuations in line voltage at or beyond the property line.
    13. There shall be no storage, distribution and/or production of toxic or flammable materials, nor spray painting or spray finishing operations that involve toxic or flammable materials which, in the judgement of the Fire Marshal pose a dangerous risk to the residence, its occupants, and/or surrounding properties. An applicant shall make available the Material Safety Data Sheets, listing all potentially toxic and/or flammable materials associated with the home occupation, to the Fire Marshal if requested for review.
    14. Bed and Breakfast facilities shall be classified as a “Lodging- Level 1” commercial use type, and are subject to the requirements of LMC 18A.70.900.
    15. Where home business use areas exceed 500 sq. ft., such areas may be subject to the area separation requirements of Section 302.4 of the Uniform Building Code, or any applicable succeeding building code.
B. Standards for Limited Home Occupations. One (1) or more home occupations may be conducted in a residential dwelling as an accessory use or uses, excepted as prohibited in LMC 18A.70.240, Prohibited Activities, provided that the limited home occupation(s) shall:
    1. Not have any employee, volunteer or other person engaged in the commercial activity on the site, other than residents of the dwelling.
    2. Be operated in its entirety within the principal dwelling or accessory structure.
    3. Not have a separate entrance from outside the building.
    4. Not use any mechanical equipment except that which is used normally for purely domestic or household purposes.
    5. Not utilize more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor area of the living space of the dwelling. Areas within attached garages, unfinished basements and storage buildings shall not be considered living space for purposes of calculating allowable home occupation area but may be used for storage of goods or other activities associated with the limited home occupation.
    6. Not show any evidence that a business is being conducted from the premises.
    7. Not have any exterior signage that identifies the property as a business location.
    8. Not allow clients or customers to visit the premises for any reason.
    9. Not have any exterior storage of materials.
C. Standards for Home Occupations. One (1) or more home occupations may be conducted in a Single-Family Residential Detached Dwelling use type as an accessory use or uses, excepted as prohibited in LMC 18A.70.240, Prohibited Activities, provided that the home occupation(s) shall:
    1. Be operated by a resident of the property on which the business is located.
    2. Not have more than one (1) full or part-time employee, other than residents of the dwelling, on the site at any one time.
    3. Be operated within the dwelling or other accessory buildings normally associated with uses permitted in the zone in which the property is located.
    4. Not interfere with existing uses on nearby land or with other uses permitted in the zone in which the property is located.
    5. Have one (1) parking space per employee provided on the same parcel of land, in addition to that parking required for the dwelling.
    6. Not park or store more than one (1) commercial vehicle on site. Parking for said vehicle shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of LMC 18A.50.150, Parking of Commercial Vehicles Accessory to Residential Uses.
    7. Store all materials, parts, tools and other equipment used in the operation of the home occupation entirely within the dwelling or accessory building.
    8. Comply with building, land use and fire code requirements for permits, occupancy, and inspection, including use of hazardous materials or equipment.
    9. Limit manufacturing to the small-scale assembly of already manufactured parts but shall not preclude production of small, individually hand-crafted items, furniture or other wood items as long as the activity meets the other standards of this section.
    10. Prohibit customers or clients on the premises prior to 9 AM and after 7 PM on Mondays through Fridays, and prior to 11 AM and after 5 PM on weekends and state or federal holidays.
    11. Prohibit more than two (2) customers or clients on the premises at any one time.
    12. Limit the home occupation activity to forty (40) percent of the gross floor area of the residence, including garages and unfinished basements, and accessory buildings; or two thousand (2,000) square feet, whichever is less.
    13. Meet the signage requirements of LMC 18A.50, 600, Signs. [Ord. 500 § 14, 2009; Ord. 317 § 12, 2003; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.260 Criteria for Approval and Conditions - Home Occupations.
A. The decision to approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a home occupation permit shall be made by the Community Development Director upon findings of whether or not the purposed home occupation is or will be:
    1. In conformance with the standards contained in this section;
    2. Clearly subordinate to the residential use of the property; and
    3. Undertaken in a manner that is not detrimental or disruptive in terms of appearance or operation to neighboring properties or the community.
B. Conditions Applicable to Approval. 
    1. The Community Development Director may impose conditions upon the approval of a home occupation permit to ensure compatibility with adjacent residential uses and surrounding neighborhoods. These conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
        a. Further limiting the hours, days, place and manner of operation.
        b. Requiring site and building design features which minimize environmental impacts such as noise, vibration, air pollution, glare, odor and dust.
        c. Requiring additional building setbacks, and increased lot area, depth or width.
        d. Further limiting the building area used by the home occupation and restricting the location of the use on the site in relationship to adjoining uses.
        e. Designating the size, number, location and design of vehicle access points.
        f. Requiring street right-of-way to be free at all times of vehicles associated with the home occupation.
        g. Requiring landscaping, buffering and/or screening of the home occupation from adjoining uses and establishing standards for the continued maintenance of these improvements.
        h. Requiring the protection and preservation of existing trees and other vegetation.
        i. Requiring storm drainage improvements, and surfacing of parking and loading areas.
        j. Limiting the extent and type of interior or exterior building remodeling necessary to accommodate the home occupation.
        k. Limiting or setting standards for the location and intensity of outdoor lighting.
        l. Requiring and designating the size, height, location of fences and materials used for their construction. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.270 Permit Revocation and Expiration - Home Occupations.
A. The Community Development Director may revoke a home occupation permit if the conditions of approval have not been complied with and the home occupation is otherwise being conducted in a manner contrary to this title.
B. When a home occupation permit has been revoked due to violation of these standards, a minimum period of one (1) year shall elapse before another application for a home occupation permit by the applicant(s) or member of the family residing on the subject property will be considered.
C. A home occupation permit shall become invalid if the applicant moves his or her residence. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.280 Nonconforming Uses - Home Occupations.
A. An ongoing home occupation may be granted nonconforming status, provided that it was permitted under Pierce County authority prior to Lakewood’s incorporation or under City authority prior to adoption of this code and has been in continuous operation since initial approval.
B. The burden of providing a home occupation’s nonconforming status rests with the property owner or tenant. A home occupation which cannot prove nonconforming status, shall be considered to be in violation of this section and shall cease until all appropriate approvals have been obtained. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.300 Accessory Living Quarters.

18A.70.310 Accessory Dwelling Units.

18A.70.311 Purpose - Accessory Dwelling Units.
Accessory dwelling units (ADUs) are intended to increase the supply of affordable and independent housing for a variety of households, increase home and personal security, provide supplemental earnings for people with limited incomes, and increase residential densities. This should occur by utilizing the existing infrastructure and community resources throughout the City while protecting the existing character of single-family neighborhoods. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.312 Applicability - Accessory Dwelling Units.
Accessory dwelling units shall be permitted as an accessory use, in conjunction with any Single-Family Detached use type, in all zones that allow single family residential dwellings. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.313 Standards - Accessory Dwelling Units.
A. The creation of the ADU shall be subject to the following general requirements:
    1. One (1) ADU shall be allowed as an accessory use in conjunction with any detached single-family structure. Accessory dwelling units shall not be included in the density calculations.
    2. An ADU may be established in a new or existing single-family dwelling by creating the unit within or in addition to the dwelling, or as a detached unit from the principal dwelling.
    3. The ADU, as well as the main dwelling unit, must meet all applicable setbacks, lot coverage, and building height requirements.
    4. The size of an ADU contained within or attached to an existing single-family structure shall be limited by the existing structure’s applicable zoning requirements. An attached ADU incorporated into a single-family house shall be limited to forty (40) percent of the living space of the principal unit, excluding garage area. The size of the living space of a detached ADU, shall be a maximum of one thousand square feet (1,000) or forty (40) percent of the size of the living space of the principal unit, excluding garage area, whichever is smaller.
    5. An ADU shall be designed to maintain the appearance of the principal dwelling as a single-family residence.
        a. The entrance to an attached ADU shall not be directed towards any front yard unless utilizing an existing doorway.
        b. The design of an ADU, including the facade, roof pitch and siding, shall be complementary to the principal dwelling unit, so as not to be obvious from the outside appearance that it is a separate unit from the principal dwelling unit.
        c. A minimum of one (1) off-street parking space shall be required for the ADU, in addition to the off-street parking required for the principal dwelling, pursuant to LMC 18A.50.500, Parking.
    6. Any legally constructed accessory building, existing prior to the effective date of this title, may be converted to an accessory dwelling unit provided the living area created within the structure does not exceed forty (40) percent of the size of the living area of the principal unit, excluding garage area.
    7. Where the residential accessory building is detached from an existing single-family structure, the building height shall be limited to twenty-four (24) feet, except for antennas, which are subject to LMC 18A.70.600 WTF.
    8. An ADU in existence prior to the adoption of this title may be found to be legal on the condition that the property owner applies for an ADU permit and complies with all required standards and provisions. Such property owners have a one (1) year period from the effective date of this title in which to apply for an ADU permit, after which time such property owners can be subject to fines and penalties established in this title.
B. Any owner occupant seeking to establish an ADU shall apply for approval in accordance with established procedures. These procedures shall include:
    1. One (1) of the dwelling units shall be owner occupied as the owner’s principal residence for at least six (6) months a year, and at no time shall the owner-occupied unit be leased or rented.
    2. No building permit or zoning certification for an ADU shall be issued until the owner files a covenant evidencing this use limitation against the property. This covenant, which acknowledges the existence of the ADU and documents the owner’s agreement to all the ADU requirements as provided in this section, shall be recorded in the records of the Pierce County Auditor. Such covenant shall be in a form specified by the Community Development Director, and shall include at a minimum:
        a. The legal description of the property which has been approved for an ADU.
        b. The applicability of the restrictions and limitations contained in this section.
        c. A copy of the floor/site plan approved by the City.
        d. The notarized signature of all property owners.
C. Discontinuation of an ADU. 
    1. An ADU shall be converted to another permitted use or shall be removed if one (1) of the two (2) dwellings is not owner occupied, pursuant to the requirements of this section.
    2. If both the ADU or the principal unit ceases to be owner occupied for more than six (6) months, the ADU permit shall be deemed revoked and use of the unit as an ADU shall cease immediately, and the ADU shall be removed or converted to a permitted use. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.350 Accessory Caretaker's Dwelling.

18A.70.351 Purpose - Accessory Caretaker's Dwelling.
Accessory caretaker’s dwellings (ACDs) are intended to meet the need for an on-site dwelling of an owner or employee to provide for security of the business, allow for extended hours of service or availability of on-site management, and to reduce the need for commute trips. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.352 Standards - Accessory Caretaker's Dwelling.
A. One (1) ACD per commercial or industrial site is permitted within all commercial and industrial zones within the City.
B. An ACD may be established in a new or existing commercial or industrial building by creating the living quarters within or as an addition to the building, or as a detached structure from the principal structure.
C. The ACD, as well as the main structure, must meet all applicable setbacks, lot coverage, and building height requirements.
D. The design and size of an ACD shall conform to all applicable standards in the building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, fire, health, and any other applicable codes.
E. The size of an ACD contained within or attached to a commercial or industrial building shall be limited to one thousand, two hundred (1,200) square feet. The size of a detached ACD shall be limited to no more than one thousand (1,000) square feet.
F. A minimum of one (1) off-street parking space shall be required for the ACD, in addition to off-street parking required for the primary use(s) on-site, pursuant to LMC 18A.50.500, Parking.
G. A building permit and zoning certification must be obtained for all ACDs prior to construction and/or occupancy of the ACD. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.400 Manufactured Home Parks.

18A.70.410 Purpose - Manufactured Home Parks.
Manufactured home parks are intended primarily to accommodate planned manufactured home developments in a desirable residential environment, thereby contributing to the provision of a greater range and choice of affordable housing types within the City. These developments are intended to accommodate individual manufactured homes within a planned-unit manufactured home park on a condominium lot sale basis or a lot rental or lease basis so that the park remains in one (1) ownership to comply with the conditions of development. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.420 Applicability - Manufactured Home Parks.
The development and operation of manufactured home parks and manufactured home subdivisions are allowed as a conditional use in all zones where Single-Family Residential, Level 4 uses are permitted, subject to LMC 18A.10, Discretionary Permits, Conditional Use Permits, and LMC 18A.70.430, Development Standards. [Ord. 483 § 31, 2008; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.430 Permitted Uses Within a Manufactured Home Parks.
No building, structure or land within the boundaries of a manufactured home park shall be used for any purpose except as follows:
A. Manufactured homes for residential use only, together with permitted residential accessory uses.
B. Community recreation facilities, including swimming pools, for residents of the park and guests only.
C. One (1) manufactured home for the use of a caretaker or manager responsible for maintaining or operating the property.
D. Pursuant to RCW 35A.21.312, a recreational vehicle may be used as primary residence within a manufactured home park, subject to the provisions of this section. [Ord. 500 § 15, 2009; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.440 Development Standards - Manufactured Home Parks.
The following development standards apply to all manufactured home parks.
A. Size. New parks shall be a minimum of three (3) acres in size. Spaces within manufactured home parks, regardless of the underlying zoning, shall be a minimum of four thousand (4,000) square feet.
B. Density. The maximum density for a manufactured home park shall be the maximum density of the underlying zone.
C. Dimensions. The minimum space width within manufactured home parks shall be fifty (50) feet; provided that up to fifty (50) percent of the pads within a park may be forty (40) feet wide.
D. Buffers. A manufactured home park shall provide and maintain the minimum landscape requirements for Type II, Streetscape and Type I, Vegetative Buffers along any property line abutting upon a public right-of-way and Type I, Vegetative Buffers along any other property line defining the outside limits of the park, pursuant to LMC 18A.50.400, Landscaping. A six (6) foot high, sight-obscuring fence shall be constructed around the perimeter of the park, except for those park boundaries abutting a public street, where the fence shall be no more than four (4) feet in height. Visible elements of the fence shall be constructed primarily of wood, stone, masonry or similar materials. Fencing and vegetative screening shall be interrupted appropriately to accommodate required pedestrian and bike access.
E. Structures. Structures located within any manufactured home space shall be limited to one (1) storage building, a carport, and an awning or a patio cover. The storage building, patio cover and/or carport may be combined as one (1) structure.
F. Outside Storage. There shall be no outdoor storage of furniture, tools, equipment, building materials or supplies belonging to the occupants or management of the park. All outside storage in a manufactured home park shall be in an enclosed building. One (1) permanent storage building containing a minimum of thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area and a maximum of one hundred (100) square feet shall be provided for each manufactured home space. The building height shall not be less than seven (7) feet nor more than ten (10) feet.
G. Each manufactured home space shall be provided with a patio having a minimum area of one hundred forty (140) square feet. The patio shall have a minimum width of seven (7) feet and a minimum length of twenty (20) feet and shall be constructed adjacent and parallel to each manufactured home pad. Patios shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, or suitable hard surfaced material.
H. Emergency Access. Each manufactured home park shall have at least one (1) main access and one (1) emergency access, or two (2) main access roads, depending upon the size of the park and other factors affecting emergency access needs. If the park abuts only one (1) street frontage, a loop road shall be utilized with access determined by the City Engineer and the Fire Marshal.
I. Street Lighting. Street lighting shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the City Engineer. Pedestrian/bike pathways, recreational facilities, service buildings and common areas shall be adequately illuminated.
J. Underground Utilities. All utilities shall be installed underground unless waived by the City Engineer and the Community Development Director.
K. Signs. Signs identifying the manufactured home park shall conform to LMC 18A.50.600, Signs.
L. Access and Circulation. All manufactured home parks shall front on an improved street. Internal park streets shall be privately owned and maintained and provided in such a pattern as to provide convenient traffic circulation for all vehicles, including fire and other emergency equipment. Park owners or managers shall be responsible for maintenance of internal roads. The vehicular speed limit shall be ten (10) miles per hour and shall be posted to the satisfaction of the Lakewood Police Department. Within manufactured home parks, all streets shall be constructed to City of Lakewood standards for public streets, including width, sidewalks, paving depth and base, curve radii and curbs; except for the width of the rights-of-way required of a public street; streets shall instead be constructed to the following standards:
    1. The width of all private streets shall be not less than thirty-two (32) feet, from curb to curb, with on-street parking allowed on one (1) side of the street only. Signs designating “no parking” and “fire lane” shall be placed on one (1) side of the street and shall be so designated on the final plans. Variations in specific design standards may be granted on a case-by-case basis, depending on field conditions, by the City Engineer and the Community Development Director.
    2. There shall be vertical concrete curb and gutter, constructed to City standard specifications, installed on each side of all private streets.
    3. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width and six (6) inches thick.
    4. Manufactured Home Park streets shall be paved in accordance with the standards established by the City Engineer.
    5. All public streets abutting a manufactured home park shall be improved to City standards.
    6. A bike/pedestrian walkway system, separated from vehicular traffic, shall be provided to link interior roadways with adjacent public streets and which shall give safe, convenient access from the lot spaces to the service buildings and common areas. Access points and design shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer and Community Development Director. Internal walkways, separate from street sidewalks, shall have a minimum width of four (4) feet with a paved surface of concrete, asphalt or the equivalent.
M. Fire Hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be provided as required by the Fire Marshal.
N. Recreational Vehicle Storage. Common storage areas for recreational and sporting vehicles and their trailers may be provided as part of the manufactured home park design at the rate of fifty (50) square feet for each pad in the park. A six (6) foot high, sight-obscuring fence with a lockable gate shall be erected around the perimeter of such storage area. Storage of recreational vehicles shall not be allowed other than in approved storage areas.
O. Recreation Area. One (1) or more recreation areas shall be created in each park at the rate of at least one hundred (100) square feet per lot space. Recreation areas shall be suitably improved and maintained for recreational purposes as necessary for the types of residents for whom the manufactured home park is intended. At least one (1) recreational area shall have a minimum size of four thousand (4,000) square feet and be of a shape that will make it usable for its intended purpose. The recreation area may contain a community clubhouse, swimming pool, tennis courts, or similar activities.
P. Laundry Facilities. Adequate and properly equipped laundry room facilities shall be made available to the residents of the manufactured home park.
Q. Open Space. Ten (10) percent of the gross area of the manufactured home park shall be reserved for open space. This open space is in addition to area used for lots, roads, walkways, or recreation areas. The open space shall be landscaped pursuant to LMC 18A.50.400, Landscaping.
R. Park Office. Every park shall provide an office for a permanent, non-seasonal resident manager who shall staff the park on an ongoing basis. The resident manager shall be available and responsible for the direct management of the manufactured home park.
S. Each manufactured home park shall develop covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs), which establishes a resident association and guidelines for operation and maintenance of park including provisions for enforcement of guidelines.
T. Manufactured Home Site Standards. The following standards shall be satisfied for individual sites or “pads” within manufactured home parks:
    1. One Home Per Site. No more than one (1) manufactured home shall be allowed on a single pad.
    2. Internal Setbacks. 
        a. A manufactured home or attached accessory building shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet to any other manufactured home or attached accessory building, closer than ten (10) feet to the edge of any right-of-way, or closer than five feet (5) to the edge of any other pad.
        b. Manufactured homes shall set back at least fifteen (15) feet from any interior property line abutting residential zoned property or ten (10) feet from any interior property line abutting commercial or industrial zoned property.
        c. Manufactured home accessory structures, when not attached to the manufactured home, shall not be located closer than six (6) feet to any dwelling, closer than ten (10) feet to the edge of any right-of-way, or closer than five (5) feet to the edge of any other pad.
        d. No structures are allowed in landscape or open space areas.
    3. Lot Coverage. A manufactured home and all accessory structures shall not cover more than seventy-five (75) percent of the space area.
    4. Parking. Parking requirements shall be consistent with LMC 18A.50.500, Parking.
    5. Height. Structures within manufactured home parks shall be no more than one (1) story in height.
U. In addition to the conditional use criteria set forth in LMC 18A.10, Discretionary Permits, Conditional Use Permits, the following criteria shall be used in approving or denying manufactured home park applications:
    1. The park design, including site layout, street configuration, landscaping, and community space, are compatible with the surroundings and the community character goals of the comprehensive plan;
    2. The park is consistent with other applicable goals and policies of the comprehensive plan; and
    3. The park makes adequate provision for sanitary sewers, stormwater drainage, water, streets, open space and recreation, and schools.
V. Use of Recreational Vehicles as a Primary Residence. Pursuant to RCW 35A.21.312, recreational vehicles may be used as a primary residence within the context of a manufactured home park, subject to the following:
    1. The recreational vehicle unit shall be connected to full utility hook-ups, including a lawful method of sewage disposal. A recreational vehicle used as a residence must contain at least one functioning internal toilet and at least one functioning internal shower;
    2. If the toilet and/or shower requirements set forth above are not met, then the manufactured housing park must provide permanent toilet and shower facilities.
    3. A building/installation permit shall be required. The applicant shall comply with any adopted requirements of the Building Official for the set-up of a recreational vehicle as a primary residence. [Ord. 500 § 16, 2009; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.450 Operation and Maintenance - Manufactured Home Parks.
A. Manufactured home parks shall be maintained free of any brush, leaves, and weeds in which might communicate fires between manufactured homes and other improvements. No combustible materials shall be stored in, around, or under any manufactured home. Manufactured home parks shall be maintained in a safe, attractive and well maintained fashion. Landscaping which is required as a part of buffers or otherwise required shall be maintained in a healthy and attractive condition.
B. Streets, sidewalks and public ways within manufactured home parks shall be maintained in a safe manner. The responsibility for maintenance of the streets, sidewalks and public ways rests solely with the park owner and resident manager.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the manufactured home park resident manager and the CCRs to ensure that the provisions of this section are observed and maintained within the manufactured home park. Violations of this chapter shall subject the owner of the facility to any penalties provided within this title for such violation. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.460 Nonconforming Parks - Manufactured Home Parks.
A. Nonconforming Manufactured and Mobile Home Parks. Manufactured and mobile home parks which were legally approved prior to the effective date of this title may continue to exist, provided that the density of the park does not increase over the number of dwelling units legally existing on the effective date of this title. Manufactured home sites within legally nonconforming manufactured home parks may continue to be used, provided that the placement of newer manufactured homes do not result in encroachment of the dwelling beyond the lot space boundaries or into the right-of-way and fire code requirements for structure spacing are met.
B. Reconfiguration of Existing Parks. An existing manufactured home park may be reconfigured pursuant to conditional use approval. The Hearing Examiner shall consider the following criteria in addition to the conditional use criteria in LCM 18A.10, Discretionary Permits, Conditional Use Permits, in determining whether to grant the conditional use permit:
    1. The reconfiguration will result in a site layout which better conforms to the land-use and community character goals of the comprehensive plan than the existing layout.
    2. The reconfiguration will substantially improve transportation, appearance, administration, open space and utility service within the park.
C. Expansion of Existing Manufactured and Mobile Home Parks. An existing manufactured or mobile home park may be expanded provided that no net increase in density results. Expansion requests shall be considered under the conditional use process subject to the following criteria, in addition to the conditional use criteria in LMC 18A.10, Discretionary Permits, Conditional Use Permits.
    1. The character and history of the structure and of development in the surrounding area.
    2. The comparative amount and nature of outside storage, loading and parking.
    3. The comparative visual appearance.
    4. The comparative effect on existing vegetation.
    5. The comparative effect on water drainage.
    6. The degree of benefit to the surrounding area.
    7. Other factors which tend to reduce conflicts or compatibility with the character or needs of the area. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.500 Camping and Recreational Vehicle Parks.

18A.70.510 Purpose - Camping and Recreational Vehicle Parks.
The purpose of this section is to provide the regulations for the development and operation of Lodging, Level 2 use types, camping and recreational vehicle (RV) parks, which may also be referred to as RV parks, and to assure that each park provides safe and sanitary accommodations for its users and their RVs while located temporarily in the park. This section also assures that the utility conveniences and facilities provided for tourists are adequate for the period of their stay in the park, and that the park does not permit the use of any of its accommodations for manufactured homes or RVs that are used for permanent occupancy. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.520 Duration of Occupancy - Camping and Recreational Vehicle Parks.
No recreational vehicle or tent shall remain in a RV park for more than thirty (30) days in any ninety (90) day period. No habitable vehicle which is not a recreational vehicle shall be allowed in the park for any period with the exception of one (1) manufactured home for the exclusive use of the park manager and/or caretaker. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.530 Development Standards - Camping and Recreational Vehicle Parks.
The following criteria shall govern the design, development, and operation of a camping and RV park facility.
A. Park Dimensions. 
    1. Size. Minimum total acreage shall not be less than three (3) acres.
    2. Density. The maximum number of RV spaces per gross acre shall not exceed sixteen (16) spaces per gross acre. The maximum number of tent camping spaces shall not exceed four (4) spaces per gross acre. The total number of spaces, including both RV and tent camping spaces, shall not exceed twenty (20) spaces per gross acre.
    3. RV Spaces. 
        a. The minimum area for any RV space shall not be less than two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet.
        b. The minimum dimensions for any RV space shall be forty (40) feet wide and fifty (50) feet in length.
        c. The RV parking pads shall be a minimum twenty (20) feet wide and forty (40) feet in length, paved with asphalt, concrete or similar material, and sloped to allow run-off of stormwater. The remainder of the space, which is not occupied by the RV parking pad, shall be landscaped.
    4. Each tent camping space shall be a minimum twenty-five (25) feet in width and forty (40) feet in length. The minimum dimensions within a tent camping spaces shall include:
        a. A parking area of twelve (12) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in length, paved with asphalt, concrete or similar material, and sloped to allow run-off of stormwater;
        b. A ten (10) by ten (10) foot cooking/eating area with a picnic table and campfire pit;
        c. A ten (10) by fifteen (15) foot tent set up area, which shall accommodate no more than two (2) tents per tent camping space.
B. Internal Setbacks. Within the RV park, the minimum setbacks shall be:
    1. Fifty (50) feet between recreation vehicles and a public street, arterial or highway right-of-way;
    2. Ten (10) feet between recreation vehicles and all property lines;
    3. Twenty (20) feet between recreation vehicles and other like units;
    4. Twenty-five (25) feet between recreation vehicles and public services buildings; and,
    5. Thirty (30) feet between all recreation vehicle sites and/or structures and perennial streams or lakes (high water mark) or other bodies of water.
C. Recreation Areas. Recreation areas and facilities such as playgrounds, swimming pools and community buildings should be provided to the extent necessary to meet the anticipated needs of the clientele the RV park is designed to serve.
    1. A developed recreation area shall be provided which contains a minimum of two hundred (200) square feet per site space.
    2. A separate recreation area for young children shall be provided.
    3. Playground areas shall be protected from public streets, private streets and parking areas by fencing.
    4. Recreation areas shall be centrally located to the spaces they are to serve. At least one (1) recreation area shall have a minimum size of four thousand (4,000) square feet and be of a shape that will make it usable for its intended purpose.
D. Landscaping. 
    1. No more than sixty (60) percent of a RV space may be impervious surface.
    2. No more than thirty (30) percent of a tent camping space may be impervious surface.
    3. No more than fifty (50) percent of the total RV park may be impervious surface.
    4. The remaining forty (40) percent of the RV space and the not less than sixty (60) percent of the camping space shall be landscaped predominately in grass. Other landscaping may be included.
    5. Ten (10) percent of the gross area of the RV park shall be reserved for open space. This open space is in addition to areas used for lots, roads, walkways, play areas and service areas. The open space shall be landscaped pursuant to LMC 18A.50.400, Landscaping.
    6. A site-obscuring landscaping buffer strip shall be required around all sides of the RV park, pursuant to LMC 18A.50.400, Landscaping.
    7. Additional landscaping, in conformance with the standards of LMC 18A.50.400, Landscaping, shall be provided around:
        a. service buildings;
        b. commercial service buildings, such as a convenience market;
        c. recreation areas; and
        d. the perimeter of parking areas for sporting vehicles.
E. Utilities and facilities. 
    1. Each RV space shall include complete utility hookups, including sewer connections constructed to the requirements of the City Engineer.
    2. A potable water source shall be provided in a convenient location to serve every four (4) tent camping spaces.
    3. Tent camping spaces shall be located no further than three hundred fifty (350) feet from restroom facilities.
    4. Restroom, shower, and utensil cleaning facilities shall be provided for all parks.
    5. All facilities and service structures including each RV space shall be provided with underground water and utilities.
    6. Approved public drinking fountains shall be located in playground and service building areas.
F. Lighting. 
    1. Lighting shall be provided for all common walkways, restrooms, recreation areas, service buildings and service areas and roadways.
G. Access and Circulation. 
    1. Roadways with the RV park shall be paved to a minimum width of twenty (20) feet for one-way circulation and thirty-two (32) feet for two-way circulation, with no parking allowed on either side of the roadway.
    2. Access for the RV park shall not be located where it will result in hazardous entrance or exit onto a road or onto a road that has a hazardous intersection with a major arterial.
    3. Ingress and egress shall be provided in such a manner as to allow access through the park tollbooth without causing traffic stoppage or unsafe traffic movement on public roads.
    4. Street grades shall not be in excess of eight (8) percent at any given point.
    5. A pedestrian walkway system shall be provided and maintained which gives safe, convenient access from individual sites to common areas, bathroom facilities, service buildings and natural amenities.
    6. Common walkways shall be located through interior areas and be kept separated from vehicular traffic.
H. Parking. 
    1. The total number of parking spaces in the RV park shall be one (1) space per camping space plus two (2) for the use of the manager(s), plus one (1) per employee. All camping spaces shall provided for one (1) paved parking space within each site.
    2. Additional parking areas for boats, boat trailers, and other recreational vehicles shall be conveniently located for supervision, but these specialized parking areas shall be separated from other parking facilities in the park. One (1) additional sporting vehicle parking space shall be provided for every ten (10) camping spaces. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.600 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.

18A.70.610 Purpose - Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
The purpose of this chapter is to accommodate an increased need for the development of enhanced wireless telecommunications facilities (WTF) capabilities and services while protecting the public health, safety, welfare, and property and aesthetic values, to the extent permitted by the federal Telecommunications Act of l996. This section establishes criteria for the siting of WTFs, which promote collocation on existing and new towers and utility pole extensions in order to minimize the number of towers; manage the location and height of towers and antennae; minimize adverse visual impacts of towers through careful design, siting, landscaping, and other innovative camouflaging and screening techniques; and avoid potential damage or adverse impacts to adjacent properties through sound engineering practices and the proper siting and construction of antenna support structures. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.615 Applicability - Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
Wireless telecommunications facilities may be located upon properties in Lakewood only as provided herein. All proposals for WTFs made in the City, whether for new construction or for modification of existing facilities, shall be subject to these regulations, except those specifically exempted under LMC 18A.70.620, Exemptions.
Wireless telecommunications facilities existing before April 28, 1998, or those with permits issued by the City after April 28, 1998, but prior to the effective date of this title, which do not meet the requirements of this section shall be allowed to continue as they presently exist, but shall be considered nonconforming uses for the purposes of this title. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.620 Exemptions - Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter and shall be permitted in accordance with the requirements of LMC 18A.30, Zoning Districts:
A. Industrial processing equipment and scientific or medical equipment using frequencies regulated by the FCC.
B. Antennae and related equipment no more than three (3) feet in height that are being stored, shipped, or displayed for sale.
C. Amateur radio station operators or receive-only antennae.
D. Home satellite services, including satellite dish antennae less than six and one-half (6 1/2) feet in diameter and direct-to-home satellite services, when used as an accessory use of the property.
E. Public safety WTFs and equipment, including the regional 911 system, radar systems for military and civilian communication and navigation, and wireless radio utilized for temporary emergency communications in the event of a disaster.
F. A mobile transmission facility or other temporary wireless telecommunications facility temporarily placed on a site for a period of thirty (30) days or less, unless an administrative use permit is obtained for an additional period or unless the City has declared an area-wide emergency.
G. Emergency or routine maintenance and repair of an existing WTF and related equipment, excluding structural work or changes in height or dimensions of antennae, towers, or buildings, provided that compliance with the standards herein is maintained.
H. Wireless telecommunications facilities installed on properties that are subject to the Chambers Creek Properties Joint Procedural Use Agreement, which shall instead be regulated to the terms and conditions of the interlocal agreement and design standards adopted thereunder, as administered by the City of University Place pursuant to interlocal agreement. If, at some point, the interlocal agreement is abandoned, such uses on the Lakewood portion of the Chambers Creek Properties shall once again be subject to the requirements set forth herein; provided, that any existing uses which do not meet these standards shall be considered to be and shall be regulated as nonconforming. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.625 Priority of Locations - Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
A. The City’s priorities for the location of new WTFs are listed below in order of preference, with the most preferred site listed first and the least preferred site listed last. The applicant must show that use of preferred site locations are not feasible in order to request a less preferred location. The applicant shall demonstrate, using engineering evidence satisfactory to the City, that all possible preferred locations and other WTF technology options have been exhausted before a less preferred site may be approved.
    1. Mount antennae on utility poles within the right-of-way, public water towers, existing WTF towers or other public and/or non-residential buildings in commercial and industrial zoning districts.
    2. Mount antennae on utility poles within the right-of-way, public water towers, existing WTF towers or other public or non-residential buildings in all zoning districts.
    3. Locate antennae and new towers in the IBP, I1, and I2 zoning districts.
    4. Locate antennae and new towers in the C1 and C2 zoning districts.
    5. Locate antennae and new towers on non-residential property in the CBD, TOC, and PI zoning districts.
    6. Locate antennae and new towers on non-residential property in the NC1 and NC2 zoning districts.
    7. Locate antennae and new towers in the C3 zoning district.
    8. Locate antennae and new towers on non-residential property in the OSR1 and OSR2 zoning districts.
    9. Locate antennae and new towers on non-residential property in the MF1, MF2, MF3, and ARC zoning districts.
    10. Locate antennae and new towers on residential property in the CBD, TOC, PI, NC1, NC2, OSR1, OSR2, and ARC zoning districts.
    11. Locate antennae and new towers on residential property in MF1, MF2, and MF3 zoning districts.
    12. Antennae and new towers shall not be located in single-family residential zoning districts, except as allowed above, unless the applicant demonstrates that all other possible locations, collocations and wireless technologies cannot be modified to function within their grid system. [Ord. 525 § 12, 2010; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.630 General Siting and Design Requirements.
The location and design of WTFs shall consider the impacts, including visual, of the facility on the surrounding neighborhood.
A. Siting. Any applicant who proposes to construct a new WTF or to modify or add to an existing WTF shall demonstrate, by engineering evidence satisfactory to the City, that the proposed facility is located at the least obtrusive and the most appropriate site available to satisfy its function in the applicant’s grid system. Facilities shall be placed in locations where the existing topography, vegetation, buildings, or other structures provide the greatest amount of screening and shall be designed to minimize any significant adverse impact on residential property.
B. Primary or Accessory Use. A WTF may be considered either a primary or an accessory use on a lot or parcel. A different use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of a WTF on that lot.
C. Development. Development and construction of the site shall preserve the existing character of the site as much as possible. Existing vegetation should be preserved. When existing vegetation cannot be preserved, vegetation shall be improved by landscaping. Disturbance of the existing topography of the site shall be minimized.
D. Design. Facilities shall be architecturally compatible with the surrounding buildings and land uses in the zoning district and screened or otherwise integrated, through location and design, to blend in with the existing characteristics of the site.
E. FCC Licensure. The City will only process WTF permit applications upon a satisfactory showing of proof that the applicant is a FCC-licensed telecommunications provider or that the applicant has agreements with a FCC-licensed telecommunications provider for use or lease of the facility.
F. Compliance with Other Laws. Wireless telecommunications facility service providers shall demonstrate compliance with FCC and FAA rules and regulations and all other applicable federal, state, and local laws, rules and regulations, including FAA and U.S. Air Force airspace maximum height criteria. Failure to maintain compliance with applicable standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the City to remove a provider’s facilities at the provider’s expense.
G. Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a WTF complies with district development regulations including, but not limited to, setback requirements, lot-coverage requirements, and other development requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the WTF may be located on leased parcel within that lot.
H. Height. Except as allowed by LMC 18A.70.645, Collocation, or LMC 18A.70.660, Conditional Use Permit, no WTF may exceed one hundred (100) feet in height. Further, the applicant must demonstrate, by engineering evidence satisfactory to the City, that the height requested is the minimum height necessary.
I. Security fencing. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six (6) feet in height, constructed of masonry, solid wood or coated chain link with matching colored slats, designed to blend with the character of the existing neighborhood provided, however, that the Community Development Director or, where applicable, the Hearing Examiner may waive these requirements as appropriate. Access to the WTF shall be through a locked gate, and there shall be a universal key box at any such gates.
J. Landscaping. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the WTF compound pursuant to LMC 18A.70.675(B). Screening.
K. Structure or rooftop mountings. Wireless telecommunications facilities mounted on existing structures or rooftops shall be designed and located so as to minimize visual and aesthetic impacts to the adjoining land uses and structures and shall, to the greatest extent practical, blend into the existing environment.
L. Aesthetics. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall meet the following requirements:
    1. Unless a different color is required by the FCC or FAA, a WTF shall be painted a neutral color generally matching the surroundings or background to minimize its visual obtrusiveness.
    2. At a WTF site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend into the existing natural and constructed environment.
M. View corridors. Due consideration shall be given so that WTFs do not obstruct or significantly diminish views of Mt. Rainier, Puget Sound, the Olympic Mountains or other scenic vistas.
N. Required parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with LMC 18A.50.550, Parking. The amount of parking required to be provided shall be dependent on whether the cell site is fully automated, partially automated, or is not automated.
O. Lighting. If lighting is required for any WTF, then the lighting shall be of a type to cause the least disturbance to the surrounding area and which shall not cause glare skyward or beyond the property line.
P. Measurement. For purposes of measurement, WTF setbacks and separation distances shall be calculated and applied irrespective of jurisdictional boundaries.
Q. Franchises, licenses, and permits. Owners and/or operators of a WTF shall certify that they have obtained all franchises, licenses, or permits required by law for the construction and/or operation of the WTF system in the City and shall file a copy of all required franchises, licenses, and permits with the Community Development Department at the time of application. All applicable franchises, licensees and permits required for operation shall be maintained.
R. Signs. No signs shall be allowed on antennae or towers.
S. Backhaul providers. Backhaul providers shall be identified and shall obtain and maintain all necessary approvals to operate as such, including holding necessary franchises, permits, and certificates. The method of providing backhaul, either wired or wireless, shall be identified.
T. Safety inspections. Each facility operator shall conduct all safety inspections in accordance with the EIA and FCC standards.
U. Equipment structures. Ground-level equipment, buildings, and the tower base shall be screened from public view. All such structures shall be considered primary structures, not accessory structures, for the purposes of development regulations. The standards for the equipment buildings are as follows:
    1. The maximum floor area shall be three hundred (300) square feet, and the maximum height shall be twelve (12) feet, unless the applicant demonstrates that the WTF and/or proposed collocation will require additional space or height to function within the provider’s local network. The City may, at its sole discretion, approve multiple equipment structures or one (1) or more larger structures if it will result in a more aesthetically pleasing structure and/or site design or will further other public policy objectives.
    2. The equipment building shall be located no more than fifty (50) feet from the tower or antenna, except under unique and unusual circumstances demonstrated by the applicant to the City’s satisfaction or for other public policy considerations.
    3. Ground level buildings shall be screened from view by landscape plantings, fencing, or other appropriate means, as specified in this title or other City ordinances or regulations.
    4. A WTF, including equipment buildings, antennae, and related equipment, shall occupy no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total roof area of the building on which the WTF is mounted. The City may, at its sole discretion, increase the percentage of building coverage allowed, if collocation is achieved and an adequate screening structure is used.
    5. Equipment buildings mounted on a roof shall be completely screened from view by materials that are consistent and compatible with the design, color, and materials of the building. Equipment for roof-mounted antenna may also be located within the building on which the antenna is mounted.
    6. If located in residential zones, equipment buildings shall be designed so as to conform in appearance with nearby residential buildings and equipment structures shall comply with the setback requirements of the zoning district. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.635 Siting and Design Requirements for Structure-Mounted WTF's.
A. A WTF mounted on and/or extending above a structure shall be subject to the following:
    1. The antenna shall be architecturally compatible, to the maximum extent feasible, with the building and/or wall on which it is mounted, and shall be designed and located so as to minimize adverse aesthetic impact.
        a. The antenna may be mounted on a wall of an existing building if it is mounted as flush to the wall as is technically possible and does not project further above the top of the wall on which it is mounted beyond that height necessary to fulfill the function of that site within the local network system.
        b. The antenna may be mounted on a building roof if the City finds that it is not technically possible or aesthetically desirable to mount the antenna on a wall.
        c. The antenna shall be constructed, painted, or fully screened to match, as closely as possible, the color and texture of the building and/or wall on which it is mounted.
        d. No portion of the antenna or base station shall exceed the height limitations set forth in this section.
    2. If an equipment shelter is present, the structure shall be architecturally and visually compatible with surrounding existing buildings, structures, vegetation, and uses in terms of color, size, and bulk. Such facilities will be considered architecturally and visually compatible if they blend with the surrounding buildings in architectural character and color and are camouflaged to disguise the facility.
    3. The maximum height of a utility pole extension shall be determined by the City Engineer and Community Development Director. The pole extension shall be designed such that the height of the utility pole is the minimum additional height necessary to support the antenna and the diameter of the utility pole required to support the antenna is not increased more than twenty (20) percent of the existing utility pole.
    4. An antenna attached to the roof or sides of a building at least thirty (30) feet in height, or on an existing tower, a water tank, or a similar structure, must be either:
        a. An omnidirectional or whip antenna no more than seven (7) inches in diameter and extending no more than sixteen (16) feet above the structure to which it is attached.
        b. A panel antenna no more than two (2) feet wide and six (6) feet long, extending no more than ten (10) feet above the structure to which it is attached. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.640 Tower Siting and Design Requirements.
A. Setbacks. All towers, support structures and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum setback requirements for the zoning district in which they are located, except under the following conditions:
    1. Tower setback. A tower’s setback shall be measured from the base of the tower to the property line of the parcel on which it is located. In the MF1, MF2, MF3, MR1, MR2, R1, R2, R3, and R4 zoning districts, where permitted, and on property abutting or adjacent to such districts, towers shall be set back from any property line in or abutting a residential zone a distance equal to one hundred (100) percent of tower height as measured from ground level, except for unusual geographic limitations or other public policy considerations, as determined at the City’s sole discretion.
    2. In all other zones, towers shall comply with a minimum setback of fifteen (15) feet from all property lines.
    3. Right-of-way setback exception. The setback requirement may be waived if the antenna and antenna support structure are located in the public right-of-way.
B. Support systems setbacks. All guy wires, anchors, and other support structures must be located within the buildable area of the lot and not within the front, rear, or side yard setbacks or within the landscape screening buffer area and which shall be located no closer than fifteen (15) feet to any property line.
C. Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required for any WTF, then the lighting must be of the type to cause the least disturbance to the surrounding area and shall not cause glare skyward or beyond the property line. If lighting is required for a tower, dual mode lighting shall be requested from the FAA when residential uses are located within five hundred (500) feet of the tower.
D. Monopole construction required. All towers shall be of a tapering monopole construction unless the provider can demonstrate that another type of tower would cause less impact to the surrounding property than a monopole structure and/or would otherwise further the purposes and goals of this section.
E. Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for a tower shall provide an inventory of its existing WTF sites that are within the jurisdiction of the City and within one (1) mile of its borders, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each facility.
F. Building and safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is constructed and maintained in compliance with applicable City building codes and EIA standards, as amended. New construction and any improvements or additions to existing towers shall require submission of site plans stamped by a professional engineer licensed in Washington State, which demonstrate compliance with the EIA standards and all other good industry practices. The plans shall be submitted and reviewed at the time building permits are requested. If, upon inspection, the City concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring the tower into compliance with such standards. If the owner fails to bring the tower into compliance within thirty (30) days, the City may remove the tower at the owner's expense. If the structure is determined by the City to pose an imminent danger to the public, the City shall be entitled to abate the danger through the appropriate processes established by the City.
G. Antenna and support structure safety. The tower or antenna and its support structure shall be designed to withstand, at a minimum, a wind force of one hundred (100) miles per hour and one-half (1/2) inch of ice without the use of supporting guy wires. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed antenna and support structure are safe and the surrounding areas will not be negatively affected by support structure failure, falling ice, or other debris or interference. All support structures shall be fitted with anti-climbing devices, as approved by the manufacturers.
H. Site selection and tower height. Towers shall be located to minimize their number, height, and visual impacts on the surrounding area in accordance with the following policies:
    1. Tower height shall not exceed one hundred (100) feet in height except under the following conditions:
        a. Collocation of two (2) or more service providers allows for additional height by using collocation height increment provisions.
        b. A single service provider can demonstrate, via the conditional use permit criteria and all other applicable criteria in this section and this title, that a tower greater than one hundred (100) feet in height is necessary to provide service within its provider system.
    2. The height of a tower shall have the least visual impact feasible and the height shall be no greater than necessary to achieve service area requirements and to provide for potential collocation; and
    3. The owner or operator has demonstrated that the tower site selected provides, to the greatest extent feasible, the least visual impact on residential areas. This shall include an analysis of the potential impacts from other vantage points in the area to illustrate that the selected site and design provides the best opportunity to minimize the visual impact of the proposed facility.
    4. The tower shall be sited to minimize solitary or prominent visibility when viewed from surrounding areas, especially residential areas. The facility shall be camouflaged to the maximum extent feasible.
I. Screening. Towers shall be significantly screened to the extent that it does not result in significant signal degradation. If there are no trees to provide screening, the site shall utilize significant camouflage or other design/construction methods satisfactory to the City, so as to provide compatible aesthetics on and around the site, to the fullest extent reasonably possible.
J. Separation distances between towers. Separation distances between towers shall be measured between the proposed tower and pre-existing towers. Measurement shall be from base of tower to base of tower, excluding pad, footing or foundation. The separation distances shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the nearest point on the base of the existing tower and the proposed tower base, pursuant to a site plan of the proposed tower. The separation distances shall be listed in linear feet. Separation distances between towers shall be one thousand five hundred (1,500) linear feet, except when both towers are lattice or guyed towers, then the separation distance shall be five thousand (5,000) linear feet, or one (1) of the towers is a monopole is less than one hundred (100) feet in height, then the separation distance shall be one thousand (1,000) linear feet; or, if the City designates areas where multiple towers can be located in closer proximity. The applicant shall provide an inventory of all WTF towers, despite ownership, within a one thousand five hundred (1,500) or five thousand (5,000) foot radius, as appropriate, around the proposed tower site, and said inventory shall include the location, height and design style of each tower. The Community Development Director or Hearing Examiner, as applicable, may reduce tower separation distance requirements if written findings are made that the provider has demonstrated that the purposes and goals of this section or this title would be better served in doing so. However, the development of multiple tower locations on one (1) or more sites in close proximity, often referred to as “antenna farms,” are specifically prohibited, unless such a site has been so designated by the City Council.
K. Collocation priority. Collocation of antennae by more than one (1) provider on existing towers is preferred to the construction of new towers. New facilities shall be designed to accommodate collocation, unless the applicant demonstrates why such design is not feasible for technical reasons. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.645 Collocation - Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
To minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation of towers, collocation of WTFs on existing or new towers is promoted and encouraged as follows:
A. To reduce the number of antenna support structures needed in the City in the future, new proposed support structures shall be designed to accommodate antennae for more than one user, unless the applicant demonstrates why such design is not feasible for technical reasons.
B. Proposed facilities shall collocate onto existing towers wherever reasonably feasible. A new or additional administrative use or conditional use permit approval, as appropriate, is not required when a new service provider is added to an existing tower without modification or reconstruction of the tower. However, requirements for any and all other permits, licenses, leases, or franchise conditions must be satisfied, and the collocation must be accomplished in a manner consistent with the policies, siting and design criteria, and landscape and screening provisions contained in this section, as well as any applicable requirements of the original administrative use or conditional use permit and building permit.
C. An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height to accommodate collocation of an additional antenna without a new or additional administrative use or conditional use permit, as appropriate, and without additional distance separation, provided that:
    1. The tower shall be of the same tower type as the existing tower, or of a less obtrusive design, such as a monopole.
    2. The additional antenna shall be of a similar type as those on the existing tower;
    3. The tower, if reconstructed, is placed on its existing site within fifty (50) feet of its existing location.
    4. The tower conforms to or can be modified to conform to the applicable design and development standards in this section.
    5. The tower is not located within a single-family or multifamily residential zone. A tower may not be increased in height without a new or additional administrative use or conditional use permit, as appropriate, in these zones.
D. The City may deny an application to construct new facilities if the applicant has not demonstrated by substantial evidence that a diligent effort has been made to collocate the facilities.
E. Collocation height increments. Collocated WTFs are eligible for additional height allowances if collocation occurs according to certain height and usage criteria.
    1. To qualify for collocation height increments, the minimum required number of service providers must either be co-applicants and/or have valid lease agreements with the applicant for collocation, at the time of application. However, space reserved for future collocations may qualify for a maximum of one (1) additional service provider for the purpose of height increments, when at least two (2) providers have already located facilities on the tower or have valid lease agreements for such location. Additional height resulting from a height increment shall not require an additional distance separation.
    2. In cases of space reservation, a first right-of-refusal, which is either executed or maintained while the provider’s facilities and services are in use, to lease the area at the base of the tower and/or mount for other providers will meet the reservation requirement. The site plan shall reserve area for other providers’ equipment near the base of the applicant’s tower.
    3. The additional height increment allowed for two (2) or more providers is thirty (30) feet above the base height. The additional height increment allowed for three (3) or more providers is fifty (50) feet above the base height and, for four (4) or more providers, is seventy (70) feet above the base height.
F. No WTF service provider or lessee or agent thereof shall fail to cooperate in good faith to accommodate collocation with competitors. If a dispute arises about the feasibility of collocating, the Community Development Director may require a third party technical study, at the expense of either or both parties, to resolve the dispute. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.650 Permits Required - Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
Unless specifically exempt, all wireless telecommunications facilities require either an administrative use or conditional use permit. Any WTF application that is not subject to administrative use permit approval pursuant to LMC 18A.70.655, Approved WTFs., or an exemption pursuant to LMC 18A.70.620, Exemptions, shall require a conditional use permit pursuant to LMC 18A.70.660, Conditional Use Permit. In addition to these discretionary land use permits, additional permits including, but not limited to, a building permit, zoning certification, site development permit and if applicable, a right-of-way permit is required prior to site development and construction. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.655 Administratively Approved WTFs.
The Community Development Director may administratively approve the WTF uses listed in this subsection, after an applicant has submitted a complete administrative use permit application and provided all information required by the City.
A. Administratively approved uses. The following uses may be approved after conducting an administrative review:
    1. Industrial/commercial zones. Locating WTFs, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with WTFs, that meet the required separation distances and that do not exceed one hundred (100) feet in height for a single user and one hundred thirty (130) feet in height for two (2) or more users in the C1, C2, C3, NC1, NC2, IBP, I1, I2, and PI zoning districts.
    2. Antennae on existing structures. Locating a WTF, other than a tower, as an accessory use by attachment to any non-residential building or structure in any zoning district, provided that:
        a. The WTF does not extend more than twenty (20) feet above the highest point of the structure if a whip antenna, or ten (10) feet above the highest point of the structure if other than a whip antenna.
        b. The WTF complies with all applicable building codes.
        c. All associated equipment is placed either within the same building or in a separate structure that matches the existing building or structure in character and materials.
    3. Facilities within allowable building height. Locating WTFs, including placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with the WTF, in the MF1, MF2, MF3, TOC, CBD zoning districts, so long as the WTF does not exceed the allowable building height for that district.
    4. A mobile transmission facility or other temporary WTF for more than thirty (30) days. Upon a proper showing of extreme necessity (for example, if repair or modification of an existing WTF clearly and legitimately cannot be completed within 30 days), locating a mobile transmission facility at a single location for more than thirty (30) calendar days shall be allowed; however, purely economic convenience shall not be considered a viable factor in making this determination.
B. Authority to waive certain requirements. In connection with the administrative use permit approval, the Community Development Director may, in order to encourage camouflaging and collocation of WTFs, administratively reduce separation distance requirements between WTFs by up to thirty (30) percent in Commercial and Industrial zones if the provider demonstrates that the purposes and goals of this section would be better served in so doing.
C. Additionally, in order to encourage the use of the least obtrusive type of WTF, the Community Development Director may administratively permit the reconstruction of any existing WTF to a less obstructive form.
D. Appeal. An appeal to a final decision of the Community Development Director issued hereunder shall be heard by the Hearing Examiner in accordance with the requirements of LMC 18A.02, Administration. [Ord. 525 § 13, 2010; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.660 Conditional Use Permit - Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
Application for a conditional use permit shall be subject to the procedures and requirements of LMC 18A.10, Discretionary Permits, Conditional Use Permits., except as modified by this subsection. Conditional use permits shall be required for the following WTFs:
A. Tower height. Locating WTFs that exceed one hundred (100) feet in height for a single user or one hundred thirty (130) feet in height for two (2) or more users.
B. Amateur radio antennae. Locating amateur radio antennae or towers that exceed seventy (70) feet in height.
C. Locating WTFs on existing structures. Placement of WTFs on existing structures that will exceed the height limitations in LMC 18A.70.655(A)(2)(a), Antennae on Existing Structures.
D. Wireless telecommunications facilities exceeding allowable building height. Locating WTFs, including towers, that exceed the allowable building height limitations in the MF1, MF2, MF3, TOC, and CBD zoning districts.
E. Tower construction under allowed separation distances. Locating towers that do not meet the separation distance requirements in LMC 18A.70.640(J), Separation Distances Between Towers., or that do not meet administratively approved separation distance limits in LMC 18A.70.655(B), Authority to Waive Certain Requirements.
F. Wireless telecommunications facilities that are located on public property, and are:
    1. Separate from existing structures on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the City or other governmental entity.
    2. Attached to existing structures exceeding the height limitations in LMC 18A.70.655(A)(2)(a), Antennae on Existing Structures., on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the City or other governmental entity.
G. Any other WTF application that is not subject to administrative approval pursuant to LMC 18A.70.655, Administrative Approved WTFs, or an exemption pursuant to LMC 18A.70.620, Exceptions. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.665 Factors for Granting Conditional Use Permits for Towers.
A. In addition to the conditions of LMC 18A.10, Discretionary Permits, Conditional Use Permits, the following factors shall be taken into consideration when reviewing a CUP application for a WTF tower. The Hearing Examiner shall make written findings to approve, deny, modify or condition an application on the basis of these factors:
    1. Height of the proposed tower.
    2. Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential zoning district boundaries.
    3. Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties.
    4. Surrounding topography.
    5. Surrounding tree coverage and foliage.
    6. Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness.
    7. Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures.
    8. Collocation of other service providers on the proposed tower.
    9. Obstruction of or interference with views.
    10. Consistency with the purpose and goals set forth in this section.
B. Authority to waive certain requirements. In connection with this conditional approval, the Hearing Examiner may, in order to encourage camouflaging and collocation of WTFs, waive separation distance requirements between WTFs by up to seventy (70) percent in Commercial and Industrial zones if the provider demonstrates that the purposes and goals of this section would be better served.
C. Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Hearing Examiner that no existing tower, structure, or alternative technology that does not require the use of towers can accommodate the applicant’s proposed WTF. An applicant shall submit information related to the availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or alternative technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology can accommodate the applicant’s proposed WTF shall address the following:
    1. No existing WTF is located within the geographic area that meets applicant’s engineering requirements.
    2. Existing WTFs are not of sufficient height to meet applicant’s engineering requirements.
    3. Existing WTFs cannot practically be reconstructed to provide sufficient structural strength to support applicant’s proposed antenna and related equipment.
    4. Electromagnetic interference would occur between two (2) or more WTF systems.
    5. The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing WTF or to adapt an existing WTF for collocation are unreasonable. Fees or costs that exceed new WTF development shall not be presumed to render sharing facilities unsuitable.
    6. Other limiting factors render existing WTFs unsuitable.
    7. An alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or structures would be unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed new WTF development shall not be presumed to render the technology unsuitable. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.670 Siting and Permit Requirements for WTF Use on Public Property.
A. Priority of WTF placement. Where public property is sought to be utilized for WTFs, priority will be given to the following entities in descending order:
    1. City of Lakewood.
    2. Public safety agencies, including law enforcement, fire and ambulance services, which are not part of the City of Lakewood, and private entities with a public safety agreement with the City of Lakewood.
    3. Other governmental agencies, for uses which are not related to public safety.
    4. Entities providing licensed commercial wireless telecommunication services including cellular, personal communication services, specialized mobilized radio, enhanced specialized mobilized radio, data, Internet, paging, and similar services that are marketed to the general public.
B. Minimum requirements. The placement of wireless telecommunications facilities on City-owned property must comply with the following requirements:
    1. The facilities shall not interfere with the purpose for which the City-owned property is intended.
    2. The facilities shall have no significant adverse impact on surrounding properties.
    3. The applicant shall obtain adequate liability insurance and commit to a lease agreement which includes equitable compensation for the use of public land and other provisions and safeguards deemed necessary by the City. The City shall determine appropriate fees after considering comparable rates in other cities, potential expenses, risks to the City, and other appropriate factors.
    4. The applicant shall submit a letter of credit, cash guarantee, or other security acceptable to the City to cover the costs of removing the facilities.
    5. The antennae or tower shall not interfere with other users who have a higher use priority on the public land pursuant to LMC 18A.70.670(A), Property of WTF Placement.
    6. The lease shall provide that, in the case of a declared emergency or documented threat to public health, safety or welfare and following reasonable notice, the City may require the applicant to remove the facilities at the applicant’s expense.
    7. The applicant shall reimburse the City for any related costs incurred by the City because of the presence of the applicant’s facilities.
    8. The applicant shall obtain all necessary land-use approvals.
    9. The applicant shall cooperate with the City’s objectives to promote and encourage collocation.
    10. The applicant shall comply with the requirements and conditions set forth in any administrative or conditional use permits, or decision of a reviewing body.
    11. The applicant shall comply with requirements for maintenance of the facility site, including but not limited to keeping lawns mowed, providing litter control and maintaining trees and other vegetation in a healthy state.
C. Special requirements for parks. The use of City-owned parks for WTFs brings with it special concerns due to the unique nature of these sites. The placement of a WTF in a park shall be allowed only when the following additional requirements are met:
    1. The applicant has clearly demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City that the following additional criteria are met:
        a. Placement of the WTF shall conform to the requirements of the Critical Areas and Resource Lands Ordinance.
        b. Visual impacts shall be mitigated to the fullest extent reasonably possible.
        c. Accommodations shall be included in the design and placement of the WTF to ensure that there will be no disruption of normal public use of the park.
        d. Placement of the WTF in a public park is absolutely necessary for the effective operation of the applicant's system, and that placement at other alternate sites would not be reasonably possible.
    2. The Community Development Director has made a recommendation, based on the approval criteria, to the City Council regarding the WTF proposed to be located in the park.
    3. The City Council has considered the Community Development Director’s recommendation in relation to the request and the applicable criteria, and has given consent for such use of the park. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.675 Landscaping and Screening - WTFs.
A. Landscaping. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the WTF compound. The City may also require any combination of existing vegetation, topography, walls, decorative fences or other features, in addition to landscaping, necessary to achieve the desired level of screening of the site. If the antenna is mounted flush on an existing building, and other equipment is housed inside an existing structure, landscaping may not be required. Landscaping is not required for WTFs mounted on rooftops or on the top of other structures; however, other methods of screening may be required to be utilized.
B. Screening. The visual impacts of a WTF shall be mitigated through landscaping or other screening materials at the base of a WTF and/or compound. The following landscaping and buffering shall be required around the perimeter of the compound. Landscaping shall be installed on the outside of fences. Further, existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible and may be used as a substitute for or as a supplement to landscaping requirements.
    1. Evergreen trees, a minimum of twelve (12) feet tall at planting, shall be planted in two (2) rows around the perimeter of the fence. The trees shall be planted so that the trees are staggered in the rows to provide maximum screening and are located no further apart than fifteen (15) feet on center.
    2. A row of bushes at least thirty (30) inches high at planting and which is capable of growing into a continuous hedge to at least forty eight (48) inches in height within two (2) years shall be planted no more than four (4) feet on center, in front of the tree line referenced above.
    3. Groundcover shall be planted such that it will completely cover the soil within the landscape area within eighteen (18) months of planting, generally one (1) gallon size plants planted no more than eighteen (18) inches on center.
    4. In the event that landscaping is not maintained at the level required herein or as required in any administrative use or conditional use permit, the City may, after giving thirty (30) days’ advance written notice, establish and/or maintain the landscaping and bill both the owner and lessee of the site for such costs until such costs are paid in full.
    5. The Community Development Director or, where applicable, the Hearing Examiner, may modify these requirements if the goals of this section would be better served. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.680 Nonconforming Uses - Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
A. Pre-existing WTFs shall be allowed to continue their usage as they presently exist. Emergency repairs and routine maintenance shall be permitted on pre-existing WTFs. Any construction, alteration or modification other than repair or maintenance on a pre-existing WTF shall comply with the requirements of this section.
B. Damage or destruction not the fault of owner/occupant. Legal nonconforming WTFs that are damaged or destroyed without fault attributable to the owner or entity in control may be rebuilt without first having to obtain an administrative use or conditional use permit and without having to meet separation requirements. The type, height, and location of the tower on-site shall be of the same type and intensity as the original facility or of a less obtrusive design, such as a monopole. Construction to rebuild the facility shall comply with all current applicable building codes and building permits shall be obtained prior to construction, and within one hundred eight (180) days from the date the facility is damaged or destroyed. If no building permit is obtained or if the permit expires, the WTF shall be deemed abandoned as specified in LMC 18A.70.685(A), Abandonment. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.685 Non-use or Abandonment - WTFs.
A. Abandonment. 
    1. The owner or operator of any abandoned WTF shall notify the City of Lakewood, in writing, at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of discontinuation of operation or abandonment of a WTF. In the event that a licensed carrier fails to give notice, the facility shall be considered abandoned upon the City's discovery of discontinuation of operation or upon a determination by the City of the date abandoned, and subsequent notice of the City’s determination of abandoned status to the WTF owner and/or operator.
    2. Except as provided in LMC 18A.70.685(A)(3), an owner or operator shall have ninety (90) days from the date of abandonment within which to reactivate the use of the facility or transfer the facility to another provider who makes actual use of the facility.
    3. If abandonment occurs due to the relocation of an antenna to a lower point on the antenna support structure, a reduction in the effective radiated power of the antenna or a reduction in the number of transmissions from the antennae, then the operator of the tower shall have six (6) months from the date of effective abandonment to collocate another service on the tower. If another service provider is not added to the tower, then the operator shall dismantle and remove, within thirty (30) days, that portion of the tower which resulted from a collocation height increment and/or exceeds the minimum height required to function satisfactorily. City approval for that portion of the tower shall automatically expire two hundred ten (210) days from the date of abandonment if the collocation is not completed or upon completion of the dismantlement and removal of that portion of the tower that is not longer being utilized, whichever comes first.
    4. Except as provided in this section, changes which are made to WTFs that do not diminish their essential role in providing a total system shall not constitute abandonment. However, in the event that there is a physical reduction in height of substantially all of the providers’ towers in the City or surrounding area, then all of the towers within the City shall similarly be reduced in height.
B. Dismantlement and Removal of Facility. If the abandoned WTF, including all accessory structures, antenna, foundation, and other associated appurtenances are not removed within the required time period, the City may remove the WTF and all associated development at the provider’s expense. If there are two (2) or more providers collocating on a facility, this provision shall not become effective until all providers cease using the facility, except as provided in LMC 18A.70.685(A)(3).
C. Except as provided in LMC 18A.70.685(A)(3), City approval for the facility shall automatically expire ninety (90) days from the date of abandonment if the WTF is not reactivated or upon completion of the dismantlement and removal of the WTF, whichever comes first.
D. Security and Lien. Prior to the commencement of demolition, each applicant shall post sufficient security in the form of a cash guarantee or assignment of funds in a form acceptable to the City, cashier’s check, or cash, to cover the estimated cost of demolition or removal of the tower and support structures, including complete site restoration. If, for any reason, the posted funds are not adequate to cover the cost of removal, then the City may charge the facility owner or operator with the City’s total cost incurred in removing the abandoned structures. If the owner or operator fails to make full payment within thirty (30) calendar days, then the amount remaining unpaid shall become a lien on the facility property. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.690 Expert Review - Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
Wireless telecommunications service providers use various methodologies and analyses, including geographically-based computer software, to determine the specific technical parameters of their services and low power mobile radio service facilities, such as expected coverage area, antenna configuration, topographic constraints that affect signal paths, etc. In certain instances, a technical expert may need to review the technical data submitted by a service provider and/or applicant. The City may require a technical review as part of a permit application process. The costs of the technical review shall be borne by the service provider and/or applicant.
The selection of the technical expert shall be at the City’s sole discretion, with a provision for the provider and interested parties to comment on the proposed expert and review the expert’s professional qualifications. The expert review is intended to address the technical aspects of the proposed facilities at a specific location and/or a review of the providers’ methodology and equipment used. Based on the results of the expert review, the City may require additional information to be submitted as part of the application process. The expert review shall address the following:
A. The accuracy and completeness of submissions.
B. The applicability of analysis techniques and methodologies.
C. The validity of conclusions reached.
D. Any specific technical issues raised by the City. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.695 Controlling Provisions.
To the extent that any provision of this chapter is inconsistent or conflicts with any other City ordinance, this chapter shall control. Otherwise, this chapter shall be construed consistently with the other provisions and regulations of the City. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.70.700 Cottage Housing.
[Ord. 620 §4, 2016.]

18A.70.710 Purpose and Intent - Cottage Housing.
Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a specific residential development type (“cottage housing”) featuring modestly sized single family detached residences with commonly held community amenities, and oriented around commonly held open-space areas. Specific design standards must be met. An increase in allowable density over the maximum density allowed in the underlying zoning district is provided as an incentive to encourage development of this type of housing, and in recognition of the reduced impacts expected from this type of housing versus typical single-family residential development. This housing type is intended to:
A. Promote a variety of housing choices to meet the needs of a population diverse in age, income, household composition, and individual needs.
B. Provide opportunities for more affordable housing choices within single-family neighborhoods.
C. Encourage creation of functional usable open space in residential communities.
D. Promote neighborhood interaction and safety through design.
E. Ensure compatibility with neighboring land uses.
F. Provide opportunities for infill development that support the growth management goal of more efficient use of urban residential land. [Ord. 620 § 5, 2016.]

18A.70.720 Applicability- Cottage Housing.
Cottage housing is permitted in the R1, R2, R3 and R4 zoning districts. The provisions of individual zoning districts shall be applicable to cottage housing developments; provided, that where a conflict exists, the provisions of this section shall have control. [Ord. 620 § 5, 2016.]

18A.70.730 General Provisions - Cottage Housing.
1. Cottage housing projects are permitted with the approval of a Cottage Housing Development Plan. Discrete ownerships may only be created through the residential binding site plan and/or condominium declaration process pursuant to RCW 64.34 as applicable. Cottage housing development plans shall be subject to review and approval as an administrative use permit subject to Process II permit procedures. Adherence to all applicable development standards shall be determined by the City’s Community Development Director as a component of the review process.
2. Individual cottage units shall contain at least eight hundred (800) and no more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of gross floor area. A covenant restricting any increases in unit size after initial construction shall be recorded against the property. Vaulted space shall not be converted into habitable space.
3. A community building of up to 2,500 square feet in size may be provided for the residents of the cottage housing development. Roof pitch, architectural themes, materials and colors shall be consistent with that of the dwelling units within the cottage housing development.
4. Accessory dwelling units shall not be permitted in cottage housing developments. [Ord. 620 § 7, 2016.]

18A.70.740 Development Standards - Cottage Housing.
Cottage housing development shall be subject to the following development standards.
A. Density. 
    1. In the R1 and R2 zoning districts, cottage housing development shall be allowed a density not to exceed three (3) times the base density allowed in the underlying zone.
    2. In R3 and R4 zoning districts, cottage housing developments shall be allowed a density not to exceed two (2) times the base density allowed in the underlying zone.
    3. On a site to be used for a cottage housing development, existing detached single-family residential structures, which may be nonconforming with respect to the standards of this section, may be permitted to remain at the discretion of the community development director, but the extent of the nonconformity shall not be increased. The number of any such nonconforming dwelling unit(s) shall be multiplied by the factors noted in sections 1 or 2 above, and included in calculating the density of the cottage housing development.
    4. An applicant for a cottage housing development shall be required to show, through a conceptual site plan, the number of traditional units that could be constructed on the site under conventional development standards and addressing any environmental constraints affecting the property. This number of units shall be used to calculate the maximum number of cottage units that may be constructed on the property.
B. Locational Criteria. 
    1. The minimum area for a cottage housing project is 0.75 acre, which may include more than one contiguous lot.
    2. Cottage housing development shall be separated from another cottage housing development by a minimum of 400 feet measured between the closest points of the subject properties.
C. Site Design. 
    1. Cottage housing development shall be clustered and shall consist of a minimum of four (4) dwelling units and a maximum of twelve (12) dwelling units.
    2. At least seventy-five (75) percent of dwelling units shall abut the common open space.
    3. Common open spaces shall have dwelling units abutting at least two (2) sides.
    4. Creation of individual lots shall only be permitted through the residential binding site plan process provided in LMC 17.34 and Chapter 64.34. RCW.
    5. Siting of dwelling units or common open space in areas with slopes exceeding fifteen (15) percent is discouraged. Dwelling units shall not be placed in such areas if extensive use of retaining walls is necessary to create building pads or open space areas.
    6. Fencing and Screening. The intent of internal decorative fencing and screening is to delineate private yards, screen parking areas and structures, community assets, refuse and recycling areas, and unit walls. A cottage housing development is intended to be an internally open community sharing common areas. The intent of external fencing and screening is to conceal the higher density development from adjacent lower density land uses. Chain link and solid fences shall not be allowed internally. Solid fencing is allowed on the perimeter boundary, except where bordering an external street where streetscape landscaping is required.
D. Setbacks and building separation. 
    1. Dwelling units shall have at least a twenty (20) foot front setback, eight (8) foot side yard setback and a ten (10) foot rear setback.
    2. Dwelling units shall be separated from one another by a minimum of ten (10) feet, not including projections.
    3. Dwelling units shall maintain a ten (10) foot separation between buildings.
    4. Dwelling units not abutting or oriented toward a right of way shall have a front yard oriented towards the common open space.
    5. The approval authority may use appropriate discretion, consistent with the intent of this chapter, in determining orientation of yards.
E. Minimum Lot Size. Beyond the density restrictions listed in this chapter, there is no required minimum lot size for lots created through the subdivision process.
F. Lot Coverage (all impervious surfaces). Impervious Surfaces shall not exceed fifty (50) percent. Lot coverage shall be calculated for the overall cottage housing development, not for individual lots. Paved components of common open space areas and walkways shall not be counted in lot coverage calculations.
G. Refuse and Recycling. Refuse and recycling containers shall be screened from view by landscaping or architectural screening, and shall not be located in the front yard setback area, or in locations where smells may be offensive to adjacent properties.
H. Pedestrian Network. Within the confines of the cottage housing development a network of pedestrian pathways shall be provided. Connections to the wider neighborhood shall be made where appropriate and allowed. All such pathways shall be accessible by the general public, except that walkways into and through the cottage housing development may be limited to residents and their guests. [Ord. 620 § 8, 2016.]

18A.70.750 Open Space - Cottage Housing.
1. A minimum of five hundred (500) square feet of common open space shall be provided per dwelling unit.
2. Common open space shall be a minimum of three thousand (3,000) square feet in size, regardless of number of dwelling units.
3. No dimension of a common open space area used to satisfy the minimum square footage requirement shall be less than ten (10) feet, unless part of a pathway or trail.
4. In subdivisions and short subdivisions, common open space shall be located in a separate tract or tracts.
5. Required common open space shall be divided into no more than two (2) separate areas per cluster of dwelling units.
6. Common open space shall be improved for passive or active recreational use. Examples may include but are not limited to courtyards, orchards, landscaped picnic areas or gardens. Common open space shall include amenities such as but not limited to seating, landscaping, trails, gazebos, barbecue facilities, covered shelters or water features.
7. Surface water management facilities may be commonly held, but shall not counted toward meeting the common open space requirement.
8. Parking areas, required setbacks, private open space, and driveways do not qualify as common open space area.
9. Landscaping located in common open space areas shall be designed to allow for easy access and use of the space by all residents, and to facilitate maintenance needs. Where feasible, existing mature trees should be retained. [Ord. 620 § 9, 2016.]

18A.70.760 Building Design Standards - Cottage Housing.
A cottage housing development is expected to reflect a coherent and high quality design concept and include architectural elements that ensure compatibility with existing neighborhood development and character. The following design elements are intended to provide compatibility with existing residential environments. Alternative designs may be submitted to the community development director for review and approval, but the community development director must find that any such concepts meet or exceed the design quality of the prescriptive standards, and fulfill the stated purpose and intent of this chapter.
A. Building Height. 
    1. The maximum building height for dwelling units shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
    2. The maximum building height for garages, community buildings, and accessory structures shall be eighteen (18) feet.
B. Roofs. 
    1. Dwelling units shall have a minimum 6:12 roof pitch. Up to thirty-five (35) percent of roof area may have a slope not less than 4:12. Portions of a roof with a pitch of less than 6:12 shall be limited to architectural features such as dormers, porch roofs and shed roofs.
    2. Garages and carports shall have a minimum 6:12 roof pitch.
    3. Cottages shall be a maximum of two (2) stories. Any upper floor shall be located within the roof structure, not below it, in order to reduce building massing as much as possible.
C. Entries and Porches. 
    1. Each dwelling unit abutting a public right of way (excluding alleys) shall have a primary entry and covered porch a minimum of eighty (80) square feet in size, oriented toward the public right of way. If abutting more than one public right of way, the developer and City shall collaborate with the project proponent to determine which right of way the entrance and covered porch shall be oriented toward.
    2. Each dwelling unit shall have an entry and covered porch oriented toward the common open space. If the dwelling unit abuts a public right of way, this may be a secondary entrance, and the minimum porch size shall be fifty (50) square feet. If not abutting a public right of way, this shall be the primary entrance, and the minimum porch size shall be eighty (80) square feet.
    3. Covered porches shall be a minimum of six (6) feet deep.
D. Dwelling units shall not include attached garages
E. Detached garages. Each dwelling unit shall have no more than one detached garage. The size of the garage shall not exceed two hundred and fifty (250) gross square feet in size. Garages can be combined into one garage structure; however, no garage structure may exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet in size for a total not to exceed four garage spaces.
F. Community Development Director Review. The community development director shall consider all aspects of the project, and shall ensure that the project is well designed and compatible with existing and planned development in the vicinity. Possible topics for review by the include community development director (but are not necessarily limited to): building materials and finishes, articulation and modulation, massing, trim details, colors, exterior lighting, special building heights, paving materials, mechanical equipment screening, fencing, tree retention and landscaping. [Ord. 620 § 10, 2016.]

18A.70.770 Parking - Cottage Housing.
A. A minimum of 2.0 parking spaces per cottage shall be provided for the entire development. An additional fifteen (15) percent of total required spaces shall be designated for guests.
B. All or a portion of new on-street parking provided as a component of the development may be counted towards minimum parking requirements if the approval authority finds that such parking configuration will result in adequate parking, and is compatible with the character and context of the surrounding area.
C. Carports are prohibited in cottage housing development.
D. Shared detached garages and surface parking design. Parking areas should be located so their visual presence is minimized and associated noise or other impacts do not intrude into public spaces. These areas should also maintain the single-family character along public streets.
    1. Shared detached garage structures may not exceed four (4) garage doors per building, and a total of one-thousand (1,000) square feet.
    2. For shared detached garages, the design of the structure must be similar and compatible to that of the dwelling units within the development.
    3. Shared detached garage structures and surface parking areas must be screened from public streets and adjacent residential uses by landscaping. consistent with LMC 18A.50.430, or architectural screening.
    4. Shared detached garage structures shall be reserved for the parking of vehicles owned by the residents of the development. Storage of items which preclude the use of the parking spaces for vehicles is prohibited.
    5. Surface parking areas may not be located in clusters of more than four (4) spaces. Clusters must be separated by a distance of at least 20 feet.
    6. The design of garages must include roof lines similar and compatible to that of the dwelling units within the development.
    7. Parking lots shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from front property lines and ten (10) feet from external side and rear property lines.
    8. Garage doors shall not be oriented toward a public right of way with the exception of an alley.
    9. Garages and carports shall not be located between the common open space and the dwelling units. [Ord. 620 § 11, 2016.]

18A.70.780 Common Area Maintenance - Cottage Housing.
Cottage housing development shall be required to implement a mechanism, acceptable to the approval authority, to ensure the continued care and maintenance of all common areas including common open space, parking, surface water management facilities (if applicable) and any other common area or shared facilities. Such a mechanism shall include creation of either a homeowners’ or condominium association with authority and funding necessary to maintain the common areas. [Ord. 620 § 12, 2016.]

18A.70.790 Cottage Housing - Low Impact Development Standards.
A. The proposed site design shall incorporate the use of low impact development (LID) strategies to meet storm water management standards. LID is a set of techniques that mimic natural watershed hydrology by slowing, evaporating/transpiring, and filtering water, which allows water to soak into the ground closer to its source. The design should seek to meet the following objectives:
    1. Preservation of natural hydrology.
    2. Reduced impervious surfaces.
    3. Treatment of storm water in numerous small, decentralized structures.
    4. Use of natural topography for drainage ways and storage areas.
    5. Preservation of portions of the site in undisturbed, natural conditions.
    6. Reduction of the use of piped systems. Whenever possible, site design should use multifunctional open drainage systems such as vegetated swales or filter strips which also help to fulfill landscaping and open space requirements. [Ord. 620 § 13, 2016.]

18A.70.795 Modifications - Cottage Housing.
Applicants may request modifications to the open space, site design, design standards, setbacks and parking provisions of this chapter. The approval authority may modify the above referenced provisions of this chapter if both of the following apply:
A. The site is constrained due to unusual shape, topography, easements or critical areas; and
B. The modification will not result in a project that is less compatible with neighboring land uses than would have occurred under strict adherence to the provisions of this chapter.
C. The approval authority may permit modifications to the building design standards if it finds the alternative design concept provides a high level of design quality and compatibility with the character of the surrounding neighborhood. [Ord. 620 § 14, 2016.]

18A.70.900 Bed and Breakfast Facilities.

18A.70.910 Purpose - Bed and Breakfast Facilities.
The purpose of the bed and breakfast regulations are to allow for the provision of limited commercial transient lodging facilities as an accessory and subordinate use of a single family residence located in single-family residential neighborhoods, while at the same time ensuring that such facilities are compatible and do not adversely affect the residential character of the area and surrounding residences. [Ord. 317 § 13, 2003.]

18A.70.920 Applicability - Bed and Breakfast Facilities.
Bed and breakfast facilities are allowed in Single-Family Residential zoning districts upon the issuance of an administrative use permit, and subject to the requirements of this chapter. [Ord. 317 § 13, 2003.]

18A.70.930 Requirements for Bed and Breakfasts.
A. Rooms. No more than five (5) rooms/units may be offered for rent in a bed and breakfast facility. Facilities with more than five (5) rooms/units for rent shall be classified as a Lodging- Level 3 commercial use type.
B. Parking. A minimum of one off-street parking space shall be provided for each lodging room included in the bed and breakfast facility, plus two parking spaces for the principal residents of the dwelling. One additional off-street parking space shall be provided if any non-resident employees are involved in the operation of the facility.
C. Applicable Codes. The bed and breakfast facility shall be subject to compliance with all applicable Federal, State and/or local requirements. Facilities with three or more rooms offered for rent are considered transient lodging facilities and are subject to the provisions of Chapter 70.62 RCW and 246.360 WAC.
D. Employees. No more than two (2) non-resident employees may be employed at the bed and breakfast facility, excluding domestic service providers (gardeners, repairmen, etc.), and temporary workers (such as caterers, valets etc.) retained for special events. The owner and operator of the facility shall reside on-site.
E. Conditions. As part of the administrative use permit process, the Community Development Director may impose additional conditions on the bed and breakfast facility in order to mitigate potential impacts that the operation might create for the surrounding neighborhood. Such conditions may include restrictions on special events involving persons other than overnight guests of the bed and breakfast that would disrupt the peace and quiet enjoyment of the residential area in the vicinity of the facility.
F. Signage shall conform to the standards set forth in LMC 18A.50.600.
G. Meals shall be provided only to residents and overnight guests, or in conjunction with permitted special events, subject to the requirements of WAC 246-215-180. [Ord. 317 § 13, 2003.]

18A.70.1000 Motor Vehicle Sales and Rental.
[Ord. 697 § 3, 2018.]

18A.70.1010 Purpose – Motor Vehicle Sales and Rental.
The purpose of this section is to provide development standards for auto sales and vehicle rental establishments consistent with the Lakewood Comprehensive Plan. The intent of this chapter is to encourage business activity, but also to promote public safety, maintain attractive streetscapes, and improve property values. [Ord. 697 § 3, 2018.]

18A.70.1020 Applicability – Motor Vehicle Sales and Rental.
These regulations are applicable to motor vehicle sales and rental land use types, Levels 1, 2, 3, and 4, located in the TOC, C1, C2, I1, I2, AC1 and AC2 zoning districts. [Ord. 697 § 3, 2018.]

18A.70.1030 Development Standards – Motor Vehicle Sales and Rental.
Proposed motor vehicle sales and rental land use types are subject to the following requirements:
A. The use of trailers, temporary modular homes, and/or manufactured or modular buildings for sales offices or other related activity is prohibited.
B. All vehicle sales and rental areas will provide supplemental customer parking on site, at a ratio of at least one space for every 2,000 square feet of motor vehicle sales and rental area.
C. Any arrangement of motor vehicle sales and rentals is allowed as long as adequate fire access is provided per the Fire Marshal.
D. All loading and unloading of motor vehicles sales and rentals shall occur on site.
E. The public right-of-way shall not be used to display motor vehicles sales and rental land use types.
F. No test drives shall occur on local residential streets found in or adjacent to R1, R2, R3, and R4 zoning districts.
G. Automobile wrecking or motor vehicle wrecking as defined in LMC 18A.90.200 shall not be conducted.
H. Spray booths and spray rooms shall not be permitted.
I. Car washes/detailing shall be located at least 50 feet from any residential zone, use, or structure.
J. Amplified speaker/public address systems are prohibited except within fully enclosed buildings. Such systems shall not be used while service bay or exterior walls entrances or exits are open.
K. The site where the motor vehicle sales or rental land use type is located shall be kept clear of weeds, rubbish, and all types of litter and combustible materials at all times, and consistent with Chapter 8.40 LMC. [Ord. 697 § 3, 2018.]

Chapter 18A.85 ELIGIBLE FACILITIES MODIFICATION CODE (WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS)

Sections:
18A.85.010   Purpose.
18A.85.020   Definitions.
18A.85.030   Application Review.

18A.85.010 Purpose.
This chapter implements Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 (“Spectrum Act”), as interpreted by the Federal Communications Commission’s (“FCC” or “Commission”) Acceleration of Broadband Deployment Report and Order, which requires a state or local government to approve any eligible facilities request for a modification of an existing tower or base station that does not result in a substantial change to the physical dimensions of such tower or base station. [Ord. 650 1, 2016.]

18A.85.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms used have the following meanings:
a. Base Station. A structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term does not encompass a tower as defined herein or any equipment associated with a tower. “Base station” includes, without limitation:
    i. Equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.
    ii. Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems (DAS) and small-cell networks).
    iii. Any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the City under this section, supports or houses equipment described in subsections (a)(i) and (a)(ii) of this section that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another State or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing that support. The term does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the City under this section, does not support or house equipment described in subsections (a)(i) and (a)(ii) of this section.
b. Collocation. The mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes.
c. Eligible Facilities Request. Any request for modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station, involving:
    i. Collocation of new transmission equipment;
    ii. Removal of transmission equipment; or
    iii. Replacement of transmission equipment.
d. Eligible Support Structure. Any tower or base station as defined in this section; provided, that it is existing at the time the relevant application is filed with the City under this section.
e. Existing. A constructed tower or base station is existing for purposes of this section if it has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another State or local regulatory review process; provided, that a tower that has not been reviewed and approved because it was not in a zoned area when it was built, but was lawfully constructed, is existing for purposes of this section.
f. Site. For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower and any access or utility easements currently related to the site, and, for other eligible support structures, further restricted to that area in proximity to the structure and to other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground.
g. Substantial Change. A modification substantially changes the physical dimensions of an eligible support structure if it meets any of the following criteria:
    i. For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it increases the height of the tower by more than 10 percent or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it increases the height of the structure by more than 10 percent or more than 10 feet, whichever is greater;
    ii. For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six feet;
    iii. For any eligible support structure, it involves installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four cabinets; or, for towers in the public rights-of-way and base stations, it involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no preexisting ground cabinets associated with the structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than 10 percent larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure;
    iv. It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site;
    v. It would defeat the concealment elements of the eligible support structure; or
    vi. It does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure or base station equipment; provided, however, that this limitation does not apply to any modification that is noncompliant only in a manner that would not exceed the thresholds identified in subsections (g)(i) through (g)(iv) of this section.
h. Transmission Equipment. Equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply. The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.
i. Tower. Any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site. [Ord. 650 1, 2016.]

18A.85.030 Application Review.
a. Application. The City shall prepare and make publicly available an application form which shall be limited to the information necessary for the City to consider whether an application is an eligible facilities request. The application may not require the applicant to demonstrate a need or business case for the proposed modification.
b. Type of Review. Upon receipt of an application for an eligible facilities request pursuant to this chapter, the City shall review such application to determine whether the application so qualifies.
c. Time Frame for Review. Within 60 days of the date on which an applicant submits an application seeking approval under this chapter, the City shall approve the application unless it determines that the application is not covered by this chapter.
d. Tolling of the Time Frame for Review. The 60-day review period begins to run when the application is filed, and may be tolled only by mutual agreement by the City and the applicant, or in cases where it is determined that the application is incomplete. The time frame for review is not tolled by a moratorium on the review of applications.
    i. To toll the time frame for incompleteness, the City must provide written notice to the applicant within 30 days of receipt of the application, specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the application.
    ii. The time frame for review begins running again when the applicant makes a supplemental submission in response to jurisdiction’s notice of incompleteness.
    iii. Following a supplemental submission, the City will notify the applicant within 10 days that the supplemental submission did not provide the information identified in the original notice delineating missing information. The time frame is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant to the procedures identified in this subsection (d). Second or subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or information that were not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.
e. Interaction with Section 332(c)(7). If the City determines that the applicant’s request is not covered by Section 6409(a) as delineated under this chapter, the presumptively reasonable time frame under Section 332(c)(7), as prescribed by the FCC’s Shot Clock order, will begin to run from the issuance of the City’s decision that the application is not a covered request. To the extent such information is necessary, the City may request additional information from the applicant to evaluate the application under Section 332(c)(7)10, pursuant to the limitations applicable to other Section 332(c)(7) reviews.
f. Failure to Act. In the event the City fails to approve or deny a request seeking approval under this chapter within the time frame for review (accounting for any tolling), the request shall be deemed granted. The deemed grant does not become effective until the applicant notifies the applicable reviewing authority in writing after the review period has expired (accounting for any tolling) that the application has been deemed granted.
g. Remedies.  Applicants and the City may bring claims related to Section 6409(a) to any court of competent jurisdiction. [Ord. 650 1, 2016.]

Chapter 18A.90 DEFINITIONS

Sections:
18A.90.100   Purpose - Definitions.
18A.90.200   Definitions.
18A.90.300   Abbreviations.

18A.90.100 Purpose - Definitions.
The purpose of this section is to define words that are used throughout this title. Definitions may also be found in specific sections of this title. [Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.90.200 Definitions.
In addition to the definitions under Section 18A.90.200, the definitions in Section 14.165.010 LMC shall apply.
ABANDON OR ABANDONMENT OF WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES (WTF). Means:
    a. to cease operation for a period of sixty (60) or more consecutive calendar days;
    b. to reduce the effective radiated power of an antenna by seventy five (75) percent for sixty (60) or more consecutive calendar days unless new technology or the construction of additional cells in the same locality allows reduction of effective radiated power by more than seventy five (75), so long as the operator still serves essentially the same customer base;
    c. to relocate an antenna at a point less than eighty (80) percent of the height of an antenna support structure; or,
    d. to reduce the number of transmissions from an antenna by seventy five (75) percent for sixty (60) or more consecutive calendar days; Provided that non-operation or reduced operation for a period of sixty (60) or more consecutive calendar days to facilitate maintenance, re-design or other changes about which the City was notified in advance shall not constitute abandonment.
ABSENTEE OWNER. Any real property owner(s) who customarily resides some place other than the property (whether an estate or business) in question.
ABUTTING. Lots sharing common property lines.
ACCESS. The way or means by which pedestrians and vehicles enter and leave property.
ACCESSORY BUILDING - A detached subordinate building, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the principal building or to the principal use of the land and which is located on the same tract with the principal building or use.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU). A habitable dwelling unit added to, created within, or detached from and on the same lot with a single-family dwelling that provides basic requirements for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
ACCESSORY LIVING QUARTERS. A single residential dwelling unit that is an attached or detached part of a commercial or manufacturing building, and which is incidental to the commercial or manufacturing use.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure either attached or detached from a principal building and located on the same lot and which is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use.
ACCESSORY USE. A use of land or of a building customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and located on the same lot with the principal use.
ACTIVITIES OF DAILY LIVING (ADL) ASSISTANCE. Provision of personal care services in a state-licensed boarding home for assisted living consisting of at least minimal assistance with the following:
    a. Bathing. Reminding or cuing to wash and dry all areas of the body as needed, stand-by assistance getting into and out of the tub or shower, and physical assistance in steadying the resident during the activity; and
    b. Dressing. Reminding or cuing to put on, take off, or lay out clothing, including prostheses when the assistance of a licensed nurse is not required; stand-by assistance during the activity; and physical assistance limited to steadying the resident during the activity; and
    c. Eating. Reminding or cuing to eat and drink; and physical assistance limited to cutting food up, preparing food and beverages, and bringing food and fluids to the resident; and
    d. Personal hygiene. Reminding and cuing to comb hair, perform oral care and brush teeth, shave, apply makeup, and wash and dry face, hands and other areas of the body; stand-by assistance during the activity; and physical assistance limited to steadying the resident during the activity; and
    e. Transferring. Reminders or cuing to move between surfaces, for example to and from the bed, chair and standing; stand-by assistance during the activity; and physical assistance limited to steadying the resident during self-transfers; and
    f. Toileting. Reminders and cuing to toilet, including resident self-care of ostomy or catheter, to wipe and cleanse, and to change and adjust clothing, protective garments and pads, stand-by assistance during the activity; and physical assistance limited to steadying the resident during the activity; and
    g. Mobility. Reminding or cuing to move between locations on the boarding home premises; stand-by assistance during the activity; and physical assistance limited to steadying the resident during the activity.
ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES. Adequate public facilities means facilities which have the capacity to serve development without decreasing levels of service below locally established minimums.
ADJACENT. Lots located across a right-of-way, railroad or street, except limited access roads.
ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMIT. A written decision granted by the Community Development Director to authorize the development or operation of a proposed land use activity subject to special degrees of control.
AGRICULTURAL USE. Land primarily devoted to the commercial production of dairy, apiary, furbearing, vegetable, or animal products or of grain, hay, straw, turf, seed, fin fish, or livestock, and that has long-term commercial significance for agricultural production.
AIRPORT. Any land area, runway or other facility designed, used or intended to be used either publicly or by any person or persons for the landing and taking off of aircraft, including all necessary taxiways, aircraft storage and tie-down areas, hangars, and other necessary buildings and open spaces.
ALLEY. A public or private way not more than 30 feet wide at the rear or side of property affording only secondary means of vehicular or pedestrian access to abutting property.
ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL. Any change or repair which would tend to prolong the life of the supporting members of a building or structure, such as alteration or bearing walls, foundation, columns, beams, or girders. In addition, any change in the external dimensions of the building shall be considered a structural alteration.
AMATEUR RADIO STATION OPERATORS OR RECEIVE-ONLY ANTENNAS. Any tower or antenna that is under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas.
AMENDMENT. Amendment means a change in the wording, context, or substance of this code or the comprehensive plan; a change in the zoning map or comprehensive plan map; a change to the official controls of City code; or any change to a condition of approval or modification of a permit or plans reviewed or approved by the Community Development Director or Hearing Examiner.
ANCHOR. The device to which tie-downs are secured or fastened having a holding power of not less than 4,800 pounds. They include, but are not necessarily limited to, screw auger, expanding or concrete deadmen type anchors, and are to be constructed as to accommodate “over the top” and “frame” type tie-downs, used singly or in conjunction.
ANTENNA HEIGHT OR HEIGHT. When referring to a tower or other Wireless Telecommunications Facilities (WTF), the vertical distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel at the base of the tower pad or antenna support structure to the highest point of the structure even if said highest point is an antenna. If the support structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the highest and lowest grades shall be used in calculating the antenna height.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Any pole, telescoping mast, tower, tripod, or other structure which supports a device used in the transmitting or receiving of radio frequency signals.
ANTENNA. Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, data, Internet, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves, and includes equipment attached to a tower or building for the purpose of providing telecommunications services.
ANTIQUE DEALER. Any person engaged, in whole or in part, in the business of selling antiques.
ANTIQUES. Works of art, pieces of furniture, decorative and household objects, and other such collectibles possessing value or commercial appeal owing to their being made during an earlier period.
APARTMENT. A dwelling unit in a multifamily building.
APPEAL. A request for review of the Community Development Director's decision concerning matters addressed by the Ordinance to the Planning Commission or a review of the Hearing Examiner’s decision to the City Council.
APPLICANT FOR WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES (WTF). Any provider or any person, partnership, or company who files an application for any permit necessary to install, maintain, or remove a WTF within the City.
APPLICANT. Any person who makes an application to the City of Lakewood for a development permit.
ARCADE. A linear pedestrian walkway that abuts and runs along the facade of a building. It is covered, but not enclosed, and open at all times to public use. Typically, it has a line of columns along its open side. There may be habitable space above the arcade.
ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES. Districts, sites, building, structures, and artifacts with material evidence of prehistoric human life and culture.
ARCHITECTURAL BARRIERS. Constructed structures such as walls, signs, rockeries, drainage swales or similar constructed features that impact the required landscape areas.
ARCHITECTURAL CHARACTER. The architectural character of a building is that quality or qualities that make it distinctive and that are typically associated with its form and the arrangement of its architectural elements. For example, a prominent design feature may convey the architectural character of a structure. Examples are a distinctive roofline, a turret or portico, an arcade, an elaborate entry, or an unusual pattern of windows and doors.
ARCHITECTURAL ELEMENTS. The elements that make up an architectural composition or the building form, which may include such features as the roof form, entries, an arcade, porch, columns, windows, doors and other openings. “Architectural elements” is used interchangeably with “architectural features” in this chapter.
ARCHITECTURAL SCALE. The perceived height and bulk of a building relative to other forms in its context. Modulating facades and other treatments may reduce a building's apparent height and bulk.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one (1) to three (3) feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and, velocity flow may be evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
AT-RISK TIME IN THE COMMUNITY. The total time, since first being housed in a Type 4 Group Home located within Lakewood, that a person has resided in the community. This includes any time spent in a Type 4 Group Home, whether in Lakewood or elsewhere, as well as any time residing in the community whether or not under DOC supervision. At-risk time in the community does not include any time spent in confinement whether in a jail, prison, pre-release or work camp. Time spent in such facilities shall be tolled for the purpose of calculating summary recidivism rates.
AUTO WRECKING YARD. Any property where two (2) or more motor vehicles not in running condition, or the parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not being restored to operation; or any land, building or structure used for the wrecking or storing of such motor vehicles or the parts thereof.
AUTOMOBILE AND OTHER VEHICLE SALES AREA. An open area, other than a street, used for the display, sale or rental of two (2) or more new or used motor vehicles or trailers and where no repair work is done except minor incidental repair of motor vehicles or trailers to be displayed, sold or rented on the premises.
AUTOMOBILE BODY REPAIR. Those establishments primarily engaged in furnishing automotive vehicle bodywork and painting.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION OR GAS STATION. A building or lot having pumps and storage tanks where fuels, oils or accessories for motor vehicles are dispensed, sold or offered for sale at retail only, repair service is incidental and no storage or parking space is offered for rent.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING OR MOTOR VEHICLE WRECKING. The dismantling or disassembling of motor vehicles or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked motor vehicles or their parts.
AWNING. A shelter extending from the exterior wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window from the elements and composed of non-rigid materials except for the supporting framework.
AXIAL SYMMETRY. The similarity of form or arrangement on either side of a dividing line or plane through the center of an object.
BACKHAUL NETWORK. The lines that connect a provider's wireless telecommunications facilities to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long distance providers, or the public switched telephone network.
BALCONY. An outdoor space built as an above ground platform projecting from the wall of a building and enclosed by a parapet or railing.
BARN. A structure used for the storage of farm products, feed, and for housing farm animals and light farm equipment.
BASE FLOOD. The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT. That portion of a building between floor and ceiling, which is partly below and partly above grade, but so located that the vertical distance from grade to the floor below is less than the vertical distance from grade to ceiling.
BAY WINDOW. A window that protrudes from the main exterior wall. Typically, the bay contains a surface that lies parallel to the exterior wall, and two (2) surfaces that extend perpendicular or diagonally from the exterior wall.
BEACH ACCESS, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE. Trails or roads that provide access for the public to the beach.
BED AND BREAKFAST. A lodging facility comprised of a single residential structure containing up to six units of small-scale temporary lodging which provides a single meal and where the proprietors of the service reside in the structure.
BIOSOLIDS. Municipal sewage sludge that is a primarily organic, semisolid product resulting from the wastewater treatment process, and septage that can be beneficially recycled and meets all applicable health regulations.
BLANK WALLS. Walls subject to “blank wall” requirements are any ground-level wall over six feet in height measured from finished grade at the base of the wall, and longer than fifty (50) feet measured horizontally. A wall subject to the requirement does not have any significant building feature, such as a window, door, modulation or articulation, or other special wall treatment within that fifty (50) foot section.
BLOCK. All land along one (1) side of a street that is between two (2) intersections or intercepting streets, or interrupting streets and a railroad right-of-way, or unsubdivided land or water course.
BOARDING HOUSE. A single family dwelling, without an owner occupant, that is rented to a group of unrelated individuals. A boarding house excludes Types 1, 2, 3, and 4 Group Homes as defined in LMC 18.20.300, Use Types and Levels; hotels and motels as defined in LMC 18A.90.200, and excludes state-licensed foster homes.
BOAT RAMP OR LAUNCH. An improved sloped surface extending from a shoreland area into an aquatic area suitable for removing a boat from the water and launching a boat into the water from a trailer.
BOATHOUSE, PRIVATE. An accessory building, or portion of a building, which provides shelter and enclosure for a boat or boats owned and operated only by the occupants of the premises, and which boathouse is erected on a pier or wharf and/or over a dock or docking slip.
BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind.
BUILDING COVERAGE. The measurement of the gross footprint of all the structures, to include accessory and exempt structures, on a lot. The gross footprint includes all structural elements and projections of a building and includes, but is not limited to; eaves, projections, decks, balconies, elevated patios, breezeways, or canopies.
BUILDING DIVISION. The Building Division of the City of Lakewood Community Development Department.
BUILDING FACADE OR FACADE. The visible wall surface, excluding the roof, of a building when viewed from a public right-of-way or adjacent property. If more than one (1) wall is predominately visible, the walls may be considered one (1) facade for the purposes of signage. A building facade is measured in gross square feet (gsf) and does not include roof area.
BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the average of the elevation of the natural, undisturbed topography or the pre-existing grade at all corners of a proposed structure to the highest point of the structure, in accordance with LMC 18A.50.130, Height Standards.
BUILDING LINE. A line on the comprehensive plan, zoning map, or plat, parallel to the street right-of-way, indicating the limit beyond which buildings or structures may not be erected, or the minimum distance as prescribed by the provisions of this ordinance.
BUILDING OR OCCUPANCY FRONTAGE. The length of that portion of a building or ground floor occupancy which abuts a street, publicly used parking area or mall appurtenant to such building or occupancy, expressed in lineal feet and fractions thereof.
BUILDING RECESS. A recessed portion of a development created by the overhanging upper portion of the building to provide a sheltered area at grade level for pedestrians.
BUILDING, ATTACHED. A building or structure attached to another building or structure by an enclosed interior wall or walls and covered by a roof in common with both structures. A structure connected to another building or structure only by a roof or only by a wall is not considered attached.
BUILDING, DETACHED. A building or structure sharing no common wall with another structure, and generally surrounded by open space on the same lot. A structure connected to another building or structure only by a roof or only by a wall is considered to be a detached building.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building devoted to the principal use of the lot on which it is situated.
BULKHEAD. A vertical wall of steel, timber or concrete used for erosion protection or as a retaining wall.
BUSINESS. The purchase, sale, or other transaction involving the handling or disposition of any article, service, substance, or commodity for livelihood or profit; or the management of office buildings, offices, recreational or amusement enterprises; or the maintenance and use of buildings, offices, structures, and premises by professions and trades rendering services.
CAMOUFLAGE. To disguise, hide, or integrate with an existing or proposed structure or with the natural environment so as to be significantly screened from view.
CAMPSITE. A space provided in a campground or recreational vehicle (RV) park which usually contains a table, stove, parking spur and space for a tent to accommodate a one-family group.
CANOPY. A permanent, cantilevered extension of a building that typically projects over a pedestrian walkway abutting and running along the facade of a building, with no habitable space above the canopy. A canopy roof is comprised of rigid materials.
CAR WASH. Mechanical facilities for the washing or waxing and vacuuming of automobiles, light trucks, and vans.
CARETAKER HOME. An on-site residential dwelling unit of up to two thousand (2,000) square feet providing living accommodations for an individual, together with his/her family, who is employed as a caretaker for a private home, public recreational or community facility, or commercial or industrial establishment. Caretaker units may not be a temporary structure or recreational vehicle and may not remain in residential use if no longer used for caretaker residence.
CARPORT. A covered automobile structure open on one (1) or more sides, with direct driveway access for the parking stall(s). A carport may be integrated with, or detached from the primary structure. An attached carport shall have common wall construction with the primary structure.
CARRYING CAPACITY. The level of development density or use an environment is able to support without suffering undesirable or irreversible degradation.
CATTERY. An enclosure or structure in which any combination of six or more cats that individually exceed seven months of age are kept for breeding, sale, or boarding purposes.
CELL SITE OR SITE. A tract or parcel of land that contains wireless telecommunications facilities including any antenna, support structure, accessory buildings, and parking, and may include other uses associated with and ancillary to Wireless Telecommunications Facilities (WTF).
CEMETERIES. Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbiums, mausoleums and mortuaries, when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery.
CERTIFICATE OF CAPACITY. A document issued by a service provider indicating the quantity of capacity that has been reserved for a specific development project on a specific property.
CHANGE OF USE. A change of use shall be determined to have occurred when it is found that the general character of the use in question has been modified. This determination shall include review of but not be limited to: hours of operation, materials processed or sold, required parking, traffic generation, impact on public utilities, clientele, general appearance and location or a change in use type.
CITY MANAGER. The Administrative Director of the City of Lakewood or his/her designee.
CIRCULATION. The movement or flow of traffic from one place to another through available routes. Traffic includes a variety of modes of travel including pedestrian, motor vehicle and non-motorized methods such as bicycles.
CLEAR-VISION AREAS. A triangular area at intersections or public drives where visual obstructions are to be kept clear as directed by the City Engineer.
CLOSED RECORD APPEALS. Administrative appeals under Chapter 36.70B RCW which are heard by the City Council or Hearing Examiner, following an open record hearing on a project permit application when the appeal is on the record with no or limited new evidence or information allowed to be submitted and only appellate arguments allowed.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT. A development technique wherein home sites or structures are grouped together, with the remainder of the tract left in open space or common open space.
COFFEE KIOSK A coffee kiosk is a small stand-alone structure that provides drive-through service of limited food and beverage items. Coffee kiosks shall not include structures with cooking facilities that require a Type I hood, provide indoor customer seating, or exceed 400 square feet in size.
CO-GENERATION. The simultaneous production of electricity and heat energy. The heat is normally used onsite for industrial processes, space or water heating, or production steam. The electric power may be used onsite or distributed through the utility grid, or both. Co-generation units are normally fired with natural gas, but also may be fueled by oil, biomass or other fuels.
COHABITANTS. A group not more than five (5) persons not meeting the definition of “family,” living together as a single housekeeping group in a dwelling unit.
COLLOCATION OF Wireless Telecommunications Facilities (WTF). The use of a WTF by more than one (1) service provider.
COMBINED USE BUILDING. Residential use types in combination with other use types.
COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY. Any activity carried out for the purpose of financial gain for an individual or organization, whether profit or non-profit.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any motorized vehicle over six thousand (6,000) gvw, including, but not limited to, a van, truck, truck trailer, utility trailer, tractor, grading machine, bulldozer, scraper, boat, motorized crane, or other construction equipment that is used in the operation of a business or in construction, road grading, or logging activities.
COMMON OPEN SPACE. A parcel of land or an area of water or a combination of land and water within a site designed or developed and intended primarily for the use or enjoyment of the residents of such development.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR. The Director of the Community Development Department of the City of Lakewood or his/her designee.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The document, including maps, adopted by the City Council which outlines the City’s goals and policies relating to management of growth and prepared in accordance with Ch. 36.70A RCW. The term also includes any adopted subarea plans prepared in accordance with Ch. 36.70A RCW.
CONCURRENCY. Ensuring that adequate public improvements or strategies are in place at the time of development, and the ability and financial commitment of the service provider to expand capacity or maintain the level-of-service for new development through capital improvements within a six year period as noted in the Transportation Capital Improvement Plan.
CONDITIONAL USE. A use conditionally permitted in a zoning district as defined by this code but which, because of characteristics particular to each such use, size, technological processes, equipment or, because of the exact location with respect to surroundings, streets, existing improvements, or demands upon public facilities, requires a special degree of control to determine if uses can be made compatible with the comprehensive plan, adjacent uses, and the character of the vicinity.
CONDOMINIUM. Real property, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of those portions. Real property is not a condominium unless the undivided interest in the common elements are vested in the unit owners, and unless a declaration and a survey map and plans have been recorded. Condominiums must meet all provisions of Chapter 64.34 RCW.
CONSTRUCTED WETLANDS. Wetlands that are intentionally created on sites that are not wetlands for the primary purpose of wastewater or stormwater treatment. Constructed wetlands are normally considered as part of the stormwater/wastewater collection and treatment system and must be maintained, but are not the same as wetlands created for mitigation purposes, which are typically viewed in the same manner as natural, regulated wetlands.
CONTIGUOUS. Bordering upon, to touch upon, or in physical contact with.
CORRECTIONAL FACILITIES. Facilities for holding persons in custody or in detention, including county jails, state prisons, juvenile detention facilities, pre-release facilities, work release facilities, and other facilities to which a person may be incarcerated upon arrest or pursuant to sentencing by court.
COTTAGE. A Single Family Detached Dwelling containing at least eight hundred (800) an no more than on thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of gross floor area, constructed as part of a cottage housing development project and subject to the general requirements of LMC section 18A.10.800.
COTTAGE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT. An alternative type of development compromised of small, Single Family Detached Dwellings (“cottages”) clustered around common open space, usually with detached garages and parking area.
COURTYARD, INTERIOR COURT. A space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above grade level on a lot and bounded on three (3) or more sides by walls of a building.
COURTYARD. A courtyard is an open space usually landscaped, which is enclosed on at least three (3) sides by a structure or structures.
CROP AND TREE FARMING. The use of land for horticultural purposes.
CURB CUT. A curb cut is a depression in the curb for a driveway to provide vehicular access between private property and the street.
CURB LEVEL. Curb level for any building means the level of the established curb in front of such building measured at the center of such front. Where no curb elevation has been established, the mean elevation of the finished lot grade immediately adjacent to a building shall be considered the curb level.
DANGEROUS WASTE. Any discarded, useless, unwanted, or abandoned substances including, but not limited to, certain pesticides, or any residues or containers of such substances which are disposed of in such quantity or concentration as to pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, wildlife, or the environment because such wastes or constituents or combinations of such wastes: have short-lived, toxic properties that may cause death, injury, or illness or have mutagenic, teratogenic, or carcinogenic properties; or are corrosive, explosive, flammable, or may generate pressure through decomposition or other means. Includes wastes designated in WAC 173-303-070 through 173-303-103 as dangerous wastes.
DAYCARE CENTER. A daycare facility which operates in a place other than a residence, with no limitation as to the number of clients.
DAYCARE FACILITY. A building or structure in which care is regularly provided for a group of children or adults for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours. Day care facilities include family day care homes and day care centers regulated by the Washington State Department of Social and Health Services or successor agency, as presently defined and as may be hereafter amended (RCW 74.15, WAC 388-73-422).
DAYCARE, HOME. A daycare facility which operates in the provider’s residence and is subject to a limitation on the number of clients.
DAYCARE, HOME-BASED. A daycare facility with no more than twelve (12) persons in attendance at any one time in the provider’s home in the family living quarters, including immediate family members who reside in the home.
DECIBEL. A unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound. Sound level meters which are employed to measure the intensity of sound are calibrated by decibels.
DECIDUOUS TREE. A tree which loses its foliage annually.
DECK. A deck is a roofless, outdoors above ground platform projecting from the wall of a building and supported by piers or columns.
DEPARTMENT. The City of Lakewood Community Development Department.
DESIGN DETAILS. Architectural or building design details refer to the minor building elements that contribute to the character or architectural style of the structure. Design details may include moldings, mullions, rooftop features, the style of the windows and doors, and other decorative features.
DESIGN, Wireless Telecommunications Facilities (WTF). The appearance of WTF, including such features as their materials, colors, and shape.
DESIGNATED ZONE FACILITY. Any hazardous waste facility that requires an interim or final status permit under rules adopted under Chapter 70.105 RCW and Chapter 173-303 WAC, and that is not a preempted facility as defined in RCW 70.105.010 or in Chapter 173-303 WAC. A hazardous waste treatment or storage facility is a designated zone facility.
DEVELOPMENT means any human-induced change to improved or unimproved real property including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings or other structures, placement of manufactured home/mobile, mining, dredging, clearing, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, or the subdivision of property, removal of substantial amounts of vegetation, or alteration of natural site characteristics.
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY. Any action taken either in conjunction with a use or to make a use possible. Activities do not in and of themselves result in a specific use. Most activities may take place in conjunction with a variety of uses.
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. Any document granting, or granting with conditions, an application for a site plan, building permit, discretionary decision, or other official action of the City having the effect of authorizing the development of land.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A plan drawn to scale, indicating but not limited to, the proposed use, the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon, the exact sizes and locations on the lot of buildings already existing, if any, and the location on the lot of the proposed building or alteration, yards, setbacks, landscaping, off-street parking, ingress and egress, and signs.
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. Regulation of the location and size of development, including but not limited to setbacks, landscaping, screening, height, site coverage, signs, building layout, parking and site design and related features of land use.
DISCONTINUANCE. The abandonment or nonuse of a building, structure, sign or lot.
DISCRETIONARY PERMIT. A decision which requires special analysis or review due to the nature of the application or because special consideration was requested by the applicant.
DISTRICT. An area designated by this title, with specific boundaries, in which lie specific zones, or special purpose area as described in this title.
DOCK-HIGH LOADING AREAS. Truck maneuvering areas and loading or unloading areas associated with loading doors that are located above the finish grade.
DOCKS. A pier or secured float or floats for vessel moorage, fishing, or other water use.
DOUBLE-FRONTAGE LOT. A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one (1) street.
DRAINAGE DITCH. A constructed channel with a bed, bank or sides which discharges surface waters into a major or minor creek, lake, pond or wetland.
DRIPLINE. A circle drawn at the soil line directly under the outermost branches of a tree.
DRIVE-THROUGH. A business establishment, building, or structure which, by design, physical facilities, or services or products format encourages or permits customers to access sales or services from a service window while remaining in their vehicles, with access provided by a dedicated lane or lanes incorporated into the site design.
DRIVEWAY. A paved or graveled surface a minimum of fifteen (15) feet in width that provides access via a paved apron to a lot from a public or private right-of-way.
DUPLEX. One (1) detached residential building, vertically or horizontally attached, containing two (2) dwelling units totally separated from each other by a one (1) hour firewall or floor, designed for occupancy by not more than two (2) families.
DWELLING UNIT. One (1) room, or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, or boarding house, or rental or lease on a weekly, monthly or longer basis, and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure or on the same property, and containing independent cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities. All rooms comprising a dwelling unit shall have access through an interior door to other parts of the dwelling unit. An efficiency apartment, also known as a studio apartment, constitutes a dwelling unit within the meaning of this title.
DWELLING. A building or portion thereof designed exclusively for human habitation, but not including hotels or motel units.
EASEMENT. A non-possessory interest in the land of another which entitles the owner of the interest to a limited use or enjoyment of the other's land for the purpose of and to protection from interference with this use by a public or private street, railroad, utilities, transmission lines, walkways, sidewalks, bikeways, equestrian trails, and other similar uses. An easement may be exclusive or include more than one (1) user.
EFFLUENT. With regard to water quality, treated or untreated liquid entering the estuary from a point source. With regard to dredging, water, including dissolved and suspended materials, which flows from a dredged material disposal site.
EQUIPMENT ENCLOSURE. A structure, shelter, cabinet, or vault used to house and protect the electronic equipment necessary for processing wireless communication signals. Associated equipment may include air conditioning, backup power supplies, and emergency generators.
ERECT. The act of placing or affixing a component of a structure upon the ground or upon another such component.
ESCAPE. Unauthorized absence from the designated facility boundary or failure to return to such place at the appointed time after having been permitted to leave.
EVERGREEN TREE. A tree, often a coniferous tree, which retains its foliage and remains green year round.
EXCAVATE. The removal by man of sand, sediment, or other material from an area of land or water for other than commercial or industrial use.
EXTREMELY HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any waste which will persist in a hazardous form for several years or more at a disposal site and which in its persistent form presents a significant environmental hazard and may be concentrated by living organisms through a food chain or may affect the genetic constitution of humans or other living creatures and is disposed of at a disposal site in such quantities as would present an extreme hazard to man or the environment. Those wastes designated in WAC 173-303-070 through 173-303-103 as extremely hazardous wastes.
FACADE. Any portion of an exterior elevation of a building extending from the ground level to the top of the parapet wall or eaves, for the entire width of the building elevation. A front facade is typically the facade facing the major public street(s). An entry facade is typically the facade with the primary public entry.
FAMILY. A person, or two (2) or more persons related by blood or marriage or law living together as single housekeeping unit in a single dwelling. In addition, the following uses shall be accepted as families pursuant to the requirements of state and/or federal law:
    a. Adult family homes licensed pursuant to RCW 70.128.150;
    b. Foster homes for the placement of the disabled, or expectant mothers in a residential setting including, but not limited to, foster family homes licensed pursuant to Chapter 74.15 RCW, community group care facilities licensed pursuant to Chapter 74.15 RCW and crisis residential centers pursuant to Chapter 13.32A RCW; and
    c. Consensual living arrangements of the disabled protected pursuant to the Federal Fair Housing Act amendments.
    Secure community transition facilities, as defined in Chapter 71.09 RCW, are not protected under the definition of “family.”
    Group Homes, Type 3, 4, and 5, as defined in LMC18A.20.300, Use Types and Levels, are not protected under the definition of “family.”
(For unrelated persons residing together, see “Cohabitants.”)
FAMILY HOME, FOSTER. An agency which regularly provides care on a twenty-four (24) hour basis to one (1) or more children, expectant mothers, or persons with developmental disabilities in the family abode of the person or persons under whose direct care and supervision the child, expectant mother, or person with a developmental disability is placed.
FAMILY MEMBERS. Persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, including foster children.
FEDERAL INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones for those areas.
FENCE, SIGHT-OBSCURING. A fence constructed of solid wood, masonry, metal or other appropriate material that totally conceals the subject use from adjoining uses.
FILL. The placement by man of sand, sediment or other material to create new uplands or raise the elevation of the land.
FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A plan or set of plans that comply with the conditions set forth in a preliminary approval and, once approved, authorizes the granting of a discretionary permit.
FLAGPOLE. A staff or pole which is designed to display a flag. A flagpole may be freestanding or attached to a building or to a private light standard.
FLEA MARKET. Arrangements whereby a person or persons sell, lease, rent, offer or donate to one or more persons a place or area where such persons may offer or display new, secondhand or junk items.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). The official map issued by the Federal Insurance Administration where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards applicable to the City of Lakewood have been designated as Zone A.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report in which the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the Flood Hazard Boundary - Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation or normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPLAIN. The area adjoining a stream, tidal estuary or coast that is subject to regional flooding. A regional (100-year) flood is a standard statistical calculation used by engineers to determine the probability of severe flooding. It represents the largest flood which has a one (1) percent chance of occurring in any one (1) year in an area as a result of periods of higher than normal rainfall or streamflows, extremely high tides, high winds, rapid snowmelt, natural stream blockages, tsunamis, or combinations thereof.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. State or local regulations, and any combination thereof, which provides standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPROOFING. A combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents.
FLOODWAY, REGULATORY. The channel or the watercourse reasonably required to carry and discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot.
FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the center line of walls separating two (2) buildings, but not including attic space providing headroom of less than seven feet or basement if more than fifty (50) percent of the basement is less than grade.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR). The floor area ratio of the building or buildings on any lot means the gross floor area of the building or buildings on that lot divided by the gross area of such lot.
FOOTCANDLE. A footcandle is a unit used for measuring the amount of illumination on a surface. The amount of usable light from any given source is partially determined by the angle of incidence of the source and the distance to the illuminated surface.
FREEWAY. Any section of a highway which has been declared to be a freeway by act or resolution of the competent establishing authority.
FRONTAGE ROAD. A street which is parallel and adjacent to an arterial, and which provides access to abutting properties while relieving them of the effect of street traffic access on to and from an arterial.
FRONTAGE. Frontage refers to length of a property line along a public street or right-of-way.
GARAGE. An enclosed automobile structure with direct driveway access principally for vehicular equipment such as automobiles, boats, etc., used by the tenants of the building(s). A garage may be integrated with, attached, or detached from the primary structure. See also PARKING STRUCTURE.
GAS ISLANDS. In conjunction with a motor vehicle service station or convenience commercial use providing gasoline, individual gas islands are comprised of single pumps dispensing single or various grades and types of motor vehicle fuel, or individual banks of pumps dispensing single or various grades and types of motor vehicle fuel, whether or not covered by a single canopy.
GATEWAYS. As used in these guidelines, the term gateway refers to those areas which are entranceways into the City of Lakewood and are so designated in the Lakewood Comprehensive Plan.
GEOLOGIC. Relating to the occurrence and properties of earth. Geologic hazards include but are not limited to faults, land and mudslides, and earthquakes.
GOVERNING AUTHORITY. The City Council of the City of Lakewood.
GRADE, AVERAGE. The average elevation of the undisturbed ground prior to construction at all exterior corners of the proposed structure.
GRADE, FINISHED. The finished surface of the ground, street, paving or sidewalk.
GRADE, PRE-CONSTRUCTION. Prior to any grade, fill or disturbance of soil or vegetation.
GROSS AREA. The total sum area of the lot minus public rights-of-way.
GROSS DENSITY. A calculation of the number of housing units that is allowed on a property based on the maximum density permitted.
GROSS SQUARE FEET (GSF). The sum of the total square footage of any building, lot, property or area.
GROUND COVER. Low-growing vegetative materials with a mound or spreading manner of growth that provides solid cover.
GUYED TOWER. A wireless communication support structure that is typically over 100 feet tall and is steadied by wire guys in a radial pattern around the tower.
HABITABLE FLOOR (for purposes of floods). Any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation or a combination thereof. A floor used only for storage purposes is not a “habitable floor.”
HABITABLE ROOM (for purposes of floods). An undivided enclosed space within a dwelling used for sleeping or kitchen facilities. This term does not include attics, cellars, corridors, hallways, laundries, serving or storage pantries, bathrooms or similar places.
HABITAT. The place or type of site where an organism lives; the place occupied by an entire community, such as a freshwater tidal marsh community.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE. Any liquid, solid, gas or sludge, including any material, substance, product, commodity or waste, regardless of quantity, that exhibits any of the characteristics or criteria of hazardous waste as described in rules adopted under Chapter 70.105 RCW or in WAC 173-303-090, 173-303-100, 173-303-101, 173-303-102 or 173-303-103.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE FACILITY BUFFER. A setback area between the hazardous substance land use facility boundary and the nearest point of the hazardous substance land use property line, necessary to provide added protection to adjacent land uses or resources of beneficial use. All hazardous waste treatment and storage facilities must maintain at least a fifty (50) foot buffer.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE LAND USE. Any use which is permitted under this title and which includes a designated facility or the processing or handling of a hazardous substance.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE LAND USE FACILITY. The projected line enclosing the area of all structures and lands on which hazardous substance land use activities occur, have occurred in the past or will occur in the future. This does not include the application of products for agricultural purposes or the use, storage, or handling of hazardous substances used in public water treatment facilities.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE PROCESSING OR HANDLING. The use, manufacture, compounding, treatment, synthesis or storage of hazardous substances in excess of the following amounts of cumulative quantities: five thousand (5,000) pounds of solid hazardous substances, five hundred (500) gallons of liquid hazardous substances, six hundred fifty (650) cubic feet of gaseous hazardous substances, or equivalent combination thereof. Hazardous substances shall not be disposed on-site unless in compliance with Dangerous Waste Regulations, WAC 173-303, and any pertinent local ordinances, such as sewer discharge standards.
HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any dangerous and extremely hazardous waste as designated pursuant to RCW 70.105, WAC 173-303, including substances composed of radioactive and hazardous components. A moderate risk waste is not a hazardous waste.
HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITY. The contiguous land and structures, other appurtenance and improvements on the land used for recycling, storing, treating, incinerating or disposing of hazardous waste.
HAZARDOUS WASTE STORAGE FACILITY. Any designated zone facility which holds hazardous waste for a temporary period not to exceed five (5) years; this does not include accumulation of hazardous waste by the generator on the site of generation, as long as the generator complies with the applicable requirements of WAC 173-303-200 and 173-303-201.
HAZARDOUS WASTE TREATMENT FACILITY. Any designated zone facility which processes hazardous waste by physical, chemical or biological means to make such waste nonhazardous or less hazardous, safer for transport, amenable for energy or material resource recovery, amenable for storage, or reduced in volume.
HAZARDOUS WASTE TREATMENT OR STORAGE FACILITY, OFFSITE. Any hazardous waste treatment or storage facility that treats or stores any waste that is generated off the site.
HAZARDOUS WASTE TREATMENT OR STORAGE FACILITY, ONSITE. Any hazardous waste treatment or storage facility that treats or stores only that waste that is generated on the site.
HEARING EXAMINER REVIEW. A process involving the judgment and discretion of the Hearing Examiner in applying specific decision criteria and other requirements unique to a particular use in the approval of an activity permitted, or permitted conditionally, within a zoning district.
HEARING EXAMINER. A person appointed by the City to carry out the functions authorized under LMC 18A.02, Administration, and Chapter 35A.63 RCW.
HOLIDAY DECORATIONS. Temporary messages, displays, lighting, or decorations celebrating national, state, local, ethnic, and religious holidays or holiday seasons.
HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation, profession or lawful commercial activity carried on by a resident living on the premises, and in which said activity is secondary to the use of the dwelling for living purposes, provided that the occupation or profession meets the requirements of LMC 18A.70.250(A) and (C).
HOME OCCUPATION, LIMITED. Any occupation, profession or lawful commercial activity carried on entirely within the dwelling, solely by a resident living on the premises, and which said activity is secondary to the use of the dwelling for living purposes; provided that the limited home occupation meets the requirements of LMC 18A.70.240(A)-(B).
HOMEOWNERS’ ASSOCIATION. An incorporated, nonprofit organization operating under recorded land agreements through which each lot owner is automatically a member, and, each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the common property, and, a charge, if unpaid, becomes a lien against the property.
HORTICULTURE. The cultivation of plants, garden crops, trees and/or stock.
HOTEL. A single building or a group of detached or semi-detached buildings containing six (6) or more guest rooms or self-contained suites, with parking provided on the site for the use of those staying in the rooms or suites, which is or are designed and used for the accommodation of transient travelers for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days.
HUMAN SCALE. The size of a building element or space relative to the dimensions and proportions of a human being.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A hard surface area which either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil mantle as it entered under natural conditions preexistent to development, or that hard surface area which causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from that present under natural conditions preexistent to development. Common impervious surfaces include but are not limited to rooftops, concrete or asphalt paving, paved walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots or storage areas, grasscrete, and oiled, macadam or other surfaces, which similarly impede the natural infiltration of surface water. Open, uncovered retention/detention facilities shall not be considered impervious surfaces.
INCIDENTAL USE. A use that is in conjunction with, and smaller than the main part of a facility or use.
INCOMPATIBLE USES. For the purpose of community design, incompatible uses are those uses, including, but not limited to, outdoor storage, utilities equipment and apparatus, and loading and service facilities, which are considered to be visually intrusive, unsightly and which require site design and screening to mitigate the negative impacts to retail, service and office commercial uses and residential development.
INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT FACILITY. Treatment devices and structures used for the treatment of industrial wastewater prior to being released into a wastewater collection or conveyance system.
INTERIOR LOT AREA. Any area of a lot that is not within a required perimeter or buffer area.
JUDICIAL APPEALS. Appeals filed by a party of record in Pierce County Superior Court.
KENNEL. An enclosure or structure in which any combination of six (6) or more dogs that individually exceed seven (7) months of age are kept for breeding, sale, training, boarding, or sporting purposes.
KITCHEN. Any room or rooms, or portion of a room or rooms, used or intended or designed to be used for cooking or the preparation of food.
LAKE. A natural or artificial body of water of two (2) or more acres or where the deepest part of the basin at low water exceeds two (2) meters. Artificial bodies of water with a recirculation system approved by the City Engineer are not included in this definition.
LANDFILL, DEMOLITION. A solid waste facility for the permanent disposal of demolition wastes resulting from the demolition or razing of buildings, roads and other man-made structures, consisting of, but not limited to, concrete, brick, bituminous concrete, wood and masonry, composition roofing and roofing paper, steel and minor amounts of other materials. Plaster or other materials likely to produce leachate is not demolition waste.
LANDFILL, INERT. A solid waste facility for the permanent disposal of inert materials which are non-combustible and non-dangerous wastes likely to retain their physical and chemical structure including resistance to biological and chemical attack from acidic rainwater.
LANDFILL, MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE. A solid waste facility for the permanent disposal of mixed household, commercial or industrial waste from municipal sources delivered by hauling companies or self-hauled by residents or businesses.
LANDFILL, SPECIAL WASTE. A solid waste facility for the permanent disposal of one (1) specific type of waste of limited, known and consistent composition such as an ash monofill, a landspreading disposal facility for biosolids, problem waste landfill or any facility which is not previously defined but is permitted with a state solid waste permit as a “limited purpose landfill.”
LANDFILL, WOOD WASTE. A solid waste facility with two thousand (2,000) or more cubic yards of capacity for the permanent disposal of wood waste which does not contain chemical preservatives. This does not include wood waste landfills on forest lands regulated under the state Forest Practices Act but does include facilities which use wood waste as a component of fill.
LANDFILL. A solid waste facility for the permanent disposal of solid wastes in or on the land which requires a solid waste permit under RCW 70.95.
LANDSCAPING. Vegetative cover including shrubs, trees, flowers, ground cover and other similar plant material.
LARGE-SCALE COMMERCIAL FACILITIES. Principal, anchoring retail use integrated with other commercial or services uses under common ownership or use exceeding 100,000 square feet of cumulative gross floor area. For this purpose, “under common ownership or use” shall mean a single establishment which shares checkstands, management, a controlling ownership interest, or storage areas, e.g., a hardware/nursery, pharmacy, and/or grocery component associated with a general merchandise store.
LATTICE TOWER. A support structure which consists of a network of crossed metal braces, forming a tower which is usually triangular or square in cross-section.
LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET. In space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used and accessible to such deliveries when required off-street parking spaces are filled. Required off-street loading space is not to be included as off-street parking space in computation of required off-street parking space.
LOCAL ROAD OR STREET. A road or street which is used or intended to be used primarily for providing access to abutting properties.
LOT. A fractional part of divided lands having fixed boundaries, being of sufficient area and dimension to meet minimum zoning requirements for width and area, and developed or built upon as a unit. The term shall include “tracts” or “parcels”.
LOT AREA. The total area, in gross square feet (gsf), within the lot lines of a lot, excluding right-of-way. For the purposes of flood regulations, any portion of a lot lying below the ordinary high water mark or lawfully constructed bulkhead shall not be included in a lot area calculation.
LOT COVERAGE. The area of a lot covered by a building or buildings, expressed as a percentage of the total lot area.
LOT DEPTH. The perpendicular distance measured from the mid-point of the front lot line to the mid-point of the opposite lot line.
LOT LINE. The property line bounding a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT. Normally, the property line separating the lot from the street, other than an alley, from which access is provided to the lot. For the purpose of establishing setback requirements, orientation of the dwelling unit shall be independent of access to the parcel. In the case of a corner lot, the front lot line shall be the property line with the narrow dimension adjacent to the street.
LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line and which is in the same plane and runs parallel to the front lot.
LOT LINE, INTERIOR. Any property line which is neither a front nor a rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD. A lot that is part of a subdivision recorded, pursuant to statute, with the Pierce County Auditor, or a legally created lot under state and local subdivision on regulations in effect at the time of creation or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
LOT, BUILDABLE. A legal lot which is proposed for use in compliance with this title, and has received approval of the water supply and sewage disposal method as appropriate to such use.
LOT, CORNER. A lot of which at least two (2) adjacent sides abut streets other than alleys.
LOT, CUL-DE-SAC. A lot which has a front lot line contiguous with the outer radius of the turn-around portion of a cul-de-sac.
LOT, FLAG. A flag lot is surrounded by abutting lots with an extended access way to a street right-of-way.
LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, THROUGH. An interior lot having frontage on two (2) streets, and which is not a corner lot.
LOT, WIDTH. The average horizontal distance between the side lot lines, ordinarily measured parallel to the front lot lines, except that portion of a flag lot that usually forms an extended access way to a street right-of-way.
LOWEST FLOOR. For flood purposes the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement or crawl space). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, useable for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a structure’s lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is compliant with Section 18A.40.170(A)(4), (i.e provided there are adequate openings to allow floodwaters into the area).
LUMEN. A lumen is a unit used for measuring the amount of light energy given off by a light source.
MAINTENANCE. Routine upkeep of existing structure or facilities which are in current use or operation.
MAJOR COMMERCIAL OR EMPLOYMENT CENTERS. An integrated planned development within the NC2, CBD, SD, C1, C2, IBP, I1, and I2 zoning districts with contiguous ownership larger than 12 acres in size. Contiguous properties under separate control, but which function as an integrated center and when combined are larger than 12 acres in size, may be considered a major center.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. A tract of land that was permitted, designed, and maintained under a single ownership or unified control where two (2) or more spaces or pads are provided solely for the placement of manufactured homes for residential purposes with or without charge. A manufactured home park shall not include manufactured home subdivisions or recreational vehicle parks.
MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE. An apportioned piece of land within a park designed to accommodate a single manufactured home, also known as a “pad.”
MANUFACTURED HOME. A factory-assembled structure that was constructed in accordance with the 1976 or later HUD federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act in effect at the time of construction, and displays the appropriate HUD or Department of Labor and Industries label,
    a. is suitable for movement along public highways;
    b. is intended solely for human habitation; and
    c. has sleeping, eating and plumbing facilities.
Manufactured homes do not include modular homes or recreational vehicles as herein defined. For the purpose of flood hazard regulations only, a manufactured home is a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. It includes recreational vehicles or travel trailers that are placed on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.
MAP. A representation, usually on a flat surface, of the whole or part of an area.
MARINA. Facilities which provide moorage, launching, storage, supplies and a variety of services for recreational, commercial and fishing vessels. They are differentiated from docks and moorages by their larger scale, the provision of significant shore or land-side services and/or the use of a solid breakwater (rock, bulkheading, etc.).
MARQUEE. A roof-like projection over the entrance to a theater, hotel, or other building.
MAXIMUM DENSITY. The maximum number of dwelling units allowed per gross acre (dua), excluding accessory dwelling units.
MEAN HIGH WATER (MHW). The average height of all high waters over a nineteen (19) year period.
MINI-WAREHOUSE. A facility consisting of separate storage units which are rented to customers having exclusive access to their respective units for storage of residential or commercial oriented goods. No business is conducted out of storage units.
MITIGATE. To alleviate the negative impacts of a particular action.
MITIGATION. Any action that, to some degree, softens the impact of development on critical or sensitive areas. This may include all or any one of the following actions:
    a. avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;
    b. minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of an action and its implementation;
    c. rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment;
    d. reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations; and
    e. compensating for the impact by creation, restoration, or enhancement of critical or sensitive areas to maintain their functional processes, such as natural biological productivity, habitat, and species diversity, unique features and water quality. Any mitigation action or combination of actions may involve monitoring and remedial follow-up measures.
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT. The development of a parcel or structure with one or more different land uses, such as a combination of residential, office, retail, public, or entertainment, in a single or physically integrated group of structures. Mixed use is characterized by: (1) complementary land uses – land uses that are at least compatible and, preferably, work together for mutual benefit (e.g., personal commercial services that serve adjacent residences); and (2) convenient pedestrian connections.
MOBILE HOME PAD. That part of a mobile home space which has been reserved for the placement of the mobile home, appurtenant structures, or addition.
MOBILE HOME PARK. An area under one (1) ownership designed to accommodate ten or more mobile homes (see Manufactured Home for definition of mobile home).
MOBILE HOME. A structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for residential purposes, that was constructed prior to June 15, 1976 and/or does not conform to [HUD] Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act. Mobile home does not include recreational vehicles. The appropriate HUD or Department of Labor and Industries label is displayed.
MOBILE TRANSMISSION FACILITY. A movable, non-stationary transmission facility that contains wireless telecommunications equipment including any antenna, support structure, accessory structures, and may include other uses associated with and ancillary to wireless telecommunications facilities.
MOBILE VENDING. Any for-profit or non-profit business selling food and/or drink at or adjacent to the vehicle or cart in which such items are carried and/or prepared. This definition shall not include businesses providing or offering to provide scheduled delivery of food products to individual residences.
MODERATE RISK WASTE FIXED FACILITY. A solid waste transfer facility needing a state solid waste permit which specializes in the collection of household hazardous waste for packaging for transport to a disposal facility for recycling. It may collect limited amounts of hazardous waste from small quantity generators that are businesses which generate hazardous waste in quantities below the threshold for regulation under Washington Dangerous Waste Regulations (RCW 70.105).
MODERATE RISK WASTE. Those wastes defined in WAC 173-303-040 as moderate risk wastes. This may include any waste that exhibits any of the properties of hazardous waste but is exempt from regulation under Chapter 70.105 RCW solely because the waste is generated in quantities below the threshold for regulation, and any household waste which is generated from the disposal of substances identified by the Department of Ecology as hazardous household substances.
MODIFICATION. The changing of any portion of a wireless telecommunications facility from its description in a previously approved permit, excluding routine maintenance and repair. Examples include, but are not limited to, changes in design or structure, changes in the heights of towers or monopoles, changes in any accessory structures or appurtenances that are affiliated with or support a wireless telecommunications facility.
MODULAR HOME. A detached dwelling that is designed for human habitation, is either entirely or substantially prefabricated at a place other than a building site, and is constructed or installed on the site in accordance with the UBC and bearing the appropriate insignia indicating such compliance. Modular homes are also commonly referred to as “prefabricated”, “panelized,” or “factory-built” units.
MODULATION. A stepping back or projecting forward of portions of a building facade within specified intervals of building width and depth as a means of breaking up the apparent bulk of a structure's continuous exterior walls.
MONOPOLE TOWER. A support structure which consists of a single pole sunk into the ground and/or attached to a foundation.
MOORAGE. Piling or a dock, or both, used to secure a boat or barge.
MOTEL. A building or group of buildings on the same lot, containing units with separate entrances and consisting of individual sleeping quarters detached or in connected rows, with or without cooking facilities, for rental to transients and guests for compensation.
MOTOR VEHICLE. Motor vehicle includes every device capable of being moved upon a public highway and in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway except for mopeds, bicycles and other devices moved by human or animal power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE OR REPAIR. Those establishments engaged in fixing, engine tune-up, adjusting lights or brakes, or supplying and installing replacement parts of or for passenger vehicles and trucks.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION. Any premises used for supplying gasoline, oil, minor accessories and services, excluding body and fender repair, for automobiles at retail direct to the customer.
MOUNT. The structure or surface upon which wireless telecommunications facilities are mounted. There are three (3) types of mounts:
    a. Building mounted. A wireless telecommunications facility mount fixed to the roof or side of a building.
    b. Ground mounted. A wireless telecommunications facility mount fixed to the ground, such as a tower.
    c. Structure mounted.
A wireless telecommunications facility fixed to a structure other than a building, such as light standards, utility poles, water towers, and bridges.
MULTIFAMILY DESIGN REVIEW. An administrative process for the purpose of reviewing multifamily development applications for compliance with specific site design, landscape design and building design criteria.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING. Multiple residential units within a single residential structure, or multiple residential structures, which provide separate living accommodations for multiple individuals or families. Multifamily dwelling units are typically under common ownership and management but may be separately owned condominium units on a commonly owned parcel or cooperatively owned.
MURAL. A picture on an exterior surface of a structure. A mural is a sign only if it is related by text, logo, or pictorial depiction to the advertisement of any product or service or the identification of any business.
NATURAL AREAS. All or portions of a parcel of land undisturbed by development and maintained in a manner which preserves the indigenous plant materials.
NEIGHBORHOOD PARK OR PLAYGROUND. An area for recreational activities, such as but not limited to field games, court games, crafts, playground apparatus area, skating, walking, viewing, picnicking, wading pools, swimming pools.
NET ACREAGE. The buildable area after the area of street right-of-way has been subtracted.
NOISE LEVEL REDUCTION (NLR). Difference in noise level from outside to inside of the building. NLR is a difference, in decibels, between A-weighted sound levels; it depends primarily on the nature of the walls, ceilings, windows, doors and vents and, to a lesser extent, on the amount of sound-absorbing material in the room in which the sound is received. It shall be measured, if so required, by the building official, in a completed and furnished building by application of the testing procedure described in this section.
NONCONFORMING LOT. A lot which does not conform to the design or density requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. A nonconforming lot is a lot that was legal when it was created but no longer meets the current area, width, or depth dimensional requirements and/or does not meet the landscaping, site planning, or site design requirements for the zoning district in which the property is located. Nonconforming lots may be occupied by any permitted use in the district; provided, that all other development regulations in effect at the time of development must be met.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. A nonconforming structure is one which was lawfully erected in conformance with the regulations in effect at the time of its construction but which no longer conforms to current development standards including, but not limited to design, height, setback or coverage requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. A structure shall not be considered non-conforming for the purposes of this code if the only nonconforming aspect is failure to comply with the Chapter 18A.50.200, Community Design Standards.
NONCONFORMING USE. The use of land, a building or a structure lawfully existing prior to the effective date of this title or subsequent amendments thereto, which does not conform with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMITY. Any land use, structure, lot or sign legally established prior to the effective date of this title or subsequent amendment, which is no longer permitted by or in full compliance with the regulations of this title.
NON-PROJECT ACTION. A decision on a policy, plan or program, which is not related to a specific project and/or which affects a significant portion of or the City of Lakewood in its entirety, including but not limited to the adoption or amendment of the comprehensive plan, development regulations, and/or subarea plans, zoning of newly annexed land, area-wide rezones, and zoning map amendments, except for site specific rezones authorized by the comprehensive plan.
NON-VEGETATIVE GROUNDCOVER. Bark mulch, gravel and other nonvegetative materials that promote vegetative growth by retaining moisture or preventing weeds.
NON-WHIP ANTENNA. An antenna that is not a whip antenna, such as dish antennas, panel antennas, etc.
NOXIOUS MATTER. Materials that are capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction or are capable of causing detrimental effects upon the psychological, social, or economic well-being of human beings.
NURSERY, HORTICULTURAL. A place where trees, shrubs, vines, etc. are propagated for transplanting or for use as stocks for grafting and where such flora can be sold.
NURSING HOME. A multi-unit or multi-bed facility that are licensed or approved to provide living accommodations and round-the-clock health car and medical supervision.
OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building is used or intended to be used. The term shall also include the building or room housing such use. Change of occupancy is not intended to include change of tenants or proprietors.
OCCUPANT. A person, family, group, or organization who is using or living in a particular building, apartment, or room.
ODOR CONTROL STRUCTURE. Equipment or structures appurtenant to wastewater conveyance facilities used to lessen the odors of the liquids being transported.
OFFICIAL CONTROLS. Legislatively defined and enacted policies, standards, precise detailed maps and other criteria, all of which control the physical development of the county, and are the means of translating into regulations and ordinances all or any part of the general objectives of the comprehensive plan.
OFFICIAL MAP. Maps that show the designation, location and boundaries of the various districts which have been adopted and made a part of this title.
OFF-SITE. With respect to mitigation, an area separated from the impact area by a significant distance and that offers little or no opportunity for reestablishing lost values and functions to organisms which originally benefited from the lost habitat.
OFFSITE HAZARDOUS WASTE TREATMENT OR STORAGE FACILITY. Any hazardous waste treatment or storage facility which treats or stores wastes that are generated off the site.
ON-SITE. With respect to mitigation, an area adjacent to or near the impact area that offers a reasonable opportunity for reestablishing lost values and functions to organisms which originally benefited from the lost habitat.
ONSITE HAZARDOUS WASTE TREATMENT OR STORAGE FACILITY. Any hazardous waste treatment or storage facility that treats or stores only those wastes that are generated on the site.
OPEN HOUSE. A temporary real estate event where a property owner or his representative opens a structure or structures on one or more contiguous Pierce County Assessor's tax parcels with single or the same ownership, to be inspected by the general public for the sole purpose of sale, rent, or lease of a structure thereon.
OPEN RECORD HEARING. A hearing held by a decision-making body who is authorized by the City to conduct such hearings, that creates the City's record through testimony and submission of evidence and information, under procedures prescribed by the City by ordinance or resolution.
OPEN SPACE. Land used for farm or forest uses, and any land area that would, if preserved and continued in its present use:
    a. Conserve and enhance natural or scenic resources;
    b. Protect air or streams or water supply;
    c. Promote conservation
    d. Enhance the value to the public of abutting or neighboring parks, forests, wildlife preserves, nature preservations or sanctuaries or other open space.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK. That mark that will be found by examining the bed and banks and ascertaining where the presence and action of waters are so common and usual, and so long continued in all ordinary years, as to mark upon the soil a character distinct from that of the abutting upland, in respect to vegetation as that condition exists on the effective date of this title, or as it may naturally change thereafter; provided, that in any area where the ordinary high-water mark cannot be found, the ordinary high-water mark shall be the line of mean high water.
ORNAMENTAL TREE. A tree that is either a conifer or deciduous tree that is accessory, decorative, enhance and accent the general landscaping of the site. Ornamental trees are generally between eight (8) and twenty (20) feet tall at maturity.
OUTSIDE STORAGE. All or part of a lot which is used for the keeping of materials, vehicles or products in an open, uncovered yard or in an unwalled building. Such materials may include tractors, backhoes, heavy equipment, construction materials and other similar items.
OVERLAY DISTRICT. A defined geographic area where a set of development regulations are established to achieve a specific public purpose. These regulations are in addition to those of the underlying zoning district.
OWNER. The owner of record of real property as shown on the tax rolls of the Pierce County Assessor, or a person who is purchasing a piece of property under contract.
OWNER OCCUPANT. A property owner, as reflected in title records, that makes his or her legal residence at the site, and actually resides at the site more than six months out of any given year.
OWNERSHIP. The existence of legal equitable title to land.
PACKAGE WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT. A pre-assembled factory built treatment plant.
PARAPET WALL. That portion of a vertical building wall that extends above the roof of the building.
PARCEL. A lot or plot of land proposed or created in accordance with this Code or prior subdivision ordinance and state law and intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership. The external boundaries existing as of the date of incorporation of the City of Lakewood shall be used to establish what is a parcel for the purposes of this Code. For parcels which have not been conveyed since that date, the legal description used in the conveyance closest to that date shall control.
PARKING AREA. An area accessible to vehicles, which area is provided, improved, maintained, and used for the sole purpose of accommodating a motor vehicle.
PARKING SPACE. Any off-street surface area of not less than fifteen (15) feet by eight (8) feet in size, exclusive of maneuvering and access area, permanently reserved for the storage or parking of one (1) vehicle, and connected with an access which affords ingress and egress for vehicles.
PARKING STRUCTURE. A building or structure consisting of more than one (1) level, above and/or below ground with one (1) or more common entrances, and used for the parking and/or temporary storage of motor vehicles.
PARKING, SURFACE. An off-street, ground level open area, usually improved, for the parking and/or temporary storage of motor vehicles.
PARKS AND CAMPGROUNDS. A developed area devoted to overnight temporary use for vacation, and/or recreational or emergency purposes, but not for residential purposes. A camping site may be occupied by a tent, travel trailer or recreational vehicle. Campgrounds shall not include intensively developed commercial uses such as retail stores or gas stations.
PARTIES OF RECORD. Persons with legal standing with respect to an application including the applicant, property owner as identified by the records available from the Pierce County assessor's office, or any person who testified at the open record public hearing on the application and/or; Any person who submitted written comments during administrative review or has submitted written comments concerning the application at the open record public hearing, excluding persons who have only signed petitions or mechanically produced form letters.
PASSIVE RECREATION. An outdoor leisure time activity which usually occurs in a natural or designed urban setting. Passive recreation may occur in common open lawn areas and, where determined appropriate, critical area buffers, aquifer recharge and flood water storage areas. Activities may include picnicking, sightseeing, walking, hiking, biking, horseback riding, and nature walks. Accessory structures associated with passive recreation include: Playground equipment, picnic shelters and tables, barbecue pits, exercise stations, restroom facilities, benches, directory signs, garbage containers, and landscaped areas.
PASSIVE RESTORATION. The use of natural processes, sequences, and timing which occurs after the removal or reduction of adverse stresses without other specific positive remedial action.
PATIO. A recreation area adjoining a dwelling which is often paved or a wood platform of thirty (30) inches or less above finished grade.
PEDESTRIAN-ORIENTED FACADES. Facades that feature one (1) or more of the following characteristics:
    a. Transparent window area or window displays along at least half the length of the ground floor facade.
    b. Sculptural, mosaic or bas-relief artwork along at least half the length of the ground floor facade.
    c. Pedestrian-oriented space, as defined below.
    d. Other measures that meet the intent of the criteria, as approved in conjunction with overall design review approval.
PEDESTRIAN-ORIENTED SPACE. An area between a building and a public street or another building that promotes visual and pedestrian access onto the site and that provides pedestrian-oriented amenities and landscaping to enhance the public's use of the space. Pedestrian-oriented spaces include but are not limited to outdoor plazas, arcades, courtyards, seating areas, and amphitheaters. Pedestrian-oriented spaces have:
    a. Visual and pedestrian access, including handicapped access, into the site from the public right-of-way.
    b. Special textured paved walking surfaces of either concrete or approved unit paving.
    c. On-site or building-mounted lighting providing at least four (4) footcandles (avg.) on the ground.
    d. Seating; at least four (4) feet of seating area (bench, ledge, etc.) or one (1) individual seat per sixty (60) square feet of plaza area or open space.
    e. Landscaping, including trees and seasonal plantings, that defines the space but does not act as a visual barrier to views from the street or adjacent buildings.
    f. Site furniture, artwork or amenities such as fountains, kiosks, etc.
    g. Pedestrian weather protection or other enclosure, such as an arcade or gazebo.
Generally, pedestrian-oriented spaces shall not have:
    a. Asphalt or gravel pavement.
    b. Adjacent unscreened parking lots.
    c. Adjacent chain-link fences.
    d. Adjacent “blank walls” without “blank wall treatment”.
PEDESTRIAN-ORIENTED USE. A commercial use whose customers commonly arrive on foot, or where signage, advertising, window display and entryways are oriented toward pedestrian traffic on a public sidewalk. Pedestrian-oriented businesses may include restaurants, retail shops, personal service businesses, travel services, banks (except drive-through windows), and similar establishments.
PENNANT. A tapered flag having a distinctive triangular form. (See FLAG and STRING PENNANTS)
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. Criterion to control noise, odor, smoke, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare or heat generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.
PERSON. Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, social or fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, branch of government, or any other person or combination acting as a unit, with legal rights and duties, whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent, employee, or guardian.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE, PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES, AND FACILITIES. (see Wireless Telecommunications Facility).
PILING. Wood, concrete or steel posts driven into the bottom in aquatic areas either as mooring devices or to support a dock, float, range marker, or other structure.
PLAT. A map or representation of a subdivision, showing thereon the division of a tract or parcel of land into lots, blocks, streets, and alleys or other division and dedications.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY. A neat and approximate drawing of a proposed subdivision showing the general layout of streets and alleys, lots, blocks, and other elements of a subdivision consistent with the requirements of the City subdivision regulations and Chapter 58.17 RCW. The preliminary plat shall be the basis for the approval or disapproval of the general layout of a subdivision.
PLAT, SHORT. A legally recorded map or drawing which subdivides a parcel of ground into four (4) or fewer lots, tracts, parcels, sites, or divisions for the purpose of sale, lease or transfer of ownership.
PLAZA. A pedestrian space that is available for public use and is situated near a main entrance to a building or is clearly visible and accessible from the adjacent right-of-way. Typical features include special paving, landscaping, lighting, seating areas, water features, and art.
POST OFFICE, BRANCH. A government operated subdivision of a main post office serving as a base for one (1) or more carrier routes and providing customer postal service.
POST OFFICE, CONTRACT STATION. A privately operated, limited-service postal facility carried on as adjunct to a principal business or use.
PREEMPTED FACILITY. Any hazardous waste facility defined as a preempted facility in RCW 70.105.010 or in Chapter 173-303 WAC. This may include any facility that includes as a significant part of its activities any of the following hazardous waste operations:
    a. Landfill,
    b. Incineration,
    c. Land treatment,
    d. Surface impoundment to be closed as a landfill, or
    e. Waste pile to be closed as a landfill.
PRE-EXISTING WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WTF). Any wireless telecommunications facility for which a building permit and/or development permit has been properly issued prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance, including permitted Wireless Telecommunications Facilities (WTFs) that have not yet been constructed, so long as that permit or approval has not expired.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL. An approval, based upon an application and conceptual plan for a Discretionary Land Use Permit, granted by the Director or Examiner which sets forth certain conditions.
PRESCHOOL. An establishment providing exclusively educational programs for prekindergarten or preschool children, but excluding daycare uses as specified in LMC 18A.20.400, Use Types and Levels.
PRINCIPAL USE. The main use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for which the premises exist.
PROCESSING OR HANDLING OF A HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE. The compounding, treatment, manufacture, synthesis, use or storage of hazardous substances in excess of the following amounts in bulk quantities: five thousand (5,000) pounds of solid hazardous substances, five hundred (500) gallons of liquid hazardous substances, and six hundred fifty (650) cubic feet of gaseous hazardous substances.
PROJECT ACTION. Any action taken or activity performed in conjunction with a development or to make a use possible, on a specific site or within a defined geographic area. Project actions do not in and of themselves constitute or result in a specific use. A project action involves a decision on a specific project located in a defined geographic area, such as agency decisions to license, permit, fund, or undertake any activity that will directly modify the environment, whether the activity will be conducted by the agency, an applicant, or under contract, or to purchase, sell, lease, transfer, or exchange natural resources, including publicly owned land, whether or not the environment is directly modified.
PROJECT PERMIT. Any land use or environmental permit or license required from the City of Lakewood for a project action, including but not limited to building permits, site development permits, grading or other land preparation permits, subdivisions, binding site plans, conditional uses, shoreline substantial development permits, site plan review, site specific rezones authorized by the comprehensive plan and other discretionary or administrative land use permits or approvals; but excluding adoption or amendment of the comprehensive plan and development regulations, zoning of newly annexed land, area-wide rezones, and zoning map amendments except as otherwise specifically included above in this definition.
PROPERTY MANAGER. A person or firm charged with the management of land and buildings as a business including renting of property, and keeping the premises and buildings in good condition.
PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENT. The relocation of a common property line between two (2) abutting properties.
PROVIDER. A corporation, company, association, joint stock company, firm, partnership, sole-proprietorship, limited liability company, other entity or individual which provides telecommunications services through the use of wireless telecommunications facilities.
PUBLIC ACCESS. Public access to shoreline and aquatic areas either may be achieved through
    a. direct physical access to shoreland and aquatic areas (i.e. boat ramps);
    b. aesthetic access (i.e. viewing opportunities); and
    c. other facilities providing some degree of access to shorelands and aquatic areas.
PUBLIC FACILITIES. Public facilities include streets, roads, highways, sidewalks, street and road lighting systems, traffic signals, domestic water systems, storm and sanitary sewer systems, storm waste facilities, parks and recreational facilities and schools. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, water supply electric power, gas and transportation of persons or freight.
PUBLIC GAIN. The net gain from combined economic, social, and environmental effects which accrue to the public because of a use or activity and its subsequent resulting effects.
PUBLIC MEETING. An informal or formal meeting, workshop, or other public gathering of persons to obtain comments from the public or other agencies on a proposed project permit prior to the City’s decision, but is not an open record hearing.
PUBLIC ON-SITE OPEN SPACE. A space that is accessible to the public at all times, predominantly open above, and designed specifically for use by the general public as opposed to serving merely as a setting for the building.
PUBLIC OR SEMI-PUBLIC USE. A structure or use, owned or operated by a state, county, City, school district or other public or private agency or concern for the benefit of the public generally including schools, fire stations, libraries, community building, museums, child care centers, fairgrounds, and churches but does not include specific uses or structures which are defined separately in this section.
PUMP/LIFT STATION. The part of a water collection or distribution system that raises water from a lower to a higher elevation.
QUALIFIED ARCHITECT OR ENGINEER. An architect or engineer registered in the state of Washington who, by reason of his/her training and experience, is considered qualified to pass judgment on acoustical design, materials, and methods of construction for the attenuation of noise. The qualifications of the architect or engineer relative to acoustical design must be reviewed and found to be acceptable by the building official.
QUEUING. Specified area for vehicles awaiting service in a drive-through facility, which may include not only the space between point of ingress and the point of service, but also, where applicable, points of service internal to the drive-through operation. Where a drive-through contains not just one but separate points of ordering, payment, and/or receipt of goods, queuing is considered to apply in between all three points as well as between the ingress point and initial point of service. “Queuing” may be used interchangeably with “stacking.”
RECIDIVISM. A condition that results when an offender who has served a period of incarceration is subsequently released from confinement and commits a new crime. As applied herein, a recidivating event is any event that results in the filing of criminal charges in any court of competent jurisdiction; or when an offender is administratively adjudicated and judged to have violated the terms of supervision or confinement in a manner that, had he or she been prosecuted in court, would have been equivalent to a misdemeanor, gross misdemeanor or felony crime in the state of Washington. Administrative adjudications are those conducted by DOC, the Indeterminate Sentence Review Board, their successors or their surrogates. Recidivating events include any criminal conduct including those which occur within the Type 4 Group Home.
RECORDED. Unless otherwise stated, filed for record with the Auditor of the County of Pierce, State of Washington.
RECREATION. The refreshment of body and mind through forms of play, amusement or relaxation. The recreational experience may be active, such as boating, fishing, and swimming, or may be passive such as enjoying the natural beauty of the shoreline or its wildlife. Facilities included as low-intensity recreation include picnic tables, trail signs, unpaved trails and portable restrooms.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. A plot of ground upon which two (2) or more recreational vehicles are located, established or maintained for occupancy by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary living quarters for recreational, education or vacation purposes.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A camping trailer, travel trailer, motor home, truck camper, and any similar vehicular-type units primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, with or without motor power, being of such size and weight as to be operable over highways without requirement of a special highway movement permit.
RECYCLING CENTER. A center for the receiving and storage of recyclable materials such as paper, glass and aluminum. The center would receive materials from the general public. This use may involve some outside storage.
RECYCLING COLLECTION SITE. A site with collection boxes or other containerized storage where citizens can leave materials for recycling.
REHABILITATION. Infrequent, extensive repair of more than routine nature to existing structures or facilities which are in current use or operation.
RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY. An establishment whose principal purpose is religious worship and for which the principal building or other structure contains the sanctuary or principal place of worship, which may include accessory uses in the main building or in separate buildings or structures such as religious educational class rooms, assembly rooms, library or reading room, recreation hall, and a single dwelling unit for caretaker or clergy and his/her immediate family.
REMOTE SWITCHING UNIT. A device or group of devices in a telephone system having the necessary equipment for terminating and interconnecting subscribers' lines, farmer lines, toll lines and inter-facilities trunks, normally dependent on one (1) or more Central Office Switching Units for full operability.
REPLAT. The act of platting the lots, parcels and easements in a recorded subdivision or partition plat to achieve a reconfiguration of the existing subdivision or partition plat or to increase or decrease the number of lots in the subdivision.
RESORT. Any area of land or water used for open land commercial or private recreation where overnight lodging, meals and related tourist services are provided in conjunction with such recreational use.
RETAIL TRADE. The sale or rental of goods and merchandise for final use or consumption.
REVEGETATION. The planting of vegetation to cover any land areas which have been disturbed during construction.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. Land owned, dedicated or conveyed to the public, used primarily for the movement of vehicles, wheelchair, bicycle, and pedestrian traffic. Right-of -way may also include land privately owned, provided that such land has been developed and constructed in compliance with all applicable laws and standards for a public right-of-way.
RIPARIAN. Of, pertaining to, or situated on the edge of the bank of a river, stream or other body of water.
RIPRAP. A layer, facing, or protective mound of stones randomly placed to prevent erosion, scour or sloughing of a structure or embankment; also, the stone so used. In local usage, the similar use of other hard material, such as concrete rubble, is also frequently included as riprap.
ROADSIDE STAND. A temporary structure designed or used for the display or sale of agricultural products primarily produced on the premises upon which such a stand is located.
ROOM. Any space in a building enclosed or set apart by a partition or partitions which is habitable and shall be deemed to apply to any room used as a bedroom, a dining room, a living room, a sitting room, a parlor, a kitchen, a sewing room, a library, a den, a music room, a dressing room, a sleeping porch, a sun room, a sun porch, a party room, a recreation room, a breakfast room, a study, and similar uses.
ROWHOUSE. A three-story residential structure in which individual dwelling units are attached along at least one (1) common wall to at least two (2) other dwelling unit. Each dwelling unit occupies space from the ground to the roof and no portion of a unit may occupy space above or below another unit, except that townhouse units may be constructed over a common shared parking garage, provided the garage is underground.
SALVAGE YARD OR JUNKYARD. A place where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed, disassembled or handled, including, but not limited to, auto and motor vehicle wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards and yards for use of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment.
SCREENING. Placement of a wireless telecommunication facility such as a tower or mount among trees or other appropriate vegetation to provide a natural, aesthetic appearance to the location of such wireless telecommunication facility.
SECONDARY USE. A use subordinate to the principal or primary use of the property, such as commercial, residential, or industrial uses allowed in each zoning district, etc.
SECONDHAND DEALER. Any person engaged, in whole or in part, in the business of buying, selling, trading, or otherwise transferring for value, secondhand or used personal property, metal junk, melted metals, or precious metals and consigned or auctioned goods.
SECONDHAND PROPERTY/GOODS. Any and all used or secondhand goods or items of personal property which can be used again for the purpose for which they were originally intended, including, but not limited to, valuable items such as coins with a value greater than their face value, precious metals, precious stones and jewelry.
SECURITY BARRIER. A wall, fence, or berm that has the purpose of securing a wireless telecommunications facilities wireless service facility from unauthorized entry or trespass.
SEPTAGE. A semisolid consisting of settled sewage solids combined with varying amounts of water and dissolved materials generated from a septic tank system.
SERVICE AREAS. Service areas refer to areas, enclosed or open, that contain equipment and uses such as ground level mechanical equipment, utility vaults, loading zones, outdoor storage areas, and trash and recycling areas.
SERVICE PROVIDER. The department, district or agency responsible for providing the specific public facility or service.
SERVICE USES OR ACTIVITIES. A business which sells the knowledge or work of its people rather than a tangible product.
SETBACK. The minimum required distance, measured from the wall line of any structure and a specified line such as a property line or buffer line that is required to remain free of structures unless otherwise provided in this title.
SEWAGE SYSTEM, ON-SITE. Any system of piping, treatment devices, or other facilities that convey, store, treat, or dispose of sewage on the property where it originates or on adjacent or nearby property under control of the user where the system is not connected to a public or approved private sewer system.
SEWAGE COLLECTION SYSTEM. Pipelines, culverts, and appurtenances which transport wastewater and sewage from points of origin to wastewater treatment plants, or which convey treated wastewater to points of discharge.
SHADING VEGETATION. Vegetation planted on the south side of a major creek that generally provides shade from midmorning to midafternoon. Examples of shading vegetation are specified in LMC 18A.50.400, Landscaping.
SHARED PARKING STRUCTURE. One structure used to house motor vehicles that combines the parking needs of multiple units.
SHED, STORAGE. A structure in which possessions are kept for future use and which is constructed on the owner's property. The owner may not lease the structure or any portion of the storage area to a second party. The structure shall not be used for any form of commercial production or retail sales activities.
SHOPPING CENTER. A retail shopping area designed as a unit, with a minimum of six (6) tenant spaces, and which uses a common parking area.
SHORELINE. The boundary between a body of water and the land, measured on tidal waters at the landward limit of aquatic vegetation or, where aquatic vegetation is absent, Mean Higher High Water; and on non-tidal waterways at the ordinary high water mark.
SHORELINE STABILIZATION. The protection from erosion and sloughing of the banks of tidal or non-tidal streams, rivers or lakes by vegetative or structural means:
    a. Vegetative shoreline stabilization is the use of lands that anchor the soil to prevent shoreline erosion and sloughing.
    b. Structural shoreline stabilization is the use of riprap, bulkheads, sea walls, or other non-vegetative material to prevent shoreline erosion.
SIGNIFICANT TREE. An existing tree which, when measured at four and one-half (4 1/2) feet above ground
    a. has a minimum diameter of nine (9) inches for evergreen trees and deciduous trees;
    b. has a minimum diameter of six (6) inches for Garry Oaks, also known as Oregon White Oaks, and,
    c. Regardless of the tree diameter, is determined to be significant by the Community Development Director due to the uniqueness of the species or provision of important wildlife habitat.
SINGLE FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING. A single-family residential structure that is structurally attached to another single-family residential structure and provides living accommodations for an individual or family. Attached dwelling units may be separate structures located on individual lots or on a commonly owned parcel.
SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING. A residential dwelling unit that is not attached to another residential dwelling unit by any means and provides living accommodations for a single individual or family. Dwelling units shall be separately located, with a maximum of one (1) dwelling unit per individual lot, except as may be allowed in conjunction with approved Cottage Housing Development.
SITE PLANNING. Site planning is the arrangement of buildings, driveways, sidewalks, public open spaces, landscaping, parking, and other facilities on a specific site.
SITE-SPECIFIC ZONING MAP AMENDMENT means a site-specific rezone. A site-specific rezone occurs when there are specific parties requesting a classification change for a specific tract. A site-specific rezone requires three factors: (1) a specific tract of land, (2) a request for a classification change, and (3) a specific party making the request.
SKATING RINK. A commercial facility wherein the rental of skating equipment occurs and an enclosed skating surface for private or public use is provided.
SLOPE LINE. The line perpendicular to the contour lines crossing the property.
SOIL. Soil means the surface layer of earth supporting plant life.
SOLID WASTE INCINERATOR. The processing of solid wastes by means of pyrolysis, refuse-derived fuel or mass incineration within an enclosed structure. These processes may include the recovery of energy resources from such waste or the conversion of the energy in such wastes to more useful forms or combinations thereof. This definition refers to citywide or regional-scale operations and does not include solid waste incineration which is accessory to an individual principal use.
SOLID WASTE TRANSFER STATION. The transfer of solid waste materials from route collection trucks to larger capacity semi-trailers for transport to a solid waste disposal site. The transfer activities would be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure. The use may involve a service area for the repair and maintenance of trucks and an outside parking area for trucks.
SOLID WASTE. All wastes, including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, swill, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles or parts thereof, discarded commodities, sludge from wastewater treatment plants, seepage from septic tanks, wood wastes, dangerous wastes, and problem wastes.
SOUND ABSORPTION. Capacity of the materials and furnishings in a habitable room to absorb sound.
SOUND LEVEL. In decibels, the quantity measured by an instrument that satisfies American National Standard Specification for Sound Level Meters, S1.4-1971, or the most recent revision thereof. Sound level is understood to be measured with the A-weighted filter and slow response of the instrument.
SOUND TRANSMISSION CLASS (STC) OF A PARTITION. A single figure rating of the sound-isolating properties of a partition, which takes into account the relative importance of the sound transmission loss of the partition at different frequencies. The determination of the sound transmission class of a partition is described in “Determination of Sound Transmission Class,” American Society for Testing and Materials, Designation E413-73.
SOUND TRANSMISSION LOSS OF A PARTITION. A measure of the sound-isolating properties of a wall, floor, ceiling, window or door, that is characteristic of the partition itself and not the room of which it is part. The determination of sound transmission loss of a partition, in the field, is described in “Measurement of Airborne Sound Isolation in Buildings,” American Society for Testing and Materials, Designation E336-71 or the latest revision thereof.
SPORTING VEHICLE. A motor- or wind-powered device used in or on the water or off normal public roads for recreational or sporting purposes.
STABILIZATION. The process of controlling or stilling the movement of sand and eroding soil by natural vegetative growth, planting of grasses and shrubs, or mechanical means such as wire net or fencing.
STACKING SPACE. The space specifically designated as a waiting area for vehicles whose occupants will be patronizing a drive-in business. Such space is considered to be located directly alongside a drive-in window, facility or entrance used by patrons and in lanes leading up to and away from the business establishment.
STORAGE. The parking of vehicles or machinery and/or the placement of equipment, inventory, goods or materials in a location for more than 72 hours or the use of a site for the parking of vehicles or machinery and/or the placement of equipment, inventory, goods or materials in a reoccurring or routine manner, regardless of the time interval.
STORMWATER CONVEYANCE FACILITIES. Features such as gutters, pipelines, culverts, manholes, weirs, man-made and natural channels, water quality filtration systems and drywells that convey stormwater.
STORMWATER MULTIPLE USE FACILITIES. Stormwater pond facilities that are also developed to allow uses such as parks, recreational, educational and research structures and activities.
STORY. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.
STREAMBANK ALTERATION. Realignment of a stream bank or the entire stream, either within or without its normal high water boundaries.
STREAM BANK, TOP OF. That line along the highest elevations at the top of a slope above a channel or stream, where the slope changes to less than ten (10) percent.
STREET FURNITURE. The objects placed on or near a sidewalk for use, convenience or enjoyment primarily by pedestrians such as benches or other seating arrangements, trash receptacles, mail and newspaper boxes, kiosks, light poles, and art objects.
STREET TREE FUND. A fund established by ordinance for the purpose of allowing the transfer of street improvements including street trees, landscaping and urban design features such as sidewalks and street furniture from one site to another.
STREET TREE. A species of tree approved by the City of Lakewood to be planted along street frontages in accordance with the provisions of LMC 18A.50.400, Landscaping.
STREET WALL. The construction of buildings adjacent to the edge of the sidewalk and which abut each other or are in very close proximity to one another, to create the effect of a continuous wall of building facades along the sidewalk at the property lines.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC. A street having only one (1) outlet for vehicular traffic, with a turnaround at the closed end and which is not planned to be extended or continued to serve future subdivisions or development on adjacent lands.
STREET, STUBBED. A street having only one (1) outlet for vehicular traffic which is constructed to the edge of a property line, and which is to be extended or continued to serve future subdivisions or development on adjacent property.
STREET. A public access way located within a thirty (30) feet right-of-way that was created to provide ingress and/or egress to one (1) or more lots, parcels, areas or tracts of land and includes the terms road, highways, lanes, avenue, or similar designation.
STREETSCAPE. The streetscape is the visual character and quality of a street as determined by various elements located between the edge of the street and the building face, such as trees and other landscaping, street furniture, lighting, artwork, transit stops, signage, utility fixtures and equipment, and paving treatments. Where there are frequent and wide spaces between buildings, the streetscape will be defined by the pattern of building and open space and the character of that open space.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change to the supporting members of a building including foundations, bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders or any structural change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
STRUCTURE (used in connection with flood regulations only). A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, and a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
STRUCTURE. Anything that is constructed in or on the ground or over water, including any edifice, gas or liquid storage tank, and any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts and joined together.
SUBDIVIDER. Any person who undertakes the subdivision of land for the purpose of ownership or development at any time, whether immediate or future.
SUBDIVISION. The act of dividing a parcel or tract of land into smaller lots and tracts.
SUBDIVISION, FINAL. The final drawing of the subdivision and dedication prepared for filing for record with the County Auditor and containing all elements and requirements set forth in this Title and Chapter 58.17 RCW.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT (for the purposes of flood regulations only). Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure either:
    a. Before the improvement or repair is started, or
    b. If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include:
    a. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
    b. Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historical Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
SURFACE MINING. Any area or areas within one-half (1/2) mile of each other, where extraction of minerals from the surface results in: Removal of five thousand (5,000) cubic yards of material; or More than three acres of disturbed area; or Mined Slopes greater than thirty (30) feet high land steeper than one (1) foot horizontal to one (1) foot vertical; or more than one (1) acre of disturbed area within an eight (8) acre or greater area when the disturbed area results from mineral prospecting or exploration activities. Surface mines include areas where mineral extraction from the surface occurs by the auger method or by reworking mine refuse or tailings, when these activities exceed the quantity, size, or height threshold listed above. Surface mining shall not include excavations and grading for the purpose of public safety or restoring the land following a natural disaster.
SURVEY AND MONUMENT. To locate and monument the boundaries of a partition parcel, road right-of-way or road easement.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. The offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS. The transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received.
TEMPORARY USE. A non-permanent structure, use or activity involving minimal capital investment that does not result in the permanent alteration of the site and which is intended to exist or operate for a limited period of time.
TOWER [FOR THE PURPOSES OF WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES (WTF)]. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one (1) or more antennas for telecommunications, including, but not limited to, radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers or personal communications services towers, alternative tower structures and other similar communication purposes. The term includes the structure, all structural supports, and all related buildings and appurtenances.
TOWNHOUSE. A two-story residential structure in which individual dwelling units are attached along at least one (1) common wall to at least two (2) other dwelling units. Each dwelling unit occupies space from the ground to the roof and no portion of a unit may occupy space above or below another unit, except that townhouse units may be constructed over a common shared parking garage, provided the garage is underground.
TOXIC MATERIALS. A substance (liquid, solid, or gaseous) which by reason of an inherent deleterious property tends to destroy life or impair health.
TRACT. Any parcel of land, lot, building site, or contiguous combination thereof devoted to or intended to be devoted to a principal use and any other uses customarily accessory thereto.
TRAILER, AUTOMOBILE COMMERCIAL. A vehicle without motor power designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle and which trailer is used or is to be used for carrying goods and property.
TRANSFER STATION, DROP-BOX. A solid waste facility requiring a state solid waste permit which is used for placement of a detachable container including the area adjacent for necessary entrance and exit roads, unloading and turn-around areas. The facility normally serves the general public with loose loads and receives waste from offsite.
TRANSFER STATION. A solid waste facility requiring a state solid waste permit which is a permanent, fixed supplemental collection and transportation facility, used by person and route collection vehicles to deposit collected solid waste from offsite into a larger transfer vehicle for transport to a disposal facility. It may include baling or compaction activities or recycling facilities.
TRANSITIONAL HOUSING. A facility operated publicly or privately to provide housing for individuals or families who might otherwise be homeless and generally have no other immediate living options available to them. Transitional housing shall not exceed a two (2) year period per individual or family.
TRANSIT-ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT. Development that is centered around and coordinated in its use and design with a transit station or other transit facility. Transit-oriented development includes a variety of different planning and development projects, but is typically compact, medium to high density, mixed-use development within walking distance of transit with a focus on pedestrian orientation and creating neighborhood centers, places and/or gathering spots.
TRANSPARENT GLASS. Windows that are transparent enough to permit the view of activities within a building from nearby streets, sidewalks and public spaces. Tinting or some coloration is permitted, provided a reasonable level of visibility is achieved. Reflective or very dark tinted glass does not accomplish this objective.
TREE REMOVAL PERMIT. An approval granted by the Community Development Department to remove a significant tree(s) within the City.
TREE. Any living woody plant characterized by one (1) main trunk and many branches.
UNIFORM BUILDING CODE (UBC). The current version of the Uniform Building Code, published by the International Conference of Building Officials.
UNIQUE AND FRAGILE AREA. An area of special environmental significance for wildlife habitat, threatened plant communities or natural scenic quality.
UNLICENSED WIRELESS SERVICES. Commercial mobile services that operate on public frequencies and are not required to have a FCC license to operate.
USE CATEGORY. A group of similar use types that are associated with each other to such an extent that they represent a general land use function.
USE TYPE. A group of similar uses that are fundamentally related to each other, contain equivalent characteristics, and which fall within the same use category.
USE, PERMITTED. Any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the restrictions applicable to the specific use.
USE, PRINCIPAL. The primary or predominant use of any lot or parcel.
USE. The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed, arranged, or intended, or for which land or buildings are occupied, maintained, rented, or leased, and includes any manner of performance of such activity with respect to the performance standards of this zoning code. A use often involves the placement of structures or facilities for industry, commerce, habitation, or recreation.
UTILITIES. Public facilities including electrical substation, electrical generation facilities, electrical transmission, telephone or communication lines, pipelines, sewer lines, water lines, natural gas lines, or similar transmission facilities, natural gas gate value and storage facilities, sewage collection and treatment facilities, waste disposal facilities, waste transfer facilities, and water supply facilities.
UTILITY VEHICLE. A utility vehicle includes those devices capable of being moved upon a public highway and in, upon, or by which any property or animal is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway such as utility trailers, horse trailers, and other similar devices, except for devices moved by human or animal power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
VARIANCE. A modification of regulations of this title when authorized by the hearing examiner after finding that the literal application of the provisions of this title would cause undue and unnecessary hardship in view of certain facts and conditions applying to a specific parcel of property.
VEGETATIVE GROUNDCOVER. Low growing vegetation that does not usually exceed one (1) foot in height and eventually grows together to form a continuous mass.
VETERINARY CLINIC. Any premises to which animals are brought, or where they are temporarily kept, solely for the purpose of diagnosis or treatment, care, observation or treatment of any illness or injury to domestic or exotic animals.
WAREHOUSE. A structure, or part of a structure, for storing goods, wares, and merchandise, whether for the owner of the structure or for others.
WASTE-TO-ENERGY FACILITY, MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE. A combustion plant specializing in disposal of or energy recovery from mixed waste from municipal sources.
WASTE-TO-ENERGY FACILITY, SPECIAL. A combustion plant designed to burn more than twelve (12) tons per day and specializing in disposal of or energy recovery from a single type of waste of known and consistent composition, other than municipal waste, such as tires or infectious waste.
WASTE-TO-ENERGY FACILITY. Any solid waste facility designed as a combustion plant to dispose of solid waste or to recover energy in a useable form from mass burning, refuse-derived fuel incineration, pyrolysis or any other means of using the heat of combustion of solid waste which requires a state solid waste permit under RCW 70.95.
WASTEWATER TRANSFER FACILITY. Equipment, structures, driving and parking surfaces, and appurtenances used for loading wastewater for transport to wastewater treatment facilities.
WASTEWATER. Water that carries waste from domestic, commercial or industrial facilities together with other waters which may inadvertently enter the sewer system through infiltration and inflow.
WATER PURIFICATION FACILITY. Treatment plants or facilities for disinfecting water.
WATER SUPPLY, POTABLE. A water source that complies with appropriate state agency regulations as to quality and quantity for use as a drinking source.
WEATHER PROTECTION. Awnings, canopies, marquees, building recesses, and arcades designed to shield pedestrians from precipitation or to offer shade.
WESTERN STATE HOSPITAL CAMPUS. A hospital and surrounding buildings, wards, and related and/or accessory structures, operated and maintained by the state of Washington for the care and treatment of patients affected with acute or chronic mental illness. The campus also includes the operation of an existing child study and treatment center and forensic center, both of which are located on the grounds of the Western State Hospital campus. Mental health facilities, the child study and treatment center, and the forensic center are subject to the public facilities master plan development standards listed in LMC 18A.30.850 as hereafter may be amended. The mental health facilities located at Western State Hospital are considered to constitute an Essential Public Facilities Civic use type.
WETLAND CREATION. Alteration, by excavation or other means, of upland areas to allow local hydrologic conditions to convert soils and vegetation to hydric character.
WETLAND ENHANCEMENT. An action which results in a long term improvement of existing wetland functional characteristics and processes that is not the result of a creation of restoration action.
WETLANDS. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.
WHIP ANTENNA. An omnidirectional dipole antenna of cylindrical shape that is no more than six inches in average diameter.
WHOLESALE. Establishments primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users; or other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying for or selling merchandise to such individuals or companies; and professional and commercial equipment suppliers.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES (WTF), INCLUDING PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE. Personal wireless service facilities, and facilities as defined in Title 47, United States Code, Section 332(c)(7)(C), including all future amendments, and also includes facilities for the transmission and reception of radio or microwave signals used for communication, telecommunication, cellular phone personal communications services, enhanced specialized mobile radio, any other services licensed by the FCC, and any other unlicensed wireless services.
YARD. An open area on a lot with a building and bounded on one (1) or more sides by such building, such space being unoccupied land unobstructed from the ground upward.
YARD SALE. All temporary and intermittent sales which may be variously referred to as “garage sale,” “lawn sale,” “attic sale,” “rummage sale,” “estate sale,” or any similar casual sale of tangible personal property from a residence or community use which is advertised by any means whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of the sale, and which is clearly secondary to the primary use of the site.
YARD, FRONT. An open space on the same lot with the building, between the front wall line of the building, exclusive of steps, and the front property line, including the full width of the lot to its side line.
YARD, REAR. An open space on the same lot with the building between the rear wall line of the building, exclusive of steps and accessory buildings, and the rear line of the lot, including the full width of the lot to its side lines.
YARD, SIDE. An open, unoccupied space on a lot, between the side wall line of the main building, exclusive of steps, and the side property line of the lot.
ZONING CERTIFICATION. A certificate, issued prior to a project permit, stating that the proposed use is in accordance with the requirements and standards of this title
ZONING DISTRICT. An area accurately defined as to boundaries and location, and classified by the Zoning Code as available for certain types of uses and within which other types of uses are excluded.
ZONING. The regulation of the use of private lands or the manner of construction related thereto in the interest of implementing the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan. Zoning includes both the division of land into separate and distinct zoning districts, and the specific use and development standards that regulate development. Such regulation shall also govern those public and quasi-public land use and buildings that provide for government activities and proprietary type services for the community benefit, except as prohibited by law. State and federal governmental activities are strongly encouraged to cooperate under these regulations to secure harmonious City development. [Ord. 704 § 2, 2019; Ord. 695 § 4, 2018; Ord. 678 § 4, 2018; Ord. 630 § 20, 2015; Ord. 604 § 12, 2015; Ord. 592 § 6, 2014; Ord. 525 § 14, 2010; Ord. 500 § 17, 2009; Ord. 462 § 9, 2007; Ord. 423 § 1, 2006; Ord. 397 § 17, 2005; Ord. 277 § 1, 2002; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

18A.90.300 Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations are used throughout this title:
DOC. Washington State Department of Corrections
DOE. Washington State Department of Ecology
DOT (or WSDOT). Washington State Department of Transportation
DNS. Determination of Non-Significance
DS. Determination of Significance
DSHS. Washington State Department of Social and Health Services
DUA. Dwelling units per gross acre
EIS. Environmental Impact Study
FCC. Federal Communications Commission
FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency
FIRM. Federal Insurance Rate Map
FHBM. Flood Hazard Boundary Map
GSF. Gross square feet
GVW Gross Vehicle Weight
HUD. U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
LMC. Lakewood Municipal Code
MDNS. Mitigated Determination of Non-Significance
OHWM Ordinary High Water Mark
SEPA. State Environmental Policy Act
RCW. Revised Code of Washington.
UBC. Uniform Building Code.
WAC. Washington Administrative Code.
WTF. Wireless telecommunications facilities [Ord. 423 § 1, 2006; Ord. 264 § 1, 2001.]

Title 18B DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT CODE

Chapters:
18B.100      Downtown District
18B.200      Land Use and Zoning
18B.300      Streets and Blocks
18B.400      Site Design, Buildings, and Frontage
18B.500      Landscaping, Open Space, and Green Infrastructure
18B.600      Parking
18B.700      Administration

Chapter 18B.100 DOWNTOWN DISTRICT

Sections:
18B.100.105  Purpose.
18B.100.110  Vision and Objectives.
18B.100.120  The Regulating Plan Map.
18B.100.130  Definitions.
18B.100.140  Relationship to Other Regulations.

18B.100.105 Purpose.
The purpose of the Downtown District is to implement the direction and policies of the Lakewood comprehensive plan, the Lakewood community vision, and the downtown plan. The Downtown District will be redeveloped into an area of rich civic amenities, walkable streets, and a mix of uses, including housing, entertainment, restaurants, and retail that builds upon the cultural and economic assets of the City.
The Downtown District is defined as the area shown in the map below.18B.100-1. Downtown District
[IMAGE: <18B.100.105_001.jpg>]
[Ord. 695 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018.]

18B.100.110 Vision and Objectives.
Downtown is the heart of Lakewood where people go to do fun things, see friends and neighbors, eat good food, and experience the cultural diversity of the City. Downtown carries a strong sense of pride for the community by celebrating all things Lakewood. Downtown is best experienced by walking or biking and is safe, inviting, accessible, and connected. It has a mix of retail, restaurant, employment, and housing options that are cohesive and well-designed, and support civic life and a strong economy.
The following objectives are intended to guide the development of Downtown according to the community’s vision for the district. All land use decisions made for Downtown shall demonstrate how they are consistent with and implement these objectives. Downtown is:
A. A vibrant mixed-use community. It is an inviting place where people live, work, meet, play, shop, and recreate.
B. A multi-modal and accessible environment. It is designed for all modes of travel. It is accessible by all ages and abilities. People can move, walk, and bike safely and freely throughout the district.
C. A signature part of Lakewood’s identity. Downtown is a community gathering place that celebrates Lakewood’s rich heritage, cultural communities, and civic pride.
D. Environmentally sustainable. Greenery, open space, and landscaping connect this urban environment to nature and mimic natural systems where possible.
E. A thriving business community. Increased daytime and nighttime populations support local businesses and create a lively place to shop, eat, or own a business. [Ord. 695 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018.]

18B.100.120 The Regulating Plan Map.
The regulating plan translates the community vision into a map. The regulating plan designates the locations, subdistricts, and streets that are intended to embody specific physical characteristics. It specifies the location and applicability of specific design treatments and maps where they are required. The regulating plan works in tandem with the development standards, tables, and figures to define the shape, size, and location of streets through connections, infill blocks, buildings, and landscaping.18B.120-1. Regulating Plan
[IMAGE: <18B.100.120_001.jpg>]
[Ord. 695 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018.]

18B.100.130 Definitions.
Definitions shall be consistent with Chapter 18A.90 LMC, Definitions. Interpretations of certain terms and phrases shall be consistent with LMC 18A.02.130, Rules of Construction. [Ord. 695 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018.]

18B.100.140 Relationship to Other Regulations.
In the case of a conflict between the regulations in Chapter 18B.100 LMC, Downtown District, and the rest of the Lakewood Municipal Code, the regulations in Chapter 18B.100 LMC, Downtown District, shall control. [Ord. 695 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018.]

Chapter 18B.200 LAND USE AND ZONING

Sections:
18B.200.210  Application within Downtown District.
18B.200.220  Uses.
18B.200.230  District-Wide Development Standards.
18B.200.240  Colonial District Standards.
18B.200.250  Transition Area Standards.

18B.200.210 Application within Downtown District.
One base zone and several zoning overlays are applied within the Downtown District, as shown in the map below.
A. The Central Business District (CBD) zoning district is the primary retail, office, social, urban residential, and government center of the City. The complementary and interactive mixture of uses and urban design provides for a regional intensity and viability with a local character. The regional focus and vitality of the district is evident in the urban density, intensity, and composition of the uses in the district. Local character is reflected in the district’s design, people orientation, and connectivity between uses, structures, and public spaces that foster a sense of community.
B. Colonial Overlay (C-O) district is a special design district in the CBD zone that preserves the unique colonial style aesthetic within that area. Stand-alone residential development is prohibited in the C-O.
C. Town Center Incentive Overlay (TCI-O) district allows for the holistic development of the Lakewood Towne Center in alignment with the vision and policies of the downtown plan. This area is available for master planning in accordance with the provisions in LMC 18B.700.720. Stand-alone residential development is prohibited in the TCI-O.
D. Low-Impact Mixed-Use Roads (LIMU-O) district supports the transformation of the Downtown District according to the downtown plan and the fulfillment of the purpose of the CBD zone, but allows for existing single-family residential development to remain in place.
E. Transition Overlay. The Transition Overlay (TO) is any property or portion of a property in the Downtown District that is within 100 feet of an abutting single-family residential zone or mixed residential zone (also called the district receiving the transition). Properties within the Downtown District that are separated from a single-family residential or mixed residential zone by a City owned right-of-way of at least 60 feet in width do not have to provide a transition area.18B.200-1. Central Business District (CBD) Zoning Map
[IMAGE: <18B.200.210_001.png>]18B.200-2. Overlay Districts Map
[IMAGE: <18B.200.210_002.png>]
[Ord. 695 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018.]

18B.200.220 Uses.
A. All residential uses, civic uses, and commercial uses and their related accessory uses as defined in Chapter 18A.20 LMC are permitted within the Downtown District, except in the Low-Impact Mixed-Use Roads district. Permitted uses are subject to the approval of all required development permits; provided, that the following uses are prohibited:
    1. Prohibited Residential Uses. 
        a. Single-family residential, Levels 1, 2, 3, and 4.
        b. Group homes, Type 4 or 5.
        c. Stand-alone residential uses within the Colonial Overlay (C-O) or Town Center Incentive Overlay (TCI-O) districts. Mixed-use developments in the C-O and TCI-O incorporating multifamily residential uses are allowed.
        d. Where allowed within the Downtown District, stand-alone residential uses located closer than 400 feet to each other as measured lot line to lot line.
    2. Prohibited Civic Uses. 
        a. Military installations;
        b. Postal services, Level 3;
        c. Public maintenance, Levels 2 and 3;
        d. Public safety services, Levels 3 and 4;
        e. Transportation, Levels 4 and 5.
    3. Prohibited Commercial Uses. 
        a. Bulk fuel dealers;
        b. Convenience commercial, Levels 2, 3, and 4;
        c. Funeral services, Levels 2 and 3;
        d. Lodging, Level 2, primary or accessory;
        e. Manufactured and modular home sales;
        f. Motor vehicle sales and rental;
        g. Motor vehicles service and repair, Levels 3, 4, and 5;
        h. Pet sales and service, Levels 3 and 4;
        i. Rental and repair, Level 4;
        j. Sales of secondhand property, Levels 2 and 3;
        k. Sexually oriented businesses;
        l. Storage.
    4. The following uses are allowed administratively, provided conditions are met:
        a. Single-family residential, Level 5, if part of a mixed-use development with other multifamily residential, civic uses, and commercial uses.
        b. Drive-through facilities; provided:
            i. Drive-through facilities are limited to one drive-through lane per establishment;
            ii. Drive-through facilities must have a primary customer entrance and cannot provide customer service exclusively from a drive-through or walk-up window;
            iii. Drive-through facilities shall be designed so that vehicles, while waiting in line to be served, will not block vehicle or pedestrian traffic in the right-of-way;
            iv. Drive-through facilities shall be appropriately and attractively screened from the public right-of-way:
                (A) Drive-through facilities shall not parallel the Green Street Loop;
                (B) Drive-through lanes shall only be placed parallel to a road if separated by a distance of 30 feet, or if fully screened by a 15-foot landscape setback with a designed landscape berm (six feet high at center of berm in 15-foot landscape setback) or three-and-one-half-foot decorative masonry wall;
                (C) Drive-through lanes oriented perpendicular to a public right-of-way shall include landscape screening to shield headlights from shining directly into an abutting or adjacent street right-of-way.
    5. Allowed Residential Uses, Civic Uses, and Commercial Uses Subject to Approval of a Conditional Use Permit and All Applicable Development Permits. 
        a. Group homes, Type 3;
        b. Enhanced services facilities;
        c. Education facilities;
        d. Outdoor recreation, Level 4;
        e. Amusement and recreation, Level 2 outdoor and Level 4 outdoor;
        f. Building/garden supply and nurseries, Level 3;
        g. Buy-back recycling center;
        h. Essential public facilities not otherwise permitted or prohibited.
B. All utilities uses, industrial uses, and agricultural uses are prohibited within the Downtown District with the exception of the following uses, which are subject to the approval of all required development permits:
    1. Permitted Utilities Uses. 
        a. Communication facilities;
        b. Electrical facilities;
        c. Natural gas, Level 1;
        d. Sewage collection facilities;
        e. Storm water facilities;
        f. Water supply facilities.
    2. Conditionally Permitted Utility Uses. 
        a. Pipelines.
    3. Permitted Industrial Uses Allowed in the Downtown District, except Not Allowed on Retail Streets, Festival Streets, or Low-Impact Mixed-Use Streets. Where permitted, such uses shall be as part of mixed-use development with commercial, retail, or residential uses:
        a. Limited manufacturing/assembly, Level 1;
        b. Flex space, Levels 1 and 2;
        c. Food and related products, Level 1;
        d. Printing and publishing;
        e. Research, development, and laboratories, Level 1;
        f. Industrial accessory uses, if accessory to one of the permitted industrial uses listed above.
    4. Conditionally Permitted Industrial Uses Allowed in the Downtown District, except Not Allowed on Retail Streets, Festival Streets, or Low-Impact Mixed-Use Streets. Where part of a mixed-use development with commercial, retail, or residential uses:
        a. Food and related products, Level 2.
C. Low-Impact Mixed-Use Roads District.  Permitted uses include professional office uses, personal services, private training schools, community and cultural services, single-family residential uses, multiple-family residential uses, and community and cultural services in areas not suitable for general commercial development or adjacent to residential development. The Director may permit other uses consistent with the uses allowed in the NC2 zoning district where the footprint of development and customer visits are compatible with adjacent single-family residential development within or outside the Downtown District. [Ord. 695 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018.]

18B.200.230 District-Wide Development Standards.
Unless otherwise specifically modified by an adopted development agreement or master plan, in addition to the regulations and requirements contained in other sections of this title, the following property development standards apply to all land and buildings in the Downtown District:
A. Density. 
    1. Maximum density is 100 units per acre, except where other conditions are met in subsections (A)(2) through (A)(4)of this section. To qualify for 100 units per acre density, the residential uses shall be part of a mixed-use development, or added to a commercial site, or provide a first-floor height of 16 feet for at least a 30-foot depth that allows for future commercial occupancies.
    2. On sites allowed a density of 100 units per acre under subsection (A)(1) of this section, density may be increased up to 125 units per acre for affordable housing according to the provisions of LMC 18A.50.740, Inclusionary Density Bonuses – Housing Incentives Program, only if the affordable housing is part of a mixed-use development.
    3. Density shall not exceed 80 units per acre for residential-only developments that are not added to or associated with existing commercial sites, or that do not provide a first-floor height that allows for future commercial occupancies.
    4. No density limit may be allowed in the Town Center Incentives Overlay if a master plan is approved per LMC 18B.700.720; provided, that the total number of dwellings is consistent with the planned action ordinance (Ordinance No. 696) and allowable height and bulk per this title’s design parameters.
B. Lot Size. There is no minimum established lot size for the Downtown District. Proposed uses and the applicable design standards in this chapter shall be used to establish the minimum lot size for a project.
C. Lot Coverage. There is no maximum lot coverage standard for the Downtown District. However, lot coverage may be reduced on individual properties due to stormwater or landscaping requirements.
D. Setbacks. The minimum distance setbacks for the Downtown District shall be determined by frontage type in Chapter 18B.400 LMC, except where increased setbacks due to building/fire code requirements apply.
E. Building Height. The maximum building height, not including any applicable height bonus, for the Downtown District shall be determined by frontage type in Chapter 18B.400 LMC, except where the transition area standards under LMC 18B.200.250 require less height.
F. Large-Scale Commercial Facilities. Large-scale commercial facilities shall meet the additional requirements specified in LMC 18A.50.241(L).
G. Design. Design features shall be required as set forth in Chapter 18B.300 LMC, Streets and Blocks, and Chapter 18B.400 LMC, Site Design, Buildings, and Frontage, and the community design standards in LMC 18A.50.231.
H. Tree Preservation. Significant tree identification and preservation and/or replacement shall be required as set forth in LMC 18A.50.300, Tree Preservation.
I. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided as set forth in Chapter 18B.500 LMC and LMC 18A.50.400, Landscaping.
J. Parking. Parking shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 18B.600 LMC and LMC 18A.50.500, Parking.
K. Signs. Signage shall conform to the requirements of LMC 18A.50.600, Sign Regulations.
L. Tax Incentive. The Downtown District is considered a residential target area for purposes of Chapter 3.64 LMC, Tax Incentive Urban Use Center Development. [Ord. 695 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018.]

18B.200.240 Colonial District Standards.
A. American Colonial Revival design is a part of Lakewood’s history. The Lakewood Theater, constructed in 1937, is the most prominent example of colonial architecture in the district. Newer buildings in the district continue to exhibit colonial architectural elements and the community desires to reinforce the character of the district through adoption of design standards, but also provide flexibility to support other goals for activating public spaces in downtown including along Motor Avenue adjacent to the Lakewood Theater, also called the Lakewood Colonial Plaza. The downtown plan contains an appendix with the Colonial District Guide and is a reference to help interpret and apply the Colonial District standards in this section.
B. Purpose and Intent. To maintain and enhance the colonial character and design elements within the district and require new development and modifications to be compatible with the scale, materials, and architectural elements of American Colonial Revival architecture. Sites and buildings should be designed to be recognizable as modern structures and not to appear as historic structures. Creativity is encouraged to design sites and buildings that represent modern interpretations of colonial architecture through building scale, materials, symmetry, window patterns, entry design, and other elements. Development shall be consistent with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Rehabilitation of Historic Structures for new additions, exterior alterations, and related new construction (Standards 9 and 10). Additionally, the Colonial District design standards are intended to achieve the following:
    1. To improve the image and character of the district and the downtown.
    2. To connect to Lakewood’s history and identity as it relates to colonial architecture and the district’s role as a community gathering place.
    3. To support the community’s vision for a vibrant downtown for all and the implementation of the downtown subarea plan.
    4. To create a great experience on downtown streets and in public spaces that is unique to Lakewood.
C. Relationship to Other Standards. Development in the Colonial District shall be consistent with the frontage standards in LMC 18B.400.410(A) and all other standards in this title unless waived by the City based on (1) site-specific conditions and (2) furthering the purpose and intent of the Colonial District design standards.
D. Colonial District Guide. The downtown plan contains an appendix with the Colonial District Guide and is a reference to help interpret and apply the Colonial District standards in this section. Examples in the District Guide may not comply with every Colonial District standard and are meant to demonstrate certain elements of the Colonial design standards.
E. Review Levels. The following types of review are required for development and modifications in the Colonial District:
    1. Facade Improvements and Modifications. Modifications to the facade of existing structures are required to comply with the standards of the Colonial District only when determined by the City to be practical and consistent with the scope of the planned improvements. The addition of detailed colonial architectural elements to noncolonial style buildings is not required. Examples of modifications that require compliance with the Colonial District standards may include:
        a. Replacement of facade materials;
        b. Replacement of windows;
        c. Modification of building entrances;
        d. Roof replacement.
    2. Additions. Building additions shall comply with the requirements of the Colonial District design standards where practical and consistent with the design of the existing building and other buildings on the site. Additions and modifications that are valued at more than 50 percent of the value of existing improvements on site shall comply with the Colonial District design standards for new buildings and redevelopment.
    3. New Buildings and Redevelopment. New buildings and redevelopment shall comply with all Colonial District design standards.
F. Design Standards. Buildings and structures in the Colonial District shall comply with the following design standards:
    1. Roofs. Buildings shall use the following roof lines:
        a. Gambrel;
        b. Gable;
        c. Side-gable;
        d. Hip roof;
        e. Flat roofs; provided, that one or more of the following elements are used to create a prominent edge and to break up the massiveness of an uninterrupted flat roof:
            i. Pitched or sloped roofs;
            ii. Extended parapets;
            iii. Projecting cornices;
            iv. Decorative molding if greater than or equal to 10 inches wide.
    2. Symmetrical Window Fenestration. Window patterns shall be designed to be symmetrical and consistent with American Colonial Revival architecture for all stories above the first floor. First floor facades shall meet the frontage and transparency requirements in LMC 18B.400.410(A).
    3. Facade Materials. The following facade materials shall be used unless an alternative is approved by the City upon determination it is consistent with the purpose and intent of the Colonial District design standards
        a. Brick;
        b. Stone;
        c. Clapboards;
        d. Wood;
        e. Stucco, if limited to a maximum 50 percent of total building surface area.
    4. Prominent Front Entry Design. The entry shall be designed to be prominent and, where practical, centered along the primary street frontage.
    5. Design Elements. Designs should include some of the following architectural elements:
        a. Columns;
        b. Chimney;
        c. Cupola;
        d. Arched windows;
        e. Gabled dormers;
        f. Pediment;
        g. Shutters;
        h. Portico;
        i. Other elements, as approved by the City, that are consistent with American Colonial Revival architecture. [Ord. 695 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018.]

18B.200.250 Transition Area Standards.
The transition area provides a buffer between higher intensity uses in the Downtown District and lower intensity uses in the residential zones that surround downtown. When development is planned adjacent to residential uses, it shall incorporate the following elements into its site and building design to soften its impact and result in a compatible transition:
A. Building Height. Building height in the transition area is limited to 10 feet higher than the maximum height of the district receiving the transition.
B. Building Setbacks. Structures within the transition area must be set back 30 feet from the interior property line of the district receiving the transition. At least 20 feet of the setback shall be planted as a landscaped buffer consistent with the landscape standards in LMC 18A.50.400. This does not apply to street setbacks.
C. Parking and Loading. Surface parking lots and loading zones shall be located away from adjacent residential properties when feasible. Surface parking lots and loading zones that are visible from the ground level views of the abutting residential district shall be screened through the use of berms, hedges, walls, or combinations thereof.
D. Refuse Containers. Refuse and recycling containers shall be located on the side of the building facing away from the abutting residential district, but may not be located in a front setback. All refuse and recycling containers shall be contained within structures enclosed on all four sides and utilize lids made of molded plastic or other sound buffering materials.
E. Mechanical Equipment. All mechanical equipment which is located on the roof shall be incorporated into the roof form and not appear as a separate penthouse or box. Mechanical equipment shall be fully screened and accommodated within the maximum height limit. [Ord. 695 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018.]

Chapter 18B.300 STREETS AND BLOCKS

Sections:
18B.300.310  Streets and Blocks.

18B.300.310 Streets and Blocks.
A. Street Grid and Blocks. 
    1. Street Grid. New and redevelopment must demonstrate the plan supports and accommodates the expansion of the public street grid to improve circulation for vehicles, pedestrians, and bicyclists. A circulation plan must be submitted for review by the City as part of any development permit in downtown unless waived by the City upon finding the project will not impact circulation or the enhancement of the public street grid.
    2. Block Size. The maximum block size is 400 feet and the maximum distance permitted between public streets. New public street alignments shall be consistent with the regulating plan map. The City may approve modifications to the street alignments and waive the 400-foot maximum block size to take advantage of existing travel corridors, the location of utilities, and required improvements.
    3. Private Streets. Private streets shall only be permitted when the City has determined there is no public benefit for circulation in the downtown. All private streets must be constructed to public standards.
    4. Mid-Block Connections. A minimum 20-foot-wide mid-block connection shall be provided at the midpoint along each block face or every 200 feet. The mid-block connections shall be designed to accommodate service needs and for pedestrian use and be free from permanent obstructions.
    5. Street Sections. The typical street sections provided below are the minimum requirements for the design of public streets. The City may approve modifications to the typical street section based on localized conditions and adjacent land uses. Modifications may include adding or removing on-street parking, wider sidewalks, loading zones, bicycle facilities, and transit accommodations.
    6. Block Development. The minimum number of buildings per 400 feet of block frontage is four, or one building per 100 feet, to create variety in the streetscape experience and support human-scale design. A single building may meet this requirement through building design and architecture that visually appears as multiple buildings. The City may approve modifications to this requirement based on site-specific conditions, including parcel ownership and configuration.
    7. Street Grid and Block Diagram. The diagram in Figure 2 highlights the major features of the form-based code for the CBD, including block size, building height, mid-block connections, and typical development within the block and grid structure. Development in the CBD should be generally consistent with the major features highlighted in this diagram.18B-300-1. Street Grid and Block Diagram
    [IMAGE: <18B.300.310_001.png>]
B. Street Types. 
    1. Retail Streets. Street level retail is required along the frontage of designated retail streets including 59th Street SW and Lakewood Towne Center Boulevard SW. Pedestrian-oriented design standards for retail streets address site and building design, building frontages, window transparency, weather protection, sidewalk widths, street entrances, access, and on-street parking. Building frontage types are more limited on retail streets.18B-300-2. 59th Street SW Retail Street Concept
    [IMAGE: <18B.300.310_002.jpg>]
    2. Mixed-Use Streets. Mixed-use streets support a variety of activities and functions both in the public right-of-way and development along the street edges. Street level retail is permitted, but not required, and a wider range of building frontage types are permitted, including street-level residential and office uses. Mixed-use streets also require pedestrian-oriented design and requirements may vary based on the location within the downtown.
    3. Arterial Mixed-Use Streets. Arterial mixed-use streets maintain the existing vehicle capacity and allow a range of land use and building frontage types and include surface parking lots.
    4. Low-Impact Mixed-Use Streets. Low-impact mixed-use streets allow for less intense commercial uses while maintaining the existing residential character for site and building design. Lower density multifamily residential uses are permitted. Street design shall be consistent with City standards for residential streets including sidewalks.
    5. Green Loop. Streets designated as part of the Green Loop include design features for pedestrian and bicycle use and vary by street. Pedestrian and bicycle facilities include a shared-use path, sharrows, sidewalks, and other park-like amenities that may include seating, bicycle parking, a bicycle repair station, signage, and landscaping.
    6. Festival Street. Festival streets are designed to support a variety of activities and events in addition to typical street elements such as travel lanes, parking, and sidewalks. Festival streets are developed with high-quality materials and are intended to be significant community gathering places within the CBD.
C. Street Standards and Frontage Types. The following street standards are the minimum required and modifications to the standards may be approved by the City upon finding that the modification is consistent with the vision and objectives in LMC 18B.100.110 and the downtown plan, supports pedestrian-oriented design, and balances the need for traffic flow to minimize congestion.
+------------+---------------+--------+-----------+-------+-----------+--------------+---------+
|   Street   |   Sidewalk    | Linear | Forecourt | Plaza | Landscape | Porch/Stoop/ | Parking |
|    Type    |     Width     |        |           |       |           |   Terrace    |         |
+------------+---------------+--------+-----------+-------+-----------+--------------+---------+
| Retail     | 14' Minimum   | P      | P         | P/R1  | X         | X            | X       |
| Street     |               |        |           |       |           |              |         |
+------------+---------------+--------+-----------+-------+-----------+--------------+---------+
| Mixed-Use  | 10' Minimum   | P      | P         | P     | P         | P            | X       |
| Street     |               |        |           |       |           |              |         |
+------------+---------------+--------+-----------+-------+-----------+--------------+---------+
| Low-Impact | As determined | P      | P         | P     | P         | P            | X       |
| Mixed-Use  | by Public     |        |           |       |           |              |         |
| Streets    | Works         |        |           |       |           |              |         |
+------------+---------------+--------+-----------+-------+-----------+--------------+---------+
| Arterial   | As determined | P      | P         | P     | P         | P            | P       |
| Mixed-Use  | by Public     |        |           |       |           |              |         |
| Street     | Works         |        |           |       |           |              |         |
+------------+---------------+--------+-----------+-------+-----------+--------------+---------+
| Festival   | 10' Minimum   | P      | P         | R2    | X         | X            | X       |
| Street     |               |        |           |       |           |              |         |
+------------+---------------+--------+-----------+-------+-----------+--------------+---------+
P = permitted, X = prohibited, R = required
1Required when on a corner lot.
2Required pursuant to Motor Avenue Design Plan, also known as the Lakewood Colonial Plaza.
D. Street Sections. The following street sections show the basic elements of the streetscape for each of the streets highlighted in the CBD. The City may approve modifications to the typical cross sections based on site-specific conditions including adjacent land uses, traffic management, parking needs, and right-of-way constraints.18B-300-4. Gravelly Lake Drive (Between Main Street SW and Bridgeport Way SW Looking North)
[IMAGE: <18B.300.310_003.png>]18B-300-5. 59th Avenue SW (Between Main St SW and 100th St SW Looking North)
[IMAGE: <18B.300.310_004.png>]18B-300-6. Lakewood Towne Center Boulevard SW Looking North
[IMAGE: <18B.300.310_005.png>]
    1. Lakewood Colonial Plaza Festival Street. Improvements to Motor Avenue should be consistent with the Motor Avenue urban design plan preferred alternative as adopted by the City Council or as modified by the City, also known as the Lakewood Colonial Plaza.18B-300-7. Lakewood Colonial Plaza Festival Street Section Looking Northeast (Preferred Alternative Selected by City Council)
    [IMAGE: <18B.300.310_006.png>]18B-300-8. Lakewood Colonial Plaza Festival Street Plaza Section (Typical)
    [IMAGE: <18B.300.310_007.png>]
E. Alleys. Alleys are encouraged to provide secondary access to properties, de-emphasize parking lots, and to promote continuous building frontages. Alleys shall meet Public Works engineering standards.
F. Weather Protection – Easements. Weather protection or building overhangs that extend over public rights-of-way may be permitted by the Community Development Director subject to execution of an easement and requirements for maintenance by the property owner or developer.
    1. Access to existing and future utilities within and under the street and boulevard must be maintained.
    2. Freedom of movement of existing and future vehicular and pedestrian activity must not be restricted.
    3. Weather protection depth and percentage coverage shall be consistent with LMC 18B.400.410(A) for frontage types.
    4. All overhead weather protection shall be placed at a height that relates to architectural features of the building and adjacent storefront weather protection, while offering effective protection from weather. Weather protection shall have a minimum vertical clearance of eight feet, measured from the sidewalk, and should not be greater than 12 feet above the pedestrian sidewalk level.
    5. The slope of the weather protection feature shall allow for proper drainage and self-cleaning action of rain and wind. Materials used should be durable and require minimum maintenance. [Ord. 695 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018.]

Chapter 18B.400 SITE DESIGN, BUILDINGS, AND FRONTAGE

Sections:
18B.400.410  Site Design, Buildings, and Frontage.

18B.400.410 Site Design, Buildings, and Frontage.
A. Frontage Types. The building frontage types below address the required standards for the relationship of buildings to the edge of the street and other site plan and design requirements. The permitted frontage types vary by street type as shown in LMC 18B.300.310(C). The building setback may be modified as approved by the City when necessary to expand the width of the right-of-way to accommodate the desired street design and cross section.
    1. Linear. The linear building frontage has zero setback from the street edge and is the primary frontage type on retail streets and is also appropriate for land uses such as townhouses and row houses.18B-400-1. Linear Building Frontage
    [IMAGE: <18B.400.410_001.png>]
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    |   |      Standard      |       CBD        |      Retail      |    Mixed-Use     |    Mixed-Use     |    Low-Impact    |     Festival     |
    |   |                    |                  |      Street      |      Street      |     Arterial     |    Mixed-Use     |      Street      |
    |   |                    |                  |                  |                  |                  |     Streets      |                  |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    | A | Building           | 90'              | 90'              | 90'              | 90'              | 35'              | 90'              |
    |   | Height             |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    | B | First Floor        | 16'              | 16'              | 16'              | 16'              | None             | 16'              |
    |   | Minimum            |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    |   | Height             |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    | C | Weather            | 10'              | 10'              | 10'              | 10'              | None             | 10'              |
    |   | Protection         |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    |   | Height             |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    | D | Weather            | 10' Depth        | 10' Depth        | 10' Depth        | 10' Depth        | None             | 10' Depth        |
    |   | Protection         | 60% of           | Weather          | Weather          | Weather          |                  | 60% of           |
    |   | Minimum            | frontage         | protection       | protection       | protection       |                  | frontage         |
    |   | Depth              | must have        | required         | required         | required         |                  | must have        |
    |   | and Linear         | weather          | for minimum      | for minimum      | for minimum      |                  | weather          |
    |   | Frontage           | protection       | of 60%           | of 60%           | of 60%           |                  | protection       |
    |   |                    |                  | of frontage      | of frontage      | of frontage      |                  |                  |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    | E | Building           | 0' – 10'         | 0' – 10'         | 0' – 10'         | 0' – 10'         | 0' – 10'         | 0' – 10'         |
    |   | Maximum            |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    |   | Setback            |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    |   | from Right-of-Way1 |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    | F | Building           | 0'               | 0'               | 0'               | 0'               | 0'               | 0'               |
    |   | Setback            |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    |   | Minimum            |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    | G | Front Entrance     | An entrance      | An entrance      | An entrance      | An entrance      | An entrance      | An entrance      |
    |   |                    | must be          | must be          | must be          | must be          | must be          | must be          |
    |   |                    | located          | located          | located          | located          | located          | located          |
    |   |                    | along            | along            | along            | along            | along            | along            |
    |   |                    | the primary      | the primary      | the primary      | the primary      | the primary      | the primary      |
    |   |                    | street           | street           | street           | street           | street           | street           |
    |   |                    | frontage;        | frontage;        | frontage;        | frontage;        | frontage;        | frontage;        |
    |   |                    | 50% transparency | 50% transparency | 50% transparency | 50% transparency | 50% transparency | 50% transparency |
    |   |                    | required         | required         | required         | required         | required         | required         |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    | H | Window             | A minimum        | A minimum        | A minimum        | None             | None             | A minimum        |
    |   | Transparency2      | 70% transparency | 70% transparency | 60% transparency |                  |                  | 70% transparency |
    |   |                    | required         | required         | required         |                  |                  | required         |
    |   |                    | at street        | at street        | at street        |                  |                  | at street        |
    |   |                    | level            | level            | level            |                  |                  | level            |
    |   |                    | between          | between          | between          |                  |                  | between          |
    |   |                    | 30'' and         | 30'' and         | 30'' and         |                  |                  | 30'' and         |
    |   |                    | 8'               | 8'               | 8' for           |                  |                  | 8'               |
    |   |                    |                  |                  | nonresidential   |                  |                  |                  |
    |   |                    |                  |                  | uses             |                  |                  |                  |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    1The maximum setback shall be up to 10 feet where the Public Works Engineering Director has determined property may be needed to accommodate the City’s planned right-of-way at full build-out. Otherwise, the maximum setback is zero feet.
    2In Colonial District Overlay, or when buildings do not front a retail street, Green Street Loop, or arterial mixed-use street, minimum transparency is 50 percent between 30 inches and eight feet.
    2. Forecourt. The forecourt building frontage type has an open area at the entrance along the street edge. This building type is applicable to a wide range of land use types and mixed-use development.18B-400-3. Forecourt Frontage Type
    [IMAGE: <18B.400.410_002.png>]
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    |   |      Standard      |       CBD        |      Retail      |    Mixed-Use     |    Mixed-Use     |    Low-Impact    |     Festival     |
    |   |                    |                  |      Street      |      Street      |     Arterial     |    Mixed-Use     |      Street      |
    |   |                    |                  |                  |                  |                  |     Streets      |                  |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    | A | Building           | 90'              | 90'              | 90'              | 90'              | 35'              | 90'              |
    |   | Height             |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    | B | First Floor        | 16'              | 16'              | 16'              | 16'              | None             | 16'              |
    |   | Minimum            |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    |   | Height             |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    |   | for depth          |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    |   | of 30              |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    |   | feet from          |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    |   | street             |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    | C | Weather            | 10'              | 10'              | 10'              | 10'              | None             | 10'              |
    |   | Protection         |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    |   | Height             |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    | D | Weather            | 5' min           | 5' min           | 15' min          | 5' min           | None             | 5' min           |
    |   | Protection         | depth;           | depth;           | depth;           | depth;           |                  | depth;           |
    |   | Minimum            | 60% of           | 60% of           | 60% of           | 60% of           |                  | 60% of           |
    |   | Depth              | frontage         | frontage         | frontage         | frontage         |                  | frontage         |
    |   | and Linear         | along            | along            | along            | along            |                  | along            |
    |   | Frontage           | sidewalk         | sidewalk         | sidewalk         | sidewalk         |                  | sidewalk         |
    |   |                    | must have        | must have        | must have        | must have        |                  | must have        |
    |   |                    | weather          | weather          | weather          | weather          |                  | weather          |
    |   |                    | protection.      | protection.      | protection.      | protection.      |                  | protection.      |
    |   |                    | Weather          | Weather          | Weather          | Weather          |                  | Weather          |
    |   |                    | protection       | protection       | protection       | protection       |                  | protection       |
    |   |                    | required         | required         | required         | required         |                  | required         |
    |   |                    | over primary     | over primary     | over primary     | over primary     |                  | over primary     |
    |   |                    | entrance.        | entrance.        | entrance.        | entrance.        |                  | entrance.        |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    | E | Building           | 0' – 10'         | 0' – 10'         | 0' – 10'         | 0' – 10'         | 0' – 10'         | 0' – 10'         |
    |   | Maximum            |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    |   | Setback            |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    |   | from Right-of-Way1 |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    | F | Building           | 0'               | 0'               | 0'               | 0'               | 0'               | 0'               |
    |   | Setback            |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    |   | Minimum            |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    | G | Front Entrance     | An entrance      | An entrance      | An entrance      | An entrance      | An entrance      | An entrance      |
    |   |                    | must be          | must be          | must be          | must be          | must be          | must be          |
    |   |                    | located          | located          | located          | located          | located          | located          |
    |   |                    | along            | along            | along            | along            | along            | along            |
    |   |                    | the primary      | the primary      | the primary      | the primary      | the primary      | the primary      |
    |   |                    | street           | street           | street           | street           | street           | street           |
    |   |                    | frontage;        | frontage;        | frontage;        | frontage;        | frontage;        | frontage;        |
    |   |                    | 50% transparency | 50% transparency | 50% transparency | 50% transparency | 50% transparency | 50% transparency |
    |   |                    | required         | required         | required         | required         | required         | required         |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    | H | Forecourt          | 10' minimum;     | 10' minimum;     | 10' minimum;     | 10' minimum;     | 10' minimum;     | 10' minimum;     |
    |   | Depth              | 30' maximum      | 30' maximum      | 30' maximum      | 30' maximum      | 30' maximum      | 30' maximum      |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    | I | Forecourt          | 10' minimum;     | 10' minimum;     | 10' minimum;     | 10' minimum;     | 10' minimum;     | 10' minimum;     |
    |   | Width              | 30' maximum      | 30' maximum      | 30' maximum      | 30' maximum      | 30' maximum      | 30' maximum      |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    | J | Window             | A minimum        | A minimum        | A minimum        | None             | None             | A minimum        |
    |   | Transparency2      | 70% transparency | 70% transparency | 60% transparency |                  |                  | 70% transparency |
    |   |                    | required         | required         | required         |                  |                  | required         |
    |   |                    | at street        | at street        | at street        |                  |                  | at street        |
    |   |                    | level            | level            | level            |                  |                  | level            |
    |   |                    | between          | between          | between          |                  |                  | between          |
    |   |                    | 30'' and         | 30'' and         | 30'' and         |                  |                  | 30'' and         |
    |   |                    | 8'               | 8'               | 8' for           |                  |                  | 8'               |
    |   |                    |                  |                  | nonresidential   |                  |                  |                  |
    |   |                    |                  |                  | uses             |                  |                  |                  |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    1The maximum setback shall be up to 10 feet where the Public Works Engineering Director has determined property may be needed to accommodate the City’s planned right-of-way at full build-out. Otherwise, the maximum setback is zero feet.
    2In Colonial District Overlay, or when buildings do not front a retail street, Green Street Loop, or arterial mixed-use street, minimum transparency is 50 percent between 30 inches and eight feet.
    3. Plaza. The plaza frontage type includes a pedestrian-oriented plaza between the building and the street edge. The plaza frontage type is applicable to retail and dining uses and can support activities such as outdoor dining, public art displays, seating, entertainment, and events. The plaza must be designed to support human activity and support a safe and inviting streetscape environment.18B-400-5. Plaza Frontage Type
    [IMAGE: <18B.400.410_003.png>]
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    |   |      Standard      |       CBD        |      Retail      |    Mixed-Use     |    Mixed-Use     |    Low-Impact    |     Festival     |
    |   |                    |                  |      Street      |      Street      |     Arterial     |    Mixed-Use     |      Street      |
    |   |                    |                  |                  |                  |                  |     Streets      |                  |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    | A | Building           | 90'              | 90'              | 90'              | 90'              | 35'              | 90'              |
    |   | Height             |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    | B | First Floor        | 16'              | 16'              | 16'              | 16'              | None             | 16'              |
    |   | Minimum            |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    |   | Height             |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    |   | for depth          |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    |   | of 30              |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    |   | feet from          |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    |   | street             |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    | C | Weather            | 10'              | 10'              | 10'              | 10'              | None             | 10'              |
    |   | Protection         |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    |   | Height             |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    | D | Weather            | 5' min           | 5' min           | 5' min           | 5' min           | None             | 5' min           |
    |   | Protection         | depth;           | depth;           | depth;           | depth;           |                  | depth;           |
    |   | Minimum            | 60% of           | 60% of           | 60% of           | 60% of           |                  | 60% of           |
    |   | Depth              | frontage         | frontage         | frontage         | frontage         |                  | frontage         |
    |   | and Linear         | along            | along            | along            | along            |                  | along            |
    |   | Frontage           | sidewalk         | sidewalk         | sidewalk         | sidewalk         |                  | sidewalk         |
    |   |                    | must have        | must have        | must have        | must have        |                  | must have        |
    |   |                    | weather          | weather          | weather          | weather          |                  | weather          |
    |   |                    | protection.      | protection.      | protection.      | protection.      |                  | protection.      |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    | E | Building           | 5' – 25'         | 5' – 25'         | 5' – 25'         | 5' – 25'         | 5' – 25'         | 5' – 25'         |
    |   | Maximum            |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    |   | Setback            |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    |   | from Right-of-Way1 |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    | F | Building           | 5'               | 5'               | 5'               | 5'               | 5'               | 5'               |
    |   | Setback            |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    |   | Minimum            |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |                  |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    | G | Front Entrance     | An entrance      | An entrance      | An entrance      | An entrance      | An entrance      | An entrance      |
    |   |                    | must be          | must be          | must be          | must be          | must be          | must be          |
    |   |                    | located          | located          | located          | located          | located          | located          |
    |   |                    | along            | along            | along            | along            | along            | along            |
    |   |                    | the primary      | the primary      | the primary      | the primary      | the primary      | the primary      |
    |   |                    | street           | street           | street           | street           | street           | street           |
    |   |                    | frontage;        | frontage;        | frontage;        | frontage;        | frontage;        | frontage;        |
    |   |                    | 50% transparency | 50% transparency | 50% transparency | 50% transparency | 50% transparency | 50% transparency |
    |   |                    | required         | required         | required         | required         | required         | required         |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    | H | Plaza Design       | Plaza            | Plaza            | Plaza            | Plaza            | n/a              | Plaza            |
    |   |                    | area must        | area must        | area must        | area must        |                  | area must        |
    |   |                    | be designed      | be designed      | be designed      | be designed      |                  | be designed      |
    |   |                    | for human        | for human        | for human        | for human        |                  | for human        |
    |   |                    | activity         | activity         | activity         | activity         |                  | activity         |
    |   |                    | and include      | and include      | and include      | and include      |                  | and include      |
    |   |                    | seating,         | seating          | seating          | seating          |                  | seating,         |
    |   |                    | landscaping,     | and other        | and other        | and other        |                  | landscaping,     |
    |   |                    | and other        | amenities        | amenities        | amenities        |                  | and other        |
    |   |                    | amenities        |                  |                  |                  |                  | amenities        |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    | I | Window             | A minimum        | A minimum        | A minimum        | None             | None             | A minimum        |
    |   | Transparency2      | 70% transparency | 70% transparency | 60% transparency |                  |                  | 70% transparency |
    |   |                    | required         | required         | required         |                  |                  | required         |
    |   |                    | at street        | at street        | at street        |                  |                  | at street        |
    |   |                    | level            | level            | level            |                  |                  | level            |
    |   |                    | between          | between          | between          |                  |                  | between          |
    |   |                    | 30'' and         | 30'' and         | 30'' and         |                  |                  | 30'' and         |
    |   |                    | 8'               | 8'               | 8' for           |                  |                  | 8'               |
    |   |                    |                  |                  | nonresidential   |                  |                  |                  |
    |   |                    |                  |                  | uses             |                  |                  |                  |
    +---+--------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
    1The maximum setback shall be up to 25 feet where the Public Works Engineering Director has determined property may be needed to accommodate the City’s planned right-of-way at full build-out. Otherwise, the maximum setback is five feet.
    2In Colonial District Overlay, or when buildings do not front a retail street, Green Street Loop, or arterial mixed-use street, minimum transparency is 50 percent between 30 inches and eight feet.
    4. Landscape. The landscape frontage has landscaping between the building and street edge. The landscape frontage is not permitted on retail streets and is appropriate for office and residential uses particularly when on the ground floor.18B-400-7. Landscape Frontage
    [IMAGE: <18B.400.410_004.png>]
    +---+-------------------+---------------+--------+---------------+---------------+---------------+----------+
    |   |     Standard      |      CBD      | Retail |   Mixed-Use   |   Mixed-Use   |  Low-Impact   | Festival |
    |   |                   |               | Street |    Street     |   Arterial    |   Mixed-Use   |  Street  |
    |   |                   |               |        |               |               |    Streets    |          |
    +---+-------------------+---------------+--------+---------------+---------------+---------------+----------+
    | A | Building          | 90'           | n/a    | 90'           | 90'           | 35'           | n/a      |
    |   | Height            |               |        |               |               |               |          |
    +---+-------------------+---------------+--------+---------------+---------------+---------------+----------+
    | B | First Floor       | 16'           | n/a    | 16'           | 16'           | None          | n/a      |
    |   | Minimum           |               |        |               |               |               |          |
    |   | Height            |               |        |               |               |               |          |
    |   | for depth         |               |        |               |               |               |          |
    |   | of 30             |               |        |               |               |               |          |
    |   | feet from         |               |        |               |               |               |          |
    |   | street:           |               |        |               |               |               |          |
    |   | Commercial        |               |        |               |               |               |          |
    |   | Uses              |               |        |               |               |               |          |
    +---+-------------------+---------------+--------+---------------+---------------+---------------+----------+
    | C | Weather           | 10'           | n/a    | 10'           | 10'           | None          | n/a      |
    |   | Protection        |               |        |               |               |               |          |
    |   | Height            |               |        |               |               |               |          |
    +---+-------------------+---------------+--------+---------------+---------------+---------------+----------+
    | D | Weather           | 5' minimum    | n/a    | 5' minimum    | 5' minimum    | 5' minimum    | n/a      |
    |   | Protection        | depth;        |        | depth;        | depth;        | depth;        |          |
    |   | Minimum           | required      |        | required      | required      | required      |          |
    |   | Depth             | over primary  |        | over primary  | over primary  | over primary  |          |
    |   | and Linear        | entrance      |        | entrance      | entrance      | entrance      |          |
    |   | Frontage          |               |        |               |               |               |          |
    +---+-------------------+---------------+--------+---------------+---------------+---------------+----------+
    | E | Building          | 20'           | n/a    | 20'           | 20'           | 20'           | n/a      |
    |   | Maximum           |               |        |               |               |               |          |
    |   | Setback           |               |        |               |               |               |          |
    |   | from Right-of-Way |               |        |               |               |               |          |
    +---+-------------------+---------------+--------+---------------+---------------+---------------+----------+
    | F | Building          | 10'           | n/a    | 10'           | 10'           | 10'           | n/a      |
    |   | Setback           |               |        |               |               |               |          |
    |   | Minimum           |               |        |               |               |               |          |
    +---+-------------------+---------------+--------+---------------+---------------+---------------+----------+
    | G | Front Entrance    | An entrance   | n/a    | An entrance   | An entrance   | An entrance   | n/a      |
    |   |                   | must be       |        | must be       | must be       | must be       |          |
    |   |                   | located       |        | located       | located       | located       |          |
    |   |                   | along         |        | along         | along         | along         |          |
    |   |                   | the primary   |        | the primary   | the primary   | the primary   |          |
    |   |                   | street        |        | street        | street        | street        |          |
    |   |                   | frontage      |        | frontage      | frontage      | frontage      |          |
    +---+-------------------+---------------+--------+---------------+---------------+---------------+----------+
    | H | Landscape         | The landscape | n/a    | The landscape | The landscape | The landscape | n/a      |
    |   | Requirements      | area shall    |        | area shall    | area shall    | area shall    |          |
    |   |                   | comply        |        | comply        | comply        | comply        |          |
    |   |                   | with the      |        | with the      | with the      | with the      |          |
    |   |                   | City’s        |        | City’s        | City’s        | City’s        |          |
    |   |                   | landscaping   |        | landscaping   | landscaping   | landscaping   |          |
    |   |                   | requirements. |        | requirements. | requirements. | requirements. |          |
    +---+-------------------+---------------+--------+---------------+---------------+---------------+----------+
    5. Porch/Stoop/Terrace. This frontage type has the building set back from the street edge to accommodate a porch, stoop, or terrace to serve as the primary access to the building. This frontage type is applicable primarily to residential and nonretail commercial uses and is not permitted on retail streets.18B-400-9. Porch/Stoop/Terrace Frontage Type
    [IMAGE: <18B.400.410_005.png>]
    +---+----------------+-----------------+--------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+----------+
    |   |    Standard    |       CBD       | Retail |    Mixed-Use    |    Mixed-Use    |   Low-Impact    | Festival |
    |   |                |                 | Street |     Street      |    Arterial     |    Mixed-Use    |  Street  |
    |   |                |                 |        |                 |                 |     Streets     |          |
    +---+----------------+-----------------+--------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+----------+
    | A | Building       | 90'             | n/a    | 90'             | 90'             | 35'             | n/a      |
    |   | Height         |                 |        |                 |                 |                 |          |
    +---+----------------+-----------------+--------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+----------+
    | B | First Floor    | 16'             | n/a    | 16'             | 16'             | None            | n/a      |
    |   | Minimum        |                 |        |                 |                 |                 |          |
    |   | Height         |                 |        |                 |                 |                 |          |
    |   | for depth      |                 |        |                 |                 |                 |          |
    |   | of 30          |                 |        |                 |                 |                 |          |
    |   | feet from      |                 |        |                 |                 |                 |          |
    |   | street:        |                 |        |                 |                 |                 |          |
    |   | Commercial     |                 |        |                 |                 |                 |          |
    |   | Uses           |                 |        |                 |                 |                 |          |
    +---+----------------+-----------------+--------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+----------+
    | C | Weather        | 10'             | n/a    | 10'             | 10'             | None            | n/a      |
    |   | Protection     |                 |        |                 |                 |                 |          |
    |   | Height         |                 |        |                 |                 |                 |          |
    +---+----------------+-----------------+--------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+----------+
    | D | Threshold      | 4' minimum      | n/a    | 4' minimum      | 4' minimum      | None            | n/a      |
    |   | Depth          |                 |        |                 |                 |                 |          |
    +---+----------------+-----------------+--------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+----------+
    | E | Threshold      | Below-grade     | n/a    | Below-grade     | Below-grade     | Below-grade     | n/a      |
    |   | Height         | maximum         |        | maximum         | maximum         | maximum         |          |
    |   |                | 4'; Above-grade |        | 4'; Above-grade | 4'; Above-grade | 4'; Above-grade |          |
    |   |                | maximum         |        | maximum         | maximum         | maximum         |          |
    |   |                | 5'              |        | 5'              | 5'              | 5'              |          |
    +---+----------------+-----------------+--------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+----------+
    | F | Front Entrance | An entrance     | n/a    | An entrance     | An entrance     | An entrance     | n/a      |
    |   |                | must be         |        | must be         | must be         | must be         |          |
    |   |                | located         |        | located         | located         | located         |          |
    |   |                | along           |        | along           | along           | along           |          |
    |   |                | the primary     |        | the primary     | the primary     | the primary     |          |
    |   |                | street          |        | street          | street          | street          |          |
    |   |                | frontage        |        | frontage        | frontage        | frontage        |          |
    +---+----------------+-----------------+--------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+----------+
    | G | Landscape      | The landscape   | n/a    | The landscape   | The landscape   | The landscape   | n/a      |
    |   | Requirements   | area shall      |        | area shall      | area shall      | area shall      |          |
    |   |                | comply          |        | comply          | comply          | comply          |          |
    |   |                | with the        |        | with the        | with the        | with the        |          |
    |   |                | City’s          |        | City’s          | City’s          | City’s          |          |
    |   |                | landscaping     |        | landscaping     | landscaping     | landscaping     |          |
    |   |                | requirements.   |        | requirements.   | requirements.   | requirements.   |          |
    +---+----------------+-----------------+--------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+----------+
    6. Parking. The parking frontage type is only permitted on arterial mixed-use streets and is the only frontage type where parking is allowed between the building and the street edge. Landscape and trees are required in the landscaped area between the street edge and the parking area.18B-400-11. Parking Frontage Type
    [IMAGE: <18B.400.410_006.png>]
    +---+--------------+---------------+--------+-----------+---------------+------------+----------+
    |   |   Standard   |      CBD      | Retail | Mixed-Use |   Mixed-Use   | Low-Impact | Festival |
    |   |              |               | Street |  Street   |   Arterial    | Mixed-Use  |  Street  |
    |   |              |               |        |           |               |  Streets   |          |
    +---+--------------+---------------+--------+-----------+---------------+------------+----------+
    | A | Landscape    | Minimum       | n/a    | n/a       | Minimum       | n/a        | n/a      |
    |   | Buffer       | 10'; Maximum  |        |           | 10'; Maximum  |            |          |
    |   | Width        | 20'           |        |           | 20'           |            |          |
    +---+--------------+---------------+--------+-----------+---------------+------------+----------+
    | B | Landscape    | The landscape | n/a    | n/a       | The landscape | n/a        | n/a      |
    |   | Requirements | area shall    |        |           | area shall    |            |          |
    |   |              | comply        |        |           | comply        |            |          |
    |   |              | with the      |        |           | with the      |            |          |
    |   |              | City’s        |        |           | City’s        |            |          |
    |   |              | landscaping   |        |           | landscaping   |            |          |
    |   |              | requirements. |        |           | requirements. |            |          |
    |   |              | A minimum     |        |           |               |            |          |
    |   |              | of one        |        |           |               |            |          |
    |   |              | tree must     |        |           |               |            |          |
    |   |              | be planted    |        |           |               |            |          |
    |   |              | every         |        |           |               |            |          |
    |   |              | 30'.          |        |           |               |            |          |
    +---+--------------+---------------+--------+-----------+---------------+------------+----------+
    | C | Pedestrian   | Required      | n/a    | n/a       | Minimum       | n/a        | n/a      |
    |   | Walkway      | from the      |        |           | width –       |            |          |
    |   |              | street        |        |           | see LMC       |            |          |
    |   |              | to primary    |        |           | 18B.500.520   |            |          |
    |   |              | building      |        |           |               |            |          |
    |   |              | entrance(s)   |        |           |               |            |          |
    +---+--------------+---------------+--------+-----------+---------------+------------+----------+
B. Civic Uses. Sites and buildings where the primary use is civic should be designed to reflect a public use and therefore may deviate from the frontage standards. Civic buildings and sites should be recognizable and accessible as public buildings in the downtown and to reflect civic pride in the community. The following standards address the design of civic uses:
    1. Civic uses are permitted on the ground level of all street types except the low-impact mixed-use streets and may be designed in accordance with any of the frontage types except parking.
    2. Civic uses are not subject to the maximum setback requirements.
    3. Civic uses may provide the main entry on the side of the building when necessary to the function of the site, including safety and security. A pedestrian connection shall be provided from the sidewalk to the entry.
    4. The design sites and buildings for civic uses should incorporate public open space when feasible and practical and provide for a variety of activities such as public art, seating, play equipment, games, and events. [Ord. 695 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018.]

Chapter 18B.500 LANDSCAPING, OPEN SPACE, AND GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE

Sections:
18B.500.510  Basic Standards.
18B.500.520  Special Landscape Treatments.
18B.500.530  Common and Open Space Standards.
18B.500.540  Green Infrastructure.

18B.500.510 Basic Standards.
Landscaping shall be provided consistent with LMC 18A.50.400, Landscaping, except as supplemented or superseded by this title. [Ord. 695 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018.]

18B.500.520 Special Landscape Treatments.
The following special landscape treatments are required or permitted along street types:
+----------------------+-------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|     Street Type      | Foundations | Plazas/Courtyards1 | Pedestrian Walkways |
+----------------------+-------------+--------------------+---------------------+
| Retail Street        | R           | P                  | R                   |
+----------------------+-------------+--------------------+---------------------+
| Mixed-Use Street     | R           | P                  | R                   |
+----------------------+-------------+--------------------+---------------------+
| Low-Impact Mixed-Use | P           | P                  | P                   |
| Street               |             |                    |                     |
+----------------------+-------------+--------------------+---------------------+
| Arterial Mixed-Use   | P           | P                  | R                   |
| Street               |             |                    |                     |
+----------------------+-------------+--------------------+---------------------+
| Festival Street      | R           | R                  | R                   |
+----------------------+-------------+--------------------+---------------------+
P = permitted, R= required
1Plaza landscaping is required when the plaza frontage is selected on a street.
A. Foundations. Buildings shall be accented by foundation plantings. Foundation plantings may frame doors, anchor corners, or screen undesirable areas. Foundation plantings shall allow for five feet of unobstructed movement on the sidewalk. Examples of foundation plantings include raised planter boxes, containers, and similar.
B. Plazas and Courtyards. Where provided, consistent with frontage standards, plazas or courtyards shall meet the following standards:
    1. Plazas and courtyards shall be visible and accessible to the public.
    2. Minimum dimensions of plazas and courtyards are 20 feet. Courtyards may qualify as common open space per LMC 18B.500.530, Common and Open Space Standards.
    3. Plazas or courtyards shall include one or more element from each category below.
        a. Special Paving. Scored concrete, stained/colored concrete, concrete pavers, paving inlays, mosaics, or other special paving material.
        b. Landscaping. Trees, shrubs, trellises, flowers, or container plants. Landscaping shall be consistent with this chapter and LMC 18A.50.400, Landscaping.
        c. Seating Area. Benches or low seating walls. Walls or benches shall be a minimum of four feet long. Seating shall be provided at a ratio of at least one seat per 60 square feet of plaza area or open space.
C. Pedestrian Walkways. Pedestrian walkways are required as follows:
    1. Street to Building. Required between a public right-of-way and building entrances where the building is set back from the street, sidewalk, or parking area.
    2. Parking. Required between parking lots and building entrances.
    3. Mid-Block Connections. One pedestrian walkway shall be provided between the street and the rear property line, spaced an average of every 200 feet or less of street frontage.
D. Dimensional Standards. 
    1. Pedestrian Walkway Width. 
        a. Six feet minimum, exclusive of landscaping or site furnishings, except that mid-block crossings shall have minimum walkway widths of 12 feet.
        b. Lines of Sight. Walkways shall be located and designed with clear sight lines for safety.
        c. Definition. Pedestrian walkways shall be defined through paving, landscaping, furnishings, and lighting.
    2. Design. Pedestrian walkways shall be defined using a combination of one or more of the following techniques:
        a. Special Paving. Scored concrete, stained/colored concrete, concrete pavers, paving inlays, mosaics, or other special paving material. Not all portions of the pedestrian walkway are required to be paved; however, a minimum of four feet in width of the pedestrian walkway shall provide an all-weather walking surface.
        b. Architectural Features. Trellises, railing, low seat walls, weather protection, bollards, or other architectural features. Chain link fences are not allowed.
        c. Landscaped Edges. A continuous, landscaped area consistent with Type II, Streetscapes, where the pedestrian walkway is from the street to building or mid-block connection, otherwise Type III, Open Space, is required, per LMC 18A.50.400, Landscaping. If the walkway abuts a driveway or driving aisle on both sides, the landscaped edge shall apply to both sides.
        d. Lighting. Pedestrian walkways shall include lighting such as pedestrian lights, bollards, and accent lighting to assist pedestrian navigation and promote a safe and comfortable walking space. [Ord. 695 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018.]

18B.500.530 Common and Open Space Standards.
The purpose of this section is to provide residents with access to usable, privately maintained and owned open space to create opportunities for active living and respite for on-site residents. This section provides a fee in lieu of providing on-site open space, recognizing different site configurations, resident needs and desires, and opportunities to provide and enhance publicly owned and maintained system parks. Publicly owned urban parks include nodal and linear parks consistent with the downtown plan and the City’s parks, recreation, and open space plan. Transferring the fee in lieu to a nearby nodal or linear park reinforces accessibility to larger public open spaces within walking distance of current and future residential and mixed-use development in downtown Lakewood.
A. Common Open Space – Private. 
    1. Each mixed-use or residential development shall provide a common open space per dwelling unit of 100 square feet per dwelling unit.
    2. For the purposes of this section, common open space means an open-air area intended for use by all residents, guests, employees or patrons of a site and may include lawns, gardens, squares, plazas, courtyards, terraces, barbecue and picnic areas, games court or multi-use recreational areas, and other types of built space.
    3. Design Standards. 
        a. Required setback areas shall not count toward the open space requirement unless they are part of an open space that meets the other requirements of common open space.
        b. Space shall have a minimum dimension of 20 feet in any direction to provide functional leisure or recreational activity. This dimension can be adjusted by the Community Development Director based on site conditions such as topography or irregular lot geometry.
        c. Space shall feature paths or walkable areas, landscaping, seating, lighting, play structures, sports courts, or other pedestrian amenities to make the area more functional and enjoyable for a range of users.
    4. Common space shall be separated from ground level windows, streets, service areas and parking lots with landscaping, low-level decorative fencing (no chain link), or other treatments as approved by the Community Development Director that enhance safety and privacy for both the common open space and dwelling units.
    5. The space shall be oriented to receive sunlight and preferably face south, if possible. Open space may also face east or west, but not north, unless the Community Development Director determines that site conditions such as topography or irregular lot geometry warrant waiving this requirement. The common open space shall be designed to provide landscaping that defines the open space but permits surveillance from units and roads.
    6. The space must be accessible from the dwelling units. The space must be oriented to encourage activity from local residents.
    7. No more than 30 percent of the area may be covered by a structure.
    8. The common open space may include multi-use storm water detention facilities if the Community Development Director determines that the facilities are designed to function as common open space by providing an enhanced natural or visually aesthetic design.
    9. The common space shall be designed to ensure that the open space network addresses Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED) principles such as security and surveillance from residential units. Common recreational spaces shall be located and arranged to allow windows to overlook them.
    10. The common space shall provide adequate lighting in the open space network, but place and shield lighting so that it does not glare into housing units.
B. Private Open Space. 
    1. Each dwelling unit shall have a private open space, at a minimum of 48 square feet with a minimum width or depth of six feet.
    2. For the purposes of this section, private open space includes individual decks, balconies, or patios.
C. Fee in Lieu for Portion of Open Space. 
    1. Within the downtown planned action area, a development may pay a fee in lieu of providing common open space or a portion of the private open space to support park land purchase and improvements within the downtown planned action area for urban nodal or urban linear parks identified in the downtown plan.
    2. The fee in lieu is allowed for each 100 square feet of common open space not provided. No less than 50 square feet of common open space per unit shall be provided on site.
    3. The fee in lieu is allowed for balconies or patios not provided on street-front facade. No less than 50 percent of the units shall include private open spaces.
    4. The fee shall be equal to the average fair market value of the land otherwise required to be provided in on-site common or private open space.
    5. Fee Payment and Use. 
        a. The payment shall be held in a reserve account by the City and may only be expended to fund a capital improvement for parks and recreation facility identified in the downtown plan;
        b. The payment shall be expended in all cases within five years of collection; and
        c. Any payment not so expended shall be refunded with interest to be calculated from the original date the deposit was received by the City and at the same rate applied to tax refunds pursuant to RCW 84.69.100; however, if the payment is not expended within five years due to delay attributable to the developer, the payment shall be refunded without interest. [Ord. 695 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018.]

18B.500.540 Green Infrastructure.
A. Development shall implement storm water standards that incorporate low impact development (LID) principles and standards consistent with City standards in Chapter 12.11 LMC.
B. Where on-site filtration is feasible, it shall be provided.
C. Permeable surfaces shall be incorporated into plazas, courtyards, and pedestrian walkways, unless demonstrated infeasible to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, and shall meet City standards per Chapter 12.11 LMC.
D. Open ponds shall be designed with both natural landscape and urban access and edge treatments consistent with LMC 18A.50.420.
E. Native and/or drought tolerant landscaping shall be incorporated into required landscape plans. [Ord. 695 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018.]

Chapter 18B.600 PARKING

Sections:
18B.600.610  Parking.

18B.600.610 Parking.
A. Off-Street Parking Requirements. The following off-street parking requirements supersede the requirements in LMC 18A.50.560. Uses not listed below must comply with the requirements in LMC 18A.50.560.
+-------------------+------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|              Land Use                |            Parking Requirement            |
+-------------------+------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
| Residential                          | 1 per dwelling unit                       |
+-------------------+------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
| Retail, Services, Restaurants        | 2 per 1,000 GSF minimum; 3 per 1,000      |
|                                      | GSF maximum                               |
+-------------------+------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
| Office                               | 2 per 1,000 GSF minimum; 3 per 1,000      |
|                                      | GSF maximum                               |
+-------------------+------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
| Street level retail 3,000 sq. ft. or | None where there is available public      |
| less per business                    | parking within 500' or abutting on-street |
|                                      | parking designed to serve street level    |
|                                      | retail                                    |
+-------------------+------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
B. Parking Reductions or Increases. The amount of required parking may be reduced or eliminated, or increased above the maximum, based on a site-specific parking study that demonstrates one or more of the following:
    1. Reduction Due to Shared Parking at Mixed-Use Sites and Buildings. A shared use parking analysis for mixed-use buildings and sites that demonstrates that the anticipated peak parking demand will be less than the sum of the off-street parking requirements for specific land uses.
    2. Reduction Due to Public Parking Availability. The availability of public parking to accommodate the parking demand generated by the site or building. The City may approve a reduction in the amount of required parking by up to 50 percent for any parking stalls that will be open and available to the public. On-street parking may be considered for the reduction; any new on-street parking provided will be counted toward the required parking availability.
    3. Reduction Due to Lower Parking Demand or Increase Based on Greater Parking Demand. Demonstrating that anticipated parking demand will be less than the minimum parking required, or greater than the maximum allowed, based on collecting local parking data for similar land uses on a typical day for a minimum of eight hours.
C. Parking Location and Design. Parking shall be located behind the building or in a structure except in locations where the parking frontage type is permitted.
D. Shared Parking. Shared parking is encouraged to support a walkable and pedestrian-oriented CBD where people can park once and visit multiple destinations. Off-site shared parking may be authorized per the standards in LMC 18A.50.550.
E. Public Parking. Public parking is permitted as a principal or accessory use in the Downtown District subject to the frontage and design standards.
F. Dimensional Standards. Parking stall and circulation design shall meet the standards of Chapter 18A.50 LMC. [Ord. 695 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018.]

Chapter 18B.700 ADMINISTRATION

Sections:
18B.700.710  Form-Based Code Review.
18B.700.720  Master Planned Development – Town Center Incentive Overlay.
18B.700.730  Update of Nonconforming Lots.

18B.700.710 Form-Based Code Review.
A. Purpose. The purpose of form-based code review is to ensure that all development in the Downtown District implements the downtown plan.
B. Applicability. All development requiring a land use or building permit in the Downtown District shall be subject to form-based code review.
C. Review Process. Form-based code review is a Process I application type under LMC 18A.02.540. Review shall be conducted concurrently with any related planning review process or building permit, including consideration of the proposal as a planned action (Ordinance No. 696), and is subject to LMC 18A.02.530, Permit Procedures.
D. Preapplication Conference. A preapplication conference is required for all development in the Downtown District. The preapplication conference shall be conducted in accordance with LMC 18A.02.622. The site plan, landscaping plan, and building design may be conceptual in form for the preapplication conference.
E. Submittal Requirements. Applications for form-based code review shall be filed with the Community Development Department. All projects submitted for form-based code review shall be subject to the submittal requirements in LMC 18A.02.630, Project Permit Applications. Additional information or materials may be requested during the review process if the Community Development Director determines they are necessary for proper review of the application. Request for additional materials shall not affect the determination of completeness under LMC 18A.02.635, but is subject to LMC 18A.02.735, Time Limitations.
F. Review Decision. The Community Development Director shall provide the applicant with a written decision either approving, denying, or approving the application with modifications and/or conditions of approval. In such case that the application is processed in conjunction with a Process III or higher permit application under the provisions of LMC 18A.02.630, Permit Procedures, the Community Development Director shall provide a written recommendation to either approve, deny, or approve with modifications and/or conditions of approval to the appropriate decision-making body for the higher process permit, as listed in LMC 18A.02.502, Table 3.
G. Review Standards. A decision on a form-based code review application shall be based on the standard criteria for Process I permits in LMC 18A.02.540 and the following:
    1. Consistency with the vision and policies of the Lakewood comprehensive plan.
    2. Consistency with the vision and objectives of the downtown plan in LMC 18B.100.110.
    3. Compliance with the standards in this title.
    4. Compliance with the downtown planned action ordinance (Ordinance No. 696).
H. Amendments to Approved Applications. Applicants wishing to amend approved applications may submit the amendment to the Community Development Director for review. The application shall meet the submittal requirements of subsection (C) of this section unless waived by the Community Development Director. A preapplication conference is not required, but is encouraged for amendment applications that incorporate major changes. [Ord. 695 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018.]

18B.700.720 Master Planned Development – Town Center Incentive Overlay.
A. Purpose. The purpose of a master planned development in the Downtown District is to provide the developer and the City the opportunity to implement the downtown plan in way that could not be achieved through strict application of the standards in this chapter. It also allows for the development of larger, more complex, and multi-phased projects to develop with certainty.
B. Applicability. Development within the Town Center Incentive Overlay may apply for a master plan for the development of 10 or more acres.
C. Allowed Modification. Adoption of a master planned development allows for the modification of Downtown District development standards within the Town Center Incentive Overlay District including modification of standards for height, site design, building design, landscaping, parking, and signage. In addition, density may be calculated by evaluating the number of residential units over the entire acreage subject to the master plan instead of the acreage of a particular site. This allows housing units to be clustered at higher intensities, if desired.
D. Review Process. A master planned development is a Process III application under LMC 18A.02.550. Notice of application shall be provided pursuant to LMC 18A.02.670.
E. Submittal Requirements. Applications for a master planned development shall be filed with the Community Development Department on forms provided by the Department along with established fees. An applicant for a master planned development shall submit the following items to the City, unless the Director finds in writing that one or more submittals are not required due to unique circumstances related to a specific development proposal:
    1. A detailed narrative that includes:
        a. A description detailing how the proposed development will be superior to or more innovative than conventional development methods as allowed under the City’s land use regulations and how the approval criteria set forth in LMC 18B.700.720(G) have been satisfied;
        b. A description of how the proposed master planned development will benefit the public in a manner greater than that achieved if the project was to be developed under the adopted standards of the CBD zone;
        c. A table illustrating the density and lot coverage of the overall development, with the proportion of the site devoted to public and open space clearly indicated;
        d. A description of the land use planned for the site, including types and numbers for commercial, civic, industrial, and residential land uses;
        e. A description of the dwelling units proposed and the overall density and intensity, including the types and numbers of affordable housing units;
        f. A description of the proposed park, open space and recreation areas including any proposed improvements, including specific details regarding the ownership and maintenance of such areas;
        g. Detailed information regarding all proposed landscaping that is not included on an associated landscaping plan;
        h. A description of the specific City standards as set forth in the underlying zoning district that the applicant is proposing for modification;
        i. A description of how the master plan meets vision and objectives of the downtown plan in LMC 18B.100.110.
    2. A site plan with the heading “Master Planned Development Site Plan” that includes information including street frontage types, building footprints, proposed landscaping, open space and parks and/or recreational areas including trails, public spaces, pedestrian walkways, parking locations, and proposed setbacks;
    3. Conceptual elevation drawings illustrating facade and building design elements, including height, overall bulk/mass and density and proposed residential design features that will provide for a superior development;
    4. A conceptual landscape plan/map showing the proposed location and types of vegetation and landscaping. The landscape plan may also be incorporated into the master planned development site plan and narrative;
    5. A phasing plan, if the development will occur in distinct phases, with a written schedule detailing the timing of improvements;
    6. A draft development agreement, if proposed by the applicant, or as required by the City; and
    7. All of the submittal requirements in LMC 18A.02.630, Project Permit Applications.
F. Additional Information. Additional information or materials may be requested during the review process if the Community Development Director determines they are necessary for proper review of the application.
G. Required Findings. A master planned development shall only be granted after the Hearing Examiner has reviewed the proposed use and has made written findings that all of the standards and criteria set forth below have been met or can be met subject to conditions of approval:
    1. The master planned development is consistent with the comprehensive plan; and
    2. The master planned development is consistent with the vision and objectives of the downtown plan in LMC 18B.100.110; and
    3. The master planned development, by the use of permitted flexibility and variation in design, is a development practice that results in better urban design features than found in traditional development. Net benefit to the City may be demonstrated by one or more of the following:
        a. Placement, type or reduced bulk of structures; or
        b. Interconnected usable open space; or
        c. Recreation facilities; or
        d. Other public facilities; or
        e. Conservation of natural features; or
        f. Conservation of critical areas and critical area buffers beyond; or
        g. Aesthetic features and harmonious design; or
        h. Energy efficient site design or building features; or
        i. Use of low impact development techniques; and
    4. The master planned development results in no greater burden on present and projected public utilities and services than would result from traditional development and will be served by adequate public or private facilities including streets, fire protection, and utilities; and
    5. Open space within the master planned development is an integrated part of the project rather than an isolated element of the project; and
    6. The design is compatible with and responds to the existing or intended character, appearance, quality of development and physical characteristics of the subject property and immediate vicinity; and
    7. Roads and streets, whether public or private, within and contiguous to the site comply with guidelines for construction of streets and the street frontage standards; and
    8. Each phase of the proposed development, as it is planned to be completed, contains the parking spaces, open space, recreation space, landscaping and utility area necessary for creating and sustaining a desirable and stable environment; and
    9. The master planned development is consistent with the planned action ordinance (Ordinance No. 696).
H. Action of the Hearing Examiner. In addition to demonstrating compliance with the criteria as determined by the Hearing Examiner, the applicant shall accept those conditions that the Hearing Examiner finds are appropriate to obtain compliance with the criteria. [Ord. 695 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018.]

18B.700.730 Update of Nonconforming Lots.
A. Purpose. The establishment of design standards to implement the downtown plan resulted in the creation of nonconforming lots. This section defines how nonconforming lots are to be updated to meet the Downtown District design standards for street frontage, site design, and landscaping when incremental changes occur.
B. Applicability. This section applies to all nonconforming lots in the Downtown District, with the exception of lots subject to a development agreement or master planned development. It supplements the standards and requirements for nonconformities in LMC 18A.02.800 through 18A.02.870.
C. Full Compliance. Within any three-year period, the expansion of any structure or complex of structures on a lot, which constitutes 50 percent or more of the existing floor area or building footprint, whichever is less, shall activate the requirement to bring the lot into full compliance with the Downtown District standards for street type, site design, and landscaping.
D. Proportional Compliance. Remodels, alterations, or other improvements to the existing structure activate the requirement to make improvements to the nonconforming lot to reduce the extent of the nonconformity. The degree to which the standards are applied shall be evaluated on a project specific basis and related to the improvement proposed. For example, if new windows are proposed to be installed, the project should address standards related to window transparency and weather protection (if located on a designated street frontage). The Community Development Director shall determine the type, location, and phasing sequence of proposed proportional compliance. [Ord. 695 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018.]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Lakewood Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 711, passed May 6, 2019.
Disclaimer: The city clerk’s office has the official version of the Lakewood Municipal Code. Users should contact the city clerk’s office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: www.cityoflakewood.us
City Telephone: (253) 589-2489
Code Publishing Company